r, and some of them went to Ash-Sham. They left all that remained behind for the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, who had control over how it was to be divided. The Prophet ﷺ divided it between the emigrants and none of Al-Ansar got a share, except for Sahl bin Hunayf and Abu Dujanah Simak bin Kharashah. They said that they were poor and the Messenger of Allah ﷺ gave them their share. Only two men from Bani An-Nadir embraced Islam, Yamin bin Umayr bin Ka'b bin 'Amr bin Jihash and Abu Sa'd bin Wahb and they saved their wealth due to their acceptance of Islam.\"\nIbn Ishaq continued, \"Some of the offspring of Yamin narrated to me that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said to Yamin,\nأَلَمْ تَرَ مَا لَقِيتُ مِنَ ابْنِ عَمِّكَ وَمَا هَمَّ بِهِ مِنْ شَأْنِي؟\n(Have you not heard what your cousin plotted to do against me?) Yamin bin 'Umayr promised someone a reward if he killed his cousin 'Amr bin Jihash, and someone killed him, according to their claim\" Ibn Ishaq then said, \"All of Surat Al-Hashr was revealed about Bani An-Nadir. \" A similar story was recorded by Yunus bin Bukayr from Ibn Ishaq. Allah's statement,\nهُوَ الَّذِي أَخْرَجَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَابِ\n(He it is Who drove out the disbelievers among the People of the Scripture) refers to Bani An-Nadir,\nمِنْ دِيَارِهِمْ لِأَوَّلِ الْحَشْرِ\n(from their homes at the first gathering.) Allah said,\nمَا ظَنَنْتُمْ أَنْ يَخْرُجُوا ۖ\n(You did not think that they would get out.) i.e., within the few days you laid siege against them. The Companions had surrounded their forts for only six days, and their forts were fortified and formidable. This is why Allah the Exalted said,\nوَظَنُّوا أَنَّهُمْ مَانِعَتُهُمْ حُصُونُهُمْ مِنَ اللَّهِ فَأَتَاهُمُ اللَّهُ مِنْ حَيْثُ لَمْ يَحْتَسِبُوا ۖ\n(And they thought that their fortresses would defend them from Allah! But Allah reached them from a place where they expected it not.) meaning, there came to them from Allah what they did not expect or anticipate. Allah said in another Ayah,\nقَدْ مَكَرَ الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ فَأَتَى اللَّهُ بُنْيَانَهُمْ مِنَ الْقَوَاعِدِ فَخَرَّ عَلَيْهِمُ السَّقْفُ مِنْ فَوْقِهِمْ وَأَتَاهُمُ الْعَذَابُ مِنْ حَيْثُ لَا يَشْعُرُونَ\n(Those before them indeed plotted, but Allah struck at the foundation of their building, and then the roof fell down upon them, from above them, and the torment overtook them from directions they did not perceive.)(16:26) Allah said,\nوَقَذَفَ فِي قُلُوبِهِمُ الرُّعْبَ ۚ\n(and He cast terror into their hearts) means, Allah cast fear, terror and fright in their hearts, and why would that not happen to them? He who was given victory, by Allah frightening his enemies the distance of a month, laid siege to them. May Allah's peace and blessings be on the Prophet. As in Ibn Ishaq's explanation – which preceded;\nيُخْرِبُونَ بُيُوتَهُمْ بِأَيْدِيهِمْ وَأَيْدِي الْمُؤْمِنِينَ\n(that they demolished their own dwellings with their own hands and the hands of the believers.) the Jews brought down what they wanted to transport from their roofs and doors, so that they could carry them on camels. Similar was said by 'Urwah bin Az-Zubayr, 'Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam and several others. Allah's statement,\nوَلَوْلَا أَنْ كَتَبَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِمُ الْجَلَاءَ لَعَذَّبَهُمْ فِي الدُّنْيَا ۖ\n(And had it not been that Allah had decreed exile for them, He would certainly have punished them in this world;) meaning, if it was not for the fact that Allah had already decreed that they would evacuate Al-Madinah, leaving behind their homes and wealth, He would have sent another type of punishment upon them, such as being killed and captured. This was said by Az-Zuhri. 'Urwah, As-Suddi and Ibn Zayd said that Allah decreed that the Jews would be punished in the life of this world and face the torment of the fire of Hell He prepared for them in the Hereafter. Allah said,\nوَلَهُمْ فِي الْآخِرَةِ عَذَابُ النَّارِ\n(and in the Hereafter theirs shall be the torment of the Fire.) meaning, it is a matter ordained that they will surely face,\nذَٰلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ شَاقُّوا اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ ۖ\n(That is because they opposed Allah and His Messenger.) means, Allah prepared this specific punishment and sent His Messenger ﷺ and his Companions against them, because they defied Allah and His Messenger and denied the good news that Allah sent forth in the Books of previous Messengers regarding the coming of Muhammad ﷺ. The Jews knew these facts about Muhammad ﷺ just as they knew their own children. Allah said,\nوَمَنْ يُشَاقِّ اللَّهَ فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ شَدِيدُ الْعِقَابِ\n(And whosoever opposes Allah, then verily, Allah is Severe in punishment.)\nThe Prophet (ﷺ) Cut down the Date Trees of the Jews by the Leave of Allah\nAllah said,\nمَا قَطَعْتُمْ مِنْ لِينَةٍ أَوْ تَرَكْتُمُوهَا قَائِمَةً عَلَىٰ أُصُولِهَا فَبِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ وَلِيُخْزِيَ الْفَاسِقِينَ\n(What you cut down of the Linah, or you left them standing on their stems, it was by leave of Allah, and in order that He might disgrace the rebellious.)\nLinah is an especially good type of date tree. Abu 'Ubaydah said that Linah is a different kind of dates than 'Ajwah and Barni. Several others said that Linah refers to every type of date fruits, except for the 'Ajwah (ripen dates), while Ibn Jarir said that it refers to all kinds of date trees. Ibn Jarir quoted Mujahid saying that it also includes the Buwayrah type.\nWhen the Messenger of Allah ﷺ laid siege to Bani An-Nadir, to humiliate them and bring fear and terror to their hearts, he ordered their date trees to be cut down. Muhammad bin Ishaq narrated that Yazid bin Ruman, Qatadah and Muqatil bin Hayyan said, \"Bani An-Nadir sent a message to the Messenger , saying that he used to outlaw mischief in the earth, so why did he order that their trees be cut down? Allah sent down this honorable Ayah stating that whatever Linah was felled or left intact by the Muslims, has been done by His permission, will, leave and pleasure to humiliate and disgrace the enemy and degrade them.\"\nMujahid said, \"Some of the emigrants discouraged others from chopping down the date trees of Jews, saying that they were war spoils for Muslims. The Qur'an approved of the actions of those who discouraged and those who approved of cutting these trees, stating that those who cut them or did not, did so only by Allah's leave.\" There is also a Hadith narrated from the Prophet ﷺ with this meaning. An-Nasa'i recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said about Allah's statement,\nمَا قَطَعْتُمْ مِنْ لِينَةٍ أَوْ تَرَكْتُمُوهَا قَائِمَةً عَلَىٰ أُصُولِهَا فَبِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ وَلِيُخْزِيَ الْفَاسِقِينَ\n(What you cut down of the Linah, or you left them standing on their stems, it was by leave of Allah, and in order that He might disgrace the rebellious.)\nThey forced them to come down from their forts and were ordered to cut their trees cut down. So the Muslims hesitated, and some of them said, 'We cut down some and left some. We must ask Allah's Messenger ﷺ if we will earn a reward for what we cut and if we will be burdened for what we left intact.' Allah sent down this Ayah,\nمَا قَطَعْتُمْ مِنْ لِينَةٍ أَوْ تَرَكْتُمُوهَا قَائِمَةً عَلَىٰ أُصُولِهَا فَبِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ\n(What you cut down of the Linah, or you left them standing on their stems, it was by leave of Allah).\"\nImam Ahmad recorded that Ibn 'Umar said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ ordered that the date trees of Bani An-Nadir be cut down and burned. The Two Sahihs collected a similar narration.\nAl-Bukhari recorded that 'Abdullah bin 'Umar said,\"Bani An-Nadir and Bani Qurayzah fought (against the Prophet ﷺ), and the Prophet ﷺ exiled Bani An-Nadir and allowed Bani Qurayzah to remain in their area until later, when the Prophet fought against Qurayzah. Their men were executed and their women, children and wealth were confiscated and divided among Muslims. Some of them, however, were saved because they returned to the Prophet's side, who granted them asylum, and they embraced Islam. All of the Jews of Al-Madinah, Bani Qaynuqa', the tribe of 'Abdullah bin Salam, Bani Harithah and the rest of the Jewish tribes in Al-Madinah were exiled.\"\nThe Two Sahihs also recorded from Ibn 'Umar that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ burned down the date trees of Bani An-Nadir and had them cut down the date palms of Al-Buwayrah. Allah the Exalted and Most Honored revealed this Ayah,\nمَا قَطَعْتُمْ مِنْ لِينَةٍ أَوْ تَرَكْتُمُوهَا قَائِمَةً عَلَىٰ أُصُولِهَا فَبِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ وَلِيُخْزِيَ الْفَاسِقِينَ\n(What you cut down of the Linah, or you left them standing on their stems, it was by leave of Allah, and in order that He might disgrace the rebellious.)\" Muhammad bin Ishaq reported that the battle of Bani An-Nadir occurred after the battles of Uhud and Bi'r Ma'unah.","href":"/tafsir/59?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:59:6","title":"Ibn Kathir · 59:6–7","text":"And what Allah gave as booty (Fai') to His Messenger from them – for this you made no expedition with either cavalry or camelry. But Allah gives power to His Messengers over whomsoever He wills. And Allah is Able to do all things (6)What Allah gave as booty (Fai') to His Messenger from the people of the townships – it is for Allah, His Messenger, the kindred, the orphans, the poor, and the wayfarer, in order that it may not become a fortune used by the rich among you. And whatsoever the Messenger gives you, take it; and whatsoever he forbids you, abstain (from it). And have Taqwa of Allah, verily, Allah is Severe in punishment (7)\nThe Fai' and how it is spent\nAllah the Exalted explains the regulations for Fai', the booty that the Muslims acquire from the disbelievers, without fighting them or using cavalry and camelry in war against them. For instance, the booty collected from Bani An-Nadir was not acquired because of fighting them using horses and camels. The Muslims did not fight Bani An-Nadir in battle, but Allah forced them out of their forts on account of the fear that He placed in their hearts for Allah's Messenger ﷺ. Therefore, it was Fai' that Allah awarded His Messenger, with his discretion to spend it however he sees fit. Indeed, the Prophet ﷺ spent the Fai' on righteous causes and for the benefit of Muslims in the areas that Allah mentioned in this Ayat,\nوَمَا أَفَاءَ اللَّهُ عَلَىٰ رَسُولِهِ مِنْهُمْ\n(And what Allah gave as booty (Fai') to His Messenger from them) meaning, from Bani An-Nadir,\nفَمَا أَوْجَفْتُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ خَيْلٍ وَلَا رِكَابٍ\n(for this you made no expedition with either cavalry or camelry.) refering to using camels,\nوَلَٰكِنَّ اللَّهَ يُسَلِّطُ رُسُلَهُ عَلَىٰ مَنْ يَشَاءُ ۚ وَاللَّهُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ\n(But Allah gives power to His Messengers over whomsoever He wills. And Allah is Able to do all things.) mean, Allah is powerful and cannot be resisted or opposed; He is the Compeller over all things. Allah the Exalted said,\nمَا أَفَاءَ اللَّهُ عَلَىٰ رَسُولِهِ مِنْ أَهْلِ الْقُرَىٰ\n(What Allah gave as booty (Fai') to His Messenger from the people of the townships) meaning, from all the villages and areas that are conquered in this manner; the booty collected from them falls under the same ruling as the booty acquired from Bani An-Nadir. This is why Allah the Exalted said,\nفَلِلَّهِ وَلِلرَّسُولِ وَلِذِي الْقُرْبَىٰ وَالْيَتَامَىٰ وَالْمَسَاكِينِ وَابْنِ السَّبِيلِ\n(it is for Allah, His Messenger, the kindred, the orphans, the poor, and the wayfarer,) until its end and the following Ayah, mentioning the ways the Fai' should be spent. Imam Ahmad recorded that 'Umar said, \"The wealth of Bani An-Nadir was of the Fai' type that Allah awarded His Messenger ﷺ and for which the Muslims did not have to use cavalry or camelry. Therefore, it was for the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, and he used it for the needs of his family for a year at a time, and the rest was used to buy armors and weapons used in the cause of Allah the Exalted and Most Honored.\" Ahmad collected the short form of this story. The Group, with the exception of Ibn Majah, collected this Hadith.\nAbu Dawud recorded that Malik bin 'Aws said,\"While I was at home, the sun rose high and it got hot. Suddenly the messenger of 'Umar bin Al-Khattab came to me and I went along with him and entered the place where 'Umar was sitting on a bedstead made of date-palm leaves and without a mattress. He said when I went in, 'O Malik! Some of your people's families came to me due to their famine, and I have ordered that relief aid should be given to them, so take it and distribute it among them.' I said, 'I wish that you ordered someone else to do it.' He said, 'Take it.' Then Yarfa (the servant of 'Umar) came saying, 'O Commander of the faithful! May I admit 'Uthman bin 'Affan, 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Awf, Az-Zubayr bin Al-'Awwam and Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas?' 'Umar said, 'Yes,' and they came in. After a while Yarfa came again and said, 'O Commander of the faithful! May I admit Al-'Abbas and 'Ali?' 'Umar said, 'Yes.' So, they were admitted and Al-'Abbas said, 'O Chief of the believers! Judge between me and this one (i.e., 'Ali).' The group (being 'Uthman and his companions) said, 'O Chief of the believers! Judge between them and relieve both of them from each other.' I (Malik bin Aws) thought that they asked the four men to come in before them for this purpose. 'Umar said, 'Be patient!' He then asked the group ('Uthman and his companions), 'I ask you by Allah by Whose permission the heaven and the earth exist, do you know that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nلَا نُورَثُ، مَا تَرَكْنَا صَدَقَةٌ\n(Our (the Prophet's) property will not be inherited. Whatever we leave, is charity)?' The group said, 'He said so.' 'Umar then turned to 'Ali and Al-'Abbas and said, 'I beseech you by Allah by Whose permission the heaven and the earth exist, do you know both that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nلَا نُورَثُ، مَا تَرَكْنَا صَدَقَةٌ\n(Our (the Prophets') property will not be inherited. Whatever we leave, is charity)' They replied, 'He said so.' 'Umar then said, 'Allah bestowed on His Messenger ﷺ a special favor unlike what he gave all other people. Allah the Exalted said,\nوَمَا أَفَاءَ اللَّهُ عَلَىٰ رَسُولِهِ مِنْهُمْ فَمَا أَوْجَفْتُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ خَيْلٍ وَلَا رِكَابٍ وَلَٰكِنَّ اللَّهَ يُسَلِّطُ رُسُلَهُ عَلَىٰ مَنْ يَشَاءُ ۚ وَاللَّهُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ\n(And what Allah gave as booty (Fai') to His Messenger from them – for this you made no expedition with either cavalry or camelry. But Allah gives power to His Messengers over whomsoever He wills. And Allah is Able to do all things.)\nTherefore, this property, the booty collected from Bani An-Nadir, was especially given to Allah's Messenger ﷺ. However, by Allah, neither did he take possession of it and leave you, nor did he favor himself with it to your exclusion. Allah's Messenger ﷺ took the yearly expenses from it for himself and his family and left the rest in the Muslim Treasury.' He then asked the group, 'I ask you by Allah with Whose permission the heavens and earth exist, do you know this?' They replied, 'Yes.' 'Umar then said to 'Ali and Al-'Abbas, 'I ask you by Allah, with Whose permission that heavens and earth exist, do you know this?' They said, 'Yes.' 'Umar added, 'When Allah took His Prophet ﷺ unto Him, Abu Bakr said: I am the successor of Allah's Messenger ﷺ! Then you both came to Abu Bakr asking for your (Al-'Abbas') share of inheritance from your nephew, and he ('Ali) asked for his wife's share from her father's inheritance. Abu Bakr said: Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nلَا نُورَثُ، مَا تَرَكْنَا صَدَقَةٌ\n(Our (the Prophets') property will not be inherited. Whatever we leave, is charity.)\" Allah knows that Abu Bakr was true, pious, rightly guided and a follower of what was right. So, Abu Bakr assumed the responsibility of that property. When Abu Bakr died, I said: I am the successor of Allah's Messenger ﷺ and the successor of Abu Bakr. So I managed it as long as Allah allowed me to manage it. Then you both ('Ali and Al-'Abbas) came to talk to me, bearing the same claim and presenting the same case, asking for that property. I said to you: I am ready to hand over this property to you if you wish. I will do so on the condition that you will take a pledge before Allah's that you will manage it in the same way as Allah's Messenger ﷺ used to. So, both of you agreed and on that condition I handed it over to you. Now you come to me to render a different judgement over the property than the one I made before. By Allah, I will never give any decision other than what I have already given, until the Last Hour begins. If you are unable to manage it, then return it to me, and I will do the job on your behalf.,\" They recorded this from the Hadith of Az-Zuhri. Allah said,\nكَيْ لَا يَكُونَ دُولَةً بَيْنَ الْأَغْنِيَاءِ مِنْكُمْ\n(in order that it may not become a fortune used by the rich among you.) means, 'We made the expenditures for the Fai' like this, so that the wealth does not remain among the wealthy, who would spend it as they wish and desire and give none of it to the poor.'\nOrdering Obedience of the Messenger (ﷺ) in All Commands and Prohibitions\nAllah the Exalted said,\nوَمَا آتَاكُمُ الرَّسُولُ فَخُذُوهُ وَمَا نَهَاكُمْ عَنْهُ فَانْتَهُوا ۚ\n(And whatsoever the Messenger gives you, take it; and whatsoever he forbids you, abstain (from it).) meaning, 'whatever the Messenger commands you, then do it and whatever he forbids you, then avoid it. Surely, He only commands righteousness and forbids evil.'\nImam Ahmad recorded that 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud said, \"Allah curses women who practice tattooing and those who get themselves tattooed, and the women who remove the hair from their eyebrows and faces and those who make artificial spaces between their teeth in order to look more beautiful, whereby changing Allah's creation.\" His statement reached a woman from Bani Asad called, Umm Ya'qub, who came to 'Abdullah and said, \"I have come to know that you have cursed such and such?\" He replied, \"Why should I not curse those whom Allah's Messenger ﷺ has cursed and who are cursed in Allah's Book!\" Umm Ya'qub said, \"I have read the whole Qur'an, but did not find in it what you say.\" He said, \"Verily, if you have read the Qur'an, you have found it. Didn't you read,\nوَمَا آتَاكُمُ الرَّسُولُ فَخُذُوهُ وَمَا نَهَاكُمْ عَنْهُ فَانْتَهُوا ۚ\n(And whatsoever the Messenger gives you take it and whatsoever he forbids you, you abstain (from it).)?\" She replied, \"Yes, I did.\" He said, \"Verily, Allah's Messenger ﷺ forbade such things.\" \"She said, \"But I think that your wife does these things?\" He said, \"Go and look at her.\" She went and watched her, but could not see anything in support of her claim. She went back to 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud and said that she did not notice anything on his wife. On that he said, \"If my wife was as you thought, I would not keep her with me.\" The Two Sahihs recorded this from the Hadith of Sufyan Ath-Thawri. As well as a Hadith of Abu Hurayrah, who said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nإِذَا أَمَرْتُكُمْ بِأَمْرٍ فَائْتُوا مِنْهُ مَا اسْتَطَعْتُمْ، وَمَا نَهَيْتُكُمْ عَنْهُ فَاجْتَنِبُوهُ\n(When I order you to do something, then do as much as you can of it. If I forbid something for you, then shun it.) Allah's statement,\nوَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ ۖ إِنَّ اللَّهَ شَدِيدُ الْعِقَابِ\n(Have Taqwa of Allah; verily, Allah is Severe in punishment.) means, fear Allah by obeying His orders and refraining from His prohibitions. Surely, Allah is severe in punishment for those who defy Him and reject and disobey His commands as well as, those who commit what He forbids and prohibits.","href":"/tafsir/59?verse=6","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:59:8","title":"Ibn Kathir · 59:8–10","text":"(And there is also a share in this booty) for the poor emigrants, who were expelled from their homes and their property, seeking bounties from Allah and (His) good pleasure, and helping Allah and His Messenger. Such are indeed the truthful (8)And (it is also for) those who, before them, had homes and had adopted the faith, love those who emigrate to them, and have no jealousy in their breasts for that which they have been given, and give them preference over themselves even though they were in need of that. And whosoever is saved from his own greed, such are they who will be the successful (9)And those who came after them say: \"Our Lord! Forgive us and our brethren who have preceded us in faith, and put not in our hearts any hatred against those who have believed. Our Lord! You are indeed full of kindness, Most Merciful (10)\nThose Who deserve the Fai'; and the Virtues of the Muhajirin and Al-Ansar\nAllah states the categories of needy people who also deserve a part of the Fai',\nالَّذِينَ أُخْرِجُوا مِنْ دِيَارِهِمْ وَأَمْوَالِهِمْ يَبْتَغُونَ فَضْلًا مِنَ اللَّهِ وَرِضْوَانًا\n(who were expelled from their homes and their property, seeking bounties from Allah and (His) good pleasure,) meaning, departed their homes and defied their people, seeking the acceptance of Allah and His favor,\nوَيَنْصُرُونَ اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ ۚ أُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الصَّادِقُونَ\n(and helping Allah and His Messenger. Such are indeed the truthful.) meaning, 'they are those who were truthful in statement and deed, and they are the chiefs of the Muhajirin.' Allah the Exalted praised the Ansar next and emphasized their virtue, status and honor, preferring to give to others over themselves, even though they were in need, and not feeling enviousness. Allah the Exalted said,\nوَالَّذِينَ تَبَوَّءُوا الدَّارَ وَالْإِيمَانَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ\n(And (it is also for) those who, before them, had homes and had adopted the faith,) referring to those who resided in the city to which the migration occurred, before the emigrants arrived at it, and who embraced the faith before many of the emigrants. 'Umar said, \"I recommend the Khalifah, who will come after me, to know the rights and virtues of the foremost Muhajirin and to preserve their honor. I also recommend him to be kind to the Ansar, those who resided in the city of Hijrah and embraced the faith beforehand, that he accepts the good that comes from those who do good among them and forgives those among them who commit errors.\" Al-Bukhari collected this Hadith. Allah said,\nيُحِبُّونَ مَنْ هَاجَرَ إِلَيْهِمْ\n(love those who emigrate to them,) indicates that they, on account of their generosity and honorable conduct, loved those who emigrated to them and comforted them with their wealth. Imam Ahmad recorded that Anas said, \"The Muhajirin said, 'O Allah's Messenger! We have never met people like those whom we emigrated to; comforting us in times of scarcity and giving us with a good heart in times of abundance. They have sufficed for us and shared their wealth with us so much so, that we feared that they might earn the whole reward instead of us.' He said,\nلَا، مَا أَثْنَيْتُمْ عَلَيْهِمْ وَدَعَوْتُمُ اللهَ لَهُمْ\n(No they won't, as long you thanked them for what they did and invoked Allah for them.)\" I have not seen this version in the other books. Al-Bukhari recorded that Yahya bin Sa'id heard Anas bin Malik, when he went with him to Al-Walid, saying, \"The Prophet ﷺ called Ansar to divide Al-Bahrayn among them. The Ansar said, 'Not until you give a similar portion to our emigrant brothers.' He said,\nإِمَّا لَا، فَاصْبِرُوا حَتّٰى تَلْقَوْنِي، فَإِنَّهُ سَيُصِيبُكُمْ بَعْدِي أَثَرَةٌ\n(Perhaps, no; but you will soon see people giving preference to others, so remain patient until you meet me (on the Day of Resurrection).)\"\nAl-Bukhari was alone with this version. He also recorded that Abu Hurayrah said, \"The Ansar said (to the Prophet ﷺ), 'Distribute our date-palms between us and our emigrant brothers.' He replied, 'No.' The Ansar said (to the emigrants), 'Look tend to the trees and share the fruits with us.' The emigrants said, 'We hear and obey.'\" Al-Bukhari, but not Muslim, recorded it.\nThe Ansar never envied the Muhajirin\nAllah said,\nوَلَا يَجِدُونَ فِي صُدُورِهِمْ حَاجَةً مِمَّا أُوتُوا\n(and have no jealousy in their breasts for that which they have been given,) meaning, the Ansar did not have any envy for the Muhajirin because of the better status, rank, or more exalted grade that Allah gave the Muhajirin above them. Allah's statement,\nمِمَّا أُوتُوا\n(that which they have been given,) refers to what the Muhajirin were favored with, according to Qatadah and Ibn Zayd.\nSelflessness of the Ansar\nAllah said,\nوَيُؤْثِرُونَ عَلَىٰ أَنْفُسِهِمْ وَلَوْ كَانَ بِهِمْ خَصَاصَةٌ\n(and give them preference over themselves even though they were in need of that.) meaning, they preferred giving to the needy rather than attending to their own needs, and began by giving the people before their own selves, even though they too were in need.\nAn authentic Hadith stated that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nأَفْضَلُ الصَّدَقَةِ جُهْدُ الْمُقِلِّ\n(The best charity is that given when one is in need and struggling.) This exalted rank is better than the rank of those whom Allah described in His statements,\nوَيُطْعِمُونَ الطَّعَامَ عَلَىٰ حُبِّهِ\n(And they give food, inspite of their love for it.)(76:8), and,\nوَآتَى الْمَالَ عَلَىٰ حُبِّهِ\n(And gives his wealth, in spite of love for it.)(2:177) The latter give charity even though they love the wealth they give, not that they really need it, nor that it is necessary for them to keep it. The former prefer others to themselves even though they are in need and have a necessity for what they spend in charity.\nAbu Bakr As-Siddiq gave away all his wealth in charity and Allah's Messenger ﷺ asked him,\nمَا أَبْقَيْتَ لِأَهْلِكَ؟\n(What did you keep for your family,) and he said, \"I kept for them Allah and His Messenger.\"\nIkrimah (bin Abi Jahl) and two other wounded fighters were offered water when they were injured during the battle of Al-Yarmuk, and each one of them said that the sip of water should be given to another of the three wounded men. They did so even though they were badly injured and craving water. When the water reached the third man, he and the other two died and none of them drank any of the water! May Allah be pleased with them and make them pleased with Him.\nAl-Bukhari recorded that Abu Hurayrah said, \"A man came to the Prophet ﷺ and said, 'O Allah's Messenger! Poverty has stuck me.' The Prophet ﷺ sent a messenger to his wives (to bring something for that man to eat) but they said that they had nothing. Then Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nأَلَا رَجُلٌ يُضَيِّفُ هَذَا، اللَّيْلَةَ، رَحِمَهُ اللهُ\n(Who will invite this person or entertain him as a guest tonight; may Allah grant His mercy to him who does so?)\nAn Ansari man said, 'I, O Allah's Messenger!' So he took him to his wife and said to her, 'Entertain the guest of Allah's Messenger generously.' She said, 'By Allah ! We have nothing except the meal for my children.' He said, 'Let your children sleep if they ask for supper. Then turn off the lamp and we go to bed tonight while hungry.' She did what he asked her to do. In the morning the Ansari went to Allah's Messenger ﷺ who said,\nلَقَدْ عَجِبَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ - أَوْ ضَحِكَ - مِنْ فُلَانٍ وَفُلَانَةَ\n(Allah wondered (favorably) or laughed at the action of so-and-so and his wife.) Then Allah revealed,\nوَيُؤْثِرُونَ عَلَىٰ أَنْفُسِهِمْ وَلَوْ كَانَ بِهِمْ خَصَاصَةٌ\n(and they give them preference over themselves even though they were in need of that).\"\nAl-Bukhari recorded this Hadith in another part of his Sahih. Muslim, At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa'i collected this Hadith. In another narration for this Hadith, the Companion's name was mentioined, it was Abu Talhah Al-Ansari, may Allah be pleased with him. Allah said,\nوَمَنْ يُوقَ شُحَّ نَفْسِهِ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْمُفْلِحُونَ\n(And whosoever is saved from his own greed, such are they who will be the successful.) indicating that those who are saved from being stingy, then they have earned success and a good achievement. Imam Ahmad recorded that Jabir bin 'Abdullah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nإِيَّاكُمْ وَالظُّلْمَ، فَإِنَّ الظُّلْمَ ظُلُمَاتٌ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ، وَاتَّقُوا الشُّحَّ، فَإِنَّ الشُّحَّ أَهْلَكَ مَنْ كَانَ قَبْلَكُمْ، حَمَلَهُمْ عَلىٰ أَنْ سَفَكُوا دِمَاءَهُمْ وَاسْتَحَلُّوا مَحَارِمَهُمْ\n(Be on your guard against committing oppression, for oppression is a darkness on the Day of Resurrection. Be on your guard against being stingy, for being stingy is what destroyed those who were before you. It made them shed blood and make lawful what was unlawful for them.) Muslim collected this Hadith.\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that Al-Aswad bin Hilal said that a man said to 'Abdullah (bin Mas'ud),\"O Abu 'Abdur-Rahman! I fear that I have earned destruction for myself.\" 'Abdullah asked him what the matter was and he said, \"I hear Allah's saying,\nوَمَنْ يُوقَ شُحَّ نَفْسِهِ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْمُفْلِحُونَ\n(And whosoever is saved from his own greed, such are they who will be the successful.) and I am somewhat a miser who barely gives away anything.\" 'Abdullah said, \"That is not the greed Allah mentioned in the Qur'an, which pertains to illegally consuming your brother's wealth. What you have is miserliness, and it is an evil thing indeed to be a miser.\" Allah said,\nوَالَّذِينَ جَاءُوا مِنْ بَعْدِهِمْ يَقُولُونَ رَبَّنَا اغْفِرْ لَنَا وَلِإِخْوَانِنَا الَّذِينَ سَبَقُونَا بِالْإِيمَانِ وَلَا تَجْعَلْ فِي قُلُوبِنَا غِلًّا لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا رَبَّنَا إِنَّكَ رَءُوفٌ رَحِيمٌ\n(And those who came after them say: \"Our Lord! Forgive us and our brethren who have preceded us in faith, and put not in our hearts any hatred against those who have believed. Our Lord! You are indeed full of kindness, Most Merciful.)\nThis is the third type of believers whose poor most deserve to receive a part of the Fai'. These three types are the Muhajirin, the Ansar and those who followed their righteous lead with excellence. Allah said in another Ayah,\nوَالسَّابِقُونَ الْأَوَّلُونَ مِنَ الْمُهَاجِرِينَ وَالْأَنْصَارِ وَالَّذِينَ اتَّبَعُوهُمْ بِإِحْسَانٍ رَضِيَ اللَّهُ عَنْهُمْ وَرَضُوا عَنْهُ\n(And of the foremost to embrace Islam of the Muhajirin and the Ansar and also those who followed them exactly, Allah is well-pleased with them as they are well-pleased with Him.)(9:100)\nThe third type are those who followed the Muhajirin and Ansar in their good works, beautiful attributes and who invoke Allah for them in public and secret. This is why Allah the Exalted said in this honorable Ayah,\nوَالَّذِينَ جَاءُوا مِنْ بَعْدِهِمْ يَقُولُونَ\n(And those who came after them say), meaning, the statement that they utter is,\nرَبَّنَا اغْفِرْ لَنَا وَلِإِخْوَانِنَا الَّذِينَ سَبَقُونَا بِالْإِيمَانِ وَلَا تَجْعَلْ فِي قُلُوبِنَا غِلًّا\n(Our Lord! Forgive us and our brethren who have preceded us in faith, and put not in our hearts any hatred), meaning, rage or envy,\nلِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا رَبَّنَا إِنَّكَ رَءُوفٌ رَحِيمٌ\n(against those who have believed. Our Lord! You are indeed full of kindness, Most Merciful.) Indeed, it is a beautiful way that Imam Malik used this honorable Ayah to declare that the Rafidah who curse the Companions do not have a share in the Fai' money, because they do not have the good quality of those whom Allah has described here that they say,\nرَبَّنَا اغْفِرْ لَنَا وَلِإِخْوَانِنَا الَّذِينَ سَبَقُونَا بِالْإِيمَانِ وَلَا تَجْعَلْ فِي قُلُوبِنَا غِلًّا لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا رَبَّنَا إِنَّكَ رَءُوفٌ رَحِيمٌ\n(Our Lord! Forgive us and our brethren who have preceded us in faith, and put not in our hearts any hatred against those who have believed. Our Lord! You are indeed full of kindness, Most Merciful.)\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that 'A'ishah said, \"They were commanded to invoke Allah to forgive them, but instead, they cursed them!\" She then recited this Ayah,\nوَالَّذِينَ جَاءُوا مِنْ بَعْدِهِمْ يَقُولُونَ رَبَّنَا اغْفِرْ لَنَا وَلِإِخْوَانِنَا الَّذِينَ سَبَقُونَا بِالْإِيمَانِ\n(And those who came after them say: \"Our Lord! Forgive us and our brethren who have preceded us in faith, and put not in our hearts any hatred against those who have believed.\")","href":"/tafsir/59?verse=8","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:59:11","title":"Ibn Kathir · 59:11–17","text":"Have you not observed the hypocrites who say to their disbelieving brethren among the People of the Scripture, \"If you are expelled, we indeed will go out with you, and we shall never obey anyone against you; and if you are attacked, we shall indeed help you.\" But Allah is Witness that they verily are liars (11)Surely, if they (the Jews) are expelled, never will they (hypocrites) go out with them; and if they are attacked, they will never help them. And (even) if they do help them, they (hypocrites) will turn their backs, and they will not be victorious (12)Verily, you are more fearful in their breasts than Allah. That is because they are a people who comprehend not (13)They fight not against you even together, except in fortified townships, or from behind walls. Their enmity among themselves is very great. You would think they were united, but their hearts are divided. That is because they are a people who understand not (14)They are like their immediate predecessors; they tasted the evil result of their conduct, and for them a painful torment (15)Like Shaytan, when he says to man: \"Disbelieve.\" But when he disbelieves, Shaytan says: \"I am free of you, I fear Allah, the Lord of all that exists! (16)So, the end of both will be that they will be in the Fire, abiding therein. Such is the recompense of the wrongdoers (17)\nThe False Promise of Support the Hypocrites gave to the Jews\nAllah states that the hypocrites, 'Abdullah bin Ubayy and his like, sent a messenger to Bani An-Nadir promising them help. Allah the Exalted said,\nأَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ نَافَقُوا يَقُولُونَ لِإِخْوَانِهِمُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَابِ لَئِنْ أُخْرِجْتُمْ لَنَخْرُجَنَّ مَعَكُمْ وَلَا نُطِيعُ فِيكُمْ أَحَدًا أَبَدًا وَإِنْ قُوتِلْتُمْ لَنَنْصُرَنَّكُمْ\n(Have you not observed the hypocrites who say to their friends among the People of the Scripture who disbelieve: \"If you are expelled, we indeed will go out with you, and we shall never obey anyone against you; and if you are attacked, we shall indeed help you.\") Allah then said,\nوَاللَّهُ يَشْهَدُ إِنَّهُمْ لَكَاذِبُونَ\n(But Allah is Witness that they verily are liars.) meaning, the hypocrites lied when they issued this promise, because it was just words that they did not intend to fulfill. Also, what they said they would do, would never have been fulfilled by them, and this is why Allah said,\nوَلَئِنْ قُوتِلُوا لَا يَنْصُرُونَهُمْ\n(and if they are attacked, they will never help them.) meaning, the hypocrites will not fight along with the Jews,\nوَلَئِنْ نَصَرُوهُمْ\n(And (even) if they do help them,) and even if the hypocrites did fight along their side,\nلَيُوَلُّنَّ الْأَدْبَارَ ثُمَّ لَا يُنْصَرُونَ\n(they will turn their backs, and they will not be victorious.) This Ayah contains good news, just as the good news that this following Ayah conveys,\nلَأَنْتُمْ أَشَدُّ رَهْبَةً فِي صُدُورِهِمْ مِنَ اللَّهِ ۚ\n(Verily, you are more fearful in their breasts than Allah.) meaning, the hypocrites fear you more than they fear Allah, as He says;\nإِذَا فَرِيقٌ مِنْهُمْ يَخْشَوْنَ النَّاسَ كَخَشْيَةِ اللَّهِ أَوْ أَشَدَّ خَشْيَةً\n(Behold! a section of them fear men as they fear Allah or even more.)(4:77) This is why Allah said,\nذَٰلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ قَوْمٌ لَا يَفْقَهُونَ\n(That is because they are a people who comprehend not.) Allah then said,\nلَا يُقَاتِلُونَكُمْ جَمِيعًا إِلَّا فِي قُرًى مُحَصَّنَةٍ أَوْ مِنْ وَرَاءِ جُدُرٍ ۚ\n(They fight not against you even together, except in fortified townships, or from behind walls.) meaning, they will not fight Muslims except from behind besieged fortified forts, because of their cowardice and fear of Muslims. They only fight when they have to defend themselves (even though they threaten Muslims of reprisals). Allah the Exalted said,\nبَأْسُهُمْ بَيْنَهُمْ شَدِيدٌ ۚ\n(Their enmity among themselves is very great.) meaning, the enmity they feel against each other is intense,\nوَيُذِيقَ بَعْضَكُمْ بَأْسَ بَعْضٍ\n(And make you to taste the violence of one another.)(6:65) Allah said in the Ayah,\nتَحْسَبُهُمْ جَمِيعًا وَقُلُوبُهُمْ شَتَّىٰ ۚ\n(You would think they were united, but their hearts are divided.) meaning, even though one might see them combining forces and think that these forces are harmonious, yet in reality, they are divided severely. Ibrahim An-Nakha'i said that this Ayah refers to the hypocrites and the People of the Scriptures,\nذَٰلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ قَوْمٌ لَا يَعْقِلُونَ\n(That is because they are a people who understand not.) Allah said,\nكَمَثَلِ الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ قَرِيبًا ۖ ذَاقُوا وَبَالَ أَمْرِهِمْ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ\n(They are like their immediate predecessors; they tasted the evil result of their conduct, and for them a painful torment.) referring to the Jewish tribe of Bani Qaynuqa', according to Ibn 'Abbas, Qatadah and Muhammad bin Ishaq.\nThe Parable of the Hypocrites and the Jews\nAllah said,\nكَمَثَلِ الشَّيْطَانِ إِذْ قَالَ لِلْإِنْسَانِ اكْفُرْ فَلَمَّا كَفَرَ قَالَ إِنِّي بَرِيءٌ مِنْكَ\n(Like Shaytan, when he says to man: \"Disbelieve.\" But when (man) disbelieves, Shaytan says: \"I am free of you...\") meaning, the example of the Jews being deceived by the promises of the hypocrites, who said that they will help them if Muslims fight them, is that of the devil. When matters got serious and the Jews were besieged, the hypocrites betrayed them and abandoned them to taste utter defeat. Likewise, the devil lures mankind into disbelief and when they obey him, he disowns them and declares himself free of their actions, saying,\nإِنِّي أَخَافُ اللَّهَ رَبَّ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(I fear Allah, the Lord of all that exists!) Allah said,\nفَكَانَ عَاقِبَتَهُمَا أَنَّهُمَا فِي النَّارِ خَالِدَيْنِ فِيهَا ۚ\n(So, the end of both will be that they will be in the Fire, abiding therein.) meaning, the end of both he, Shaytan, who commanded that disbelief be committed, and those who accepted his call, was in the fire of Hell forever,\nوَذَٰلِكَ جَزَاءُ الظَّالِمِينَ\n(Such is the recompense of the wrongdoers.) means, this is the recompense of every unjust person.","href":"/tafsir/59?verse=11","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:59:18","title":"Ibn Kathir · 59:18–20","text":"O you who believe! Have Taqwa of Allah and let every person look to what he has sent forth for tomorrow, and fear Allah. Verily, Allah is All-Aware of what you do (18)And be not like those who forgot Allah, and He caused them to forget themselves. Those are the rebellious (19)Not equal are the dwellers of the Fire and the dwellers of the Paradise. It is the dwellers of Paradise that will be successful (20)\nThe Command to have Taqwa and to prepare for the Day of Resurrection\nImam Ahmad recorded that Al-Mundhir bin Jarir narrated that his father said, \"While we were in the company of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ in the early hours of the morning, some people came there who were barefooted, naked, wearing striped woolen clothes, or cloaks, with their swords hung (around their necks). Most of them, nay, all of them, belonged to the tribe of Mudar. The color of the face of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ underwent a change when he saw them in poverty. He then entered (his house) and came out and commanded Bilal to pronounce Adhan. Bilal pronounced Adhan and Iqamah, and the Prophet ﷺ led the prayer. He then addressed them, first reciting,\nيَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ اتَّقُوا رَبَّكُمُ الَّذِي خَلَقَكُمْ مِنْ نَفْسٍ وَاحِدَةٍ\n(O mankind! Have Taqwa of your Lord, Who created you from a single person...)(4:1), until the end of the Ayah. Then he recited the Ayah that is in Surat Al-Hashr:\nوَلْتَنْظُرْ نَفْسٌ مَا قَدَّمَتْ لِغَدٍ\n(and let every person look to what he has sent forth for tomorrow,\") He then said, \"A man donated his Dinar, his Dirham, from his clothes, from his Sa' of wheat, from his Sa' of dates\" – until he said – \"even if it was half a date.\" Then a person among the Ansar came there with a moneybag, which his hands could scarcely lift; in fact, his hands could not lift it. Then the people followed continuously, until I saw two heaps of eatables and clothes. I saw the face of the Messenger ﷺ radiate with pleasure, like gold. The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَنْ سَنَّ فِي الْإِسْلَامِ سُنَّةً حَسَنَةً فَلَهُ أَجْرُهَا وَأَجْرُ مَنْ عَمِلَ بِهَا بَعْدَهُ، مِنْ غَيْرِ أَنْ يُنْقَصَ مِنْ أُجُورِهِمْ شَيْءٌ، وَمَنْ سَنَّ فِي الْإِسْلَامِ سُنَّةً سَيِّئَةً كَانَ عَلَيْهِ وِزْرُهَا وَوِزْرُ مَنْ عَمِلَ بِهَا، مِنْ غَيْرِ أَنْ يُنْقَصَ مِنْ أَوْزَارِهِمْ شَيْءٌ\n(He who sets a good example in Islam, there is a reward for him for this (act of goodness) and reward of that also who acted according to it subsequently, without any deduction from their rewards. Whoever sets in Islam an evil example, there is upon him the burden of that evil and the burden of him also who acted upon it subsequently, without any deduction from their burden.)\" Muslim recorded this Hadith via the chain of Shu'bah. Therefore, Allah's statement,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اتَّقُوا اللَّهَ\n(O you who believe! Have Taqwa of Allah), ordains the Taqwa of Allah which pertains to obeying what He ordered and staying away from what He forbade. Allah said,\nوَلْتَنْظُرْ نَفْسٌ مَا قَدَّمَتْ لِغَدٍ\n(and let every person look to what he has sent forth for tomorrow,) meaning, hold yourselves accountable before you are recompensed, and contemplate what you have kept for yourselves of good deeds for the Day of your return and being paraded before your Lord,\nوَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ ۚ\n(Have Taqwa of Allah), again ordering Taqwa,\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ خَبِيرٌ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ\n(Verily, Allah is All-Aware of what you do.) Allah asserts that surely, He knows all of your deeds – O mankind – and actions. Nothing that pertains to you ever escapes His observation, nor any matter of yours, whether major or minor, is ever beyond His knowledge,\nوَلَا تَكُونُوا كَالَّذِينَ نَسُوا اللَّهَ فَأَنْسَاهُمْ أَنْفُسَهُمْ ۚ\n(And be not like those who forgot Allah, and He caused them to forget themselves.) meaning, do not forget the remembrance of Allah, the Exalted, otherwise, He will make you forget to perform the good deeds that benefit you in your return, because the recompense is equated with the action. This is why Allah the Exalted said,\nأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْفَاسِقُونَ\n(Those are the rebellious.) referring to those who rebel against obedience to Allah, who will earn destruction on the Day of Resurrection and failure upon their return,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تُلْهِكُمْ أَمْوَالُكُمْ وَلَا أَوْلَادُكُمْ عَنْ ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ ۚ وَمَنْ يَفْعَلْ ذَٰلِكَ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْخَاسِرُونَ\n(O you who believe! Let not your properties or your children divert you from the remembrance of Allah. And whosoever does that, then they are the losers.)(63:9)\nThe Residents of Paradise and the Residents of Hell are never Equal\nAllah said,\nلَا يَسْتَوِي أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ وَأَصْحَابُ الْجَنَّةِ ۚ\n(Not equal are the dwellers of the Fire and the dwellers of the Paradise.) meaning, these two categories of people are never the same with regards to the judgement of Allah, the Exalted, on the Day of Resurrection. Allah said in other Ayat,\nأَمْ حَسِبَ الَّذِينَ اجْتَرَحُوا السَّيِّئَاتِ أَنْ نَجْعَلَهُمْ كَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ سَوَاءً مَحْيَاهُمْ وَمَمَاتُهُمْ ۚ سَاءَ مَا يَحْكُمُونَ\n(Or do those who earn evil deeds think that We shall hold them equal with those who believe and do righteous good deeds, in their present life and after their death? Worst is the judgement that they make.)(45:21),\nوَمَا يَسْتَوِي الْأَعْمَىٰ وَالْبَصِيرُ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ وَلَا الْمُسِيءُ ۚ قَلِيلًا مَا تَتَذَكَّرُونَ\n(And not equal are the blind and those who see; nor are those who believe and do righteous good deeds and those who do evil. Little do you remember!)(40:58), and,\nأَمْ نَجْعَلُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ كَالْمُفْسِدِينَ فِي الْأَرْضِ أَمْ نَجْعَلُ الْمُتَّقِينَ كَالْفُجَّارِ\n(Shall We treat those who believe and do righteous good deeds as corrupters on earth? Or shall We treat those who have Taqwa as the wicked?)(38:28)\nTherefore, Allah asserts that He will honor the righteous and humiliate the sinners, and this is why He said here,\nأَصْحَابُ الْجَنَّةِ هُمُ الْفَائِزُونَ\n(It is the dwellers of Paradise that will be successful.) that is, they are those who will earn safety and deliverance from the torment of Allah the Exalted and Most Honored.","href":"/tafsir/59?verse=18","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:59:21","title":"Ibn Kathir · 59:21–24","text":"Had We sent down this Qur'an on a mountain, you would surely have seen it humbling itself and rent asunder by the fear of Allah. Such are the parables which We put forward to mankind that they may reflect (21)He is Allah, beside Whom La ilaha illa Huwa, the All-Knower of the unseen and the seen. He is the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful (22)He is Allah, beside Whom La ilaha illa Huwa, Al-Malik, Al-Quddus, As-Salam, Al-Mu'min, Al-Muhaymin, Al-'Aziz, Al-Jabbar, Al-Mutakabbir. Glory be to Allah! Above all that they associate as partners with Him (23)He is Allah, Al-Khaliq, Al-Bari, Al-Musawwir. To Him belong the Best Names. All that is in the heavens and the earth glorify Him. And He is the Almighty, the All-Wise (24)\nAsserting the Greatness of the Qur'an\nAllah the Exalted emphasizes the greatness of the Qur'an, its high status and of being worthy of making hearts humble and rent asunder upon hearing it, because of the true promises and sure threats that it contains,\nلَوْ أَنْزَلْنَا هَٰذَا الْقُرْآنَ عَلَىٰ جَبَلٍ لَرَأَيْتَهُ خَاشِعًا مُتَصَدِّعًا مِنْ خَشْيَةِ اللَّهِ ۚ\n(Had We sent down this Qur'an on a mountain, you would surely have seen it humbling itself and rent asunder by the fear of Allah.)\nIf this is the case with a mountain which is hard and huge, that if it was made able to comprehend and understand this Qur'an, will feel humble and crumble from fear of Allah the Exalted, then what about you – O mankind? Why do your hearts not feel softness and humbleness from the fear of Allah, even though you understand Allah's command and comprehend His Book? This is why Allah said,\nوَتِلْكَ الْأَمْثَالُ نَضْرِبُهَا لِلنَّاسِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ\n(Such are the parables which We put forward to mankind that they may reflect.) There is a Hadith of the Mutawatir grade that states that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ had someone make him a Minbar. Before that, he used to stand next to a tree trunk in the Masjid to deliver speeches. So, when the Minbar was made and placed in the Masjid, the Prophet ﷺ came to deliver a speech and passed the tree trunk, headed towards the Minbar, the tree trunk started weeping, just like an infant. The tree trunk missed hearing the remembrance of Allah and the revelation that were being recited next to it. In one of the narrations for this Hadith, Al-Hasan Al-Basri said after narrating the Hadith, \"You – mankind – are more worthy to miss the Messenger of Allah ﷺ than the tree trunk!\"\nLikewise, this honorable Ayah asks that if the solid mountains feel humble and are rent asunder from the fear of Allah, if it heard Allah's Speech and comprehended it, what about you – O mankind – who heard the Qur'an and understood it? Allah the Exalted said in another Ayah,\nوَلَوْ أَنَّ قُرْآنًا سُيِّرَتْ بِهِ الْجِبَالُ أَوْ قُطِّعَتْ بِهِ الْأَرْضُ أَوْ كُلِّمَ بِهِ الْمَوْتَىٰ ۗ\n(And if there had been a Qur'an with which mountains could be moved, or the earth could be cloven asunder, or the dead could be made to speak.)(13:31)\nWe mentioned the meaning of this Ayah as stating that, if there were a Qur'an that has these qualities, it would be this Qur'an. Allah the Exalted said in another Ayah,\nوَإِنَّ مِنَ الْحِجَارَةِ لَمَا يَتَفَجَّرُ مِنْهُ الْأَنْهَارُ ۚ وَإِنَّ مِنْهَا لَمَا يَشَّقَّقُ فَيَخْرُجُ مِنْهُ الْمَاءُ ۚ وَإِنَّ مِنْهَا لَمَا يَهْبِطُ مِنْ خَشْيَةِ اللَّهِ ۗ\n(And indeed, there are stones out of which rivers gush forth, and indeed, there are of them (stones) which split asunder so that water flows from them, and indeed, there are of them which fall down for fear of Allah.)(2:74)\nGlorifying Allah the Exalted by mentioning His Names and Attributes\nAllah the Exalted said,\nهُوَ اللَّهُ الَّذِي لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ ۖ عَالِمُ الْغَيْبِ وَالشَّهَادَةِ ۖ هُوَ الرَّحْمَٰنُ الرَّحِيمُ\n(He is Allah, beside Whom La ilaha illa Huwa, the All-Knower of the unseen and the seen. He is the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.) Allah states that He Alone is worthy of worship, there is no Lord or God for the existence, except Him. All that is being worshipped instead of Allah are false deities. Allah is the All-Knower in the unseen and the seen, He knows all that pertains to the creations that we see, and those we cannot see. Nothing in heaven or on earth ever escapes His knowledge, no matter how great or insignificant, big or small, including ants in darkness. Allah's statement,\nهُوَ الرَّحْمَٰنُ الرَّحِيمُ\n(He is the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.) was duly explained before at the very beginning of this Tafsir, so it is not necessary to repeat it here, and it asserts that Allah is the Owner of the wide encompassing mercy that entails all of His creation. He is Ar-Rahman and Ar-Rahim of this life and the Hereafter. Allah the Exalted said in other Ayat,\nوَرَحْمَتِي وَسِعَتْ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ ۚ\n(And My mercy embraces all things.)(7:156),\nكَتَبَ رَبُّكُمْ عَلَىٰ نَفْسِهِ الرَّحْمَةَ ۖ\n(Your Lord has written (prescribed) mercy for Himself.)(6:54), and,\nقُلْ بِفَضْلِ اللَّهِ وَبِرَحْمَتِهِ فَبِذَٰلِكَ فَلْيَفْرَحُوا هُوَ خَيْرٌ مِمَّا يَجْمَعُونَ\n(Say: \"In the bounty of Allah, and in His mercy; – therein let them rejoice.\" That is better than what (the wealth) they amass.)(10:58) Allah the Exalted said,\nهُوَ اللَّهُ الَّذِي لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ الْمَلِكُ\n(He is Allah, beside Whom La ilaha illa Huwa, Al-Malik.) Al-Malik, meaning \"The Owner and King of all things,\" Who has full power over them without resistance or hindrance. Allah's statement,\nالْقُدُّوسُ\n(Al-Quddus,) meaning \"The Pure,\" according to Wahb bin Munabbih, while Mujahid and Qatadah said that Al-Quddus means \"The Blessed.\" Ibn Jurayj said that Al-Quddus means \"He Whom the honorable angels glorify.\"\nالسَّلَامُ\n(As-Salam,) meaning \"Free from any defects or shortcomings that lessen or decrease His perfect attributes and actions.\" Allah's statement,\nالْمُؤْمِنُ\n(Al-Mu'min,) means \"Who has granted safety to His servants by promising that He will never be unjust to them, \" according to Ad-Dahhak who reported it from Ibn 'Abbas. Qatadah said that Al-Mu'min means that \"Allah affirms that His statements are true,\" while Ibn Zayd said that it means, \"He attested to His faithful servants' having faith in Him.\" Allah's statement,\nالْمُهَيْمِنُ\n(Al-Muhaymin,) means, according to Ibn 'Abbas and others, \"The Witness for His servants actions,\" that is, the Ever-Watcher over them. Allah said in similar Ayat,\nوَاللَّهُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ شَهِيدٌ\n(And Allah is Witness over all things.)(58:6),\nثُمَّ اللَّهُ شَهِيدٌ عَلَىٰ مَا يَفْعَلُونَ\n(and moreover Allah is Witness over what they used to do.)(10:46), and,\nأَفَمَنْ هُوَ قَائِمٌ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ نَفْسٍ بِمَا كَسَبَتْ ۗ\n(Is then He (Allah) Who takes charge (guards) of every person and knows all that he has earned?)(13:33) Allah said,\nالْعَزِيزُ\n(Al-'Aziz,) meaning that \"He is the Almighty, Dominant over all things.\" Therefore, His majesty is never violated, due to His might, greatness, irresistible power and pride. Allah said;\nالْجَبَّارُ الْمُتَكَبِّرُ\n(Al-Jabbar, Al-Mutakabbir), meaning \"The Only One worthy of being the Compeller and Supreme.\" There is a Hadith in the Sahih Collection in which Allah said,\nالْعَظَمَةُ إِزَارِي، وَالْكِبْرِيَاءُ رِدَائِي، فَمَنْ نَازَعَنِي وَاحِدًا مِنْهُمَا عَذَّبْتُهُ\n(Might is My Izar and pride is My Rida; if anyone disputes any one of them with Me, then I will punish him.) Allah the Exalted said,\nسُبْحَانَ اللَّهِ عَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ\n(Glory be to Allah! (High is He) above all that they associate as partners with Him.), then He said,\nهُوَ اللَّهُ الْخَالِقُ الْبَارِئُ الْمُصَوِّرُ ۖ\n(He is Allah, Al-Khaliq, Al-Bari, Al-Musawwir.) Al-Khaliq refers to measuring and proportioning, Al-Bari refers to inventing and bringing into existence what He has created and measured. Surely, none except Allah is able to measure, bring forth and create whatever He wills to come to existence. Allah's statement,\nالْخَالِقُ الْبَارِئُ الْمُصَوِّرُ\n(Al-Khaliq, Al-Bari, Al-Musawwir.) means, if Allah wills something, He merely says to it \"be\" and it comes to existence in the form that He wills and the shape He chooses,\nفِي أَيِّ صُورَةٍ مَا شَاءَ رَكَّبَكَ\n(In whatever form He willed, He put you together.)(82:8) Allah describing Himself as being Al-Musawwir, Who brings into existence anything He wills in the shape and form He decides.\nAl-Asma' Al-Husna\nAllah the Exalted said,\nلَهُ الْأَسْمَاءُ الْحُسْنَىٰ ۚ\n(To Him belong Al-Asma' Al-Husna (the Best Names).) We explained the meaning of this Ayah in the Tafsir of Surat Al-A'raf. The Two Sahihs recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ للهِ تَعَالَىٰ تِسْعَةً وَتِسْعِينَ اسْمًا، مِائَةً إِلَّا وَاحِدًا، مَنْ أَحْصَاهَا دَخَلَ الْجَنَّةَ، وَهُوَ وِتْرٌ يُحِبُّ الْوِتْرَ\n(Allah the Exalted has ninety-nine Names, one hundred less one; whoever then preserves them, will enter Paradise. Allah is Witr (One) and He likes the Witr.)\nEverything praises and glorifies Allah\nAllah's statement,\nيُسَبِّحُ لَهُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ ۖ\n(All that is in the heavens and the earth glorify Him.) is similar to His other statement,\nتُسَبِّحُ لَهُ السَّمَاوَاتُ السَّبْعُ وَالْأَرْضُ وَمَنْ فِيهِنَّ ۚ وَإِنْ مِنْ شَيْءٍ إِلَّا يُسَبِّحُ بِحَمْدِهِ وَلَٰكِنْ لَا تَفْقَهُونَ تَسْبِيحَهُمْ ۗ إِنَّهُ كَانَ حَلِيمًا غَفُورًا\n(The seven heavens and the earth and all that is therein, glorify Him and there is not a thing but glorifies His praise. But you understand not their glorification. Truly, He is Ever Forbearing, Oft–Forgiving.)(17:44) Allah's statement,\nوَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ\n(and He is Al-'Aziz) The Almighty, meaning, His greatness is never humbled,\nالْحَكِيمُ\n(Al-Hakim) the All-Wise, in His legislation and decrees.\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Al-Hashr. All praise is due to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/59?verse=21","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:60:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 60:1–3","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَتَّخِذُوا عَدُوِّي وَعَدُوَّكُمْ أَوْلِيَاءَ تُلْقُونَ إِلَيْهِمْ بِالْمَوَدَّةِ وَقَدْ كَفَرُوا بِمَا جَاءَكُمْ مِنَ الْحَقِّ يُخْرِجُونَ الرَّسُولَ وَإِيَّاكُمْ ۙ أَنْ تُؤْمِنُوا بِاللَّهِ رَبِّكُمْ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ خَرَجْتُمْ جِهَادًا فِي سَبِيلِي وَابْتِغَاءَ مَرْضَاتِي ۚ تُسِرُّونَ إِلَيْهِمْ بِالْمَوَدَّةِ وَأَنَا أَعْلَمُ بِمَا أَخْفَيْتُمْ وَمَا أَعْلَنْتُمْ ۚ وَمَنْ يَفْعَلْهُ مِنْكُمْ فَقَدْ ضَلَّ سَوَاءَ السَّبِيلِ - إِنْ يَثْقَفُوكُمْ يَكُونُوا لَكُمْ أَعْدَاءً وَيَبْسُطُوا إِلَيْكُمْ أَيْدِيَهُمْ وَأَلْسِنَتَهُمْ بِالسُّوءِ وَوَدُّوا لَوْ تَكْفُرُونَ - لَنْ تَنْفَعَكُمْ أَرْحَامُكُمْ وَلَا أَوْلَادُكُمْ ۚ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ يَفْصِلُ بَيْنَكُمْ ۚ وَاللَّهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ بَصِيرٌ\n(1. O you who believe! Take not My enemies and your enemies as protecting friends, showing affection towards them, while they have disbelieved in what has come to you of the truth, and have driven out the Messenger and yourselves because you believe in Allah, your Lord! If you have come forth to strive in My cause and to seek My good pleasure. You show friendship to them in secret, while I am All-Aware of what you conceal and what you reveal. And whosoever of you (Muslims) does that, then indeed he has gone (far) astray from the straight path.)(2. Should they gain the upper hand over you, they would behave to you as enemies, and stretch forth their hands and their tongues against you with evil, and they desire that you should disbelieve.)(3. Neither your relatives nor your children will benefit you on the Day of Resurrection. He will judge between you. And Allah is the All-Seer of what you do.)\nReason behind revealing Surat Al-Mumtahanah\nThe story of Hatib bin Abi Balta'ah is the reason behind revealing the beginning of this honorable Surah. Hatib was among the Early Emigrants and participated in the battle of Badr. Hatib had children and wealth in Makkah, but he was not from the tribe of Quraysh. Rather, he was an ally of 'Uthman. When the Messenger of Allah ﷺ decided to conquer Makkah, after its people broke the peace treaty between them, he ordered the Muslims to mobilize their forces to attack Makkah, and then said,\nاللّٰهُمَّ عَمِّ عَلَيْهِمْ خَبَرَنَا\n(O Allah! Keep our news concealed from them.) Hatib wrote a letter and sent it to the people of Makkah, with a woman from the tribe of Quraysh, informing them of the Messenger's intent to attack them. He wanted them to be indebted to him [so that they would grant safety to his family in Makkah]. Allah the Exalted conveyed this matter to His Messenger ﷺ, because He accepted the Prophet's invocation [to Him to conceal the news of the attack]. The Prophet ﷺ sent someone after the woman and retrieved the letter. This story is collected in the Two Sahihs.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Hasan bin Muhammad bin 'Ali said that 'Abdullah bin Abu Rafi' – or Ubaydullah bin Abu Rafi' – said that he heard 'Ali say, \"Allah's Messenger ﷺ sent me, Zubayr and Al-Miqdad saying,\nانْطَلِقُوا حَتّٰى تَأْتُوا رَوْضَةَ خَاخٍ فَإِنَّ بِهَا ظَعِينَةً مَعَهَا كِتَابٌ فَخُذُوهُ مِنْهَا\n(Proceed until you reach Rawdat Khakh, where there is a lady carrying a letter. Take that letter from her.)\nSo we proceeded on our way, with our horses galloping, until we reached the Rawdah. There we found the lady and said to her, 'Take out the letter.' She said, 'I am not carrying a letter.' We said, 'Take out the letter, or else we will take off your clothes.' So she took it out of her braid, and we brought the letter to Allah's Messenger ﷺ. The letter was addressed from Hatib bin Abu Balta'ah to some pagans of Makkah, telling them about what Allah's Messenger ﷺ intended to do. Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nيَا حَاطِبُ، مَا هَذَا؟\n(O Hatib! What is this?) Hatib replied, 'O Allah's Messenger! Do not make a hasty decision about me. I was a person not belonging to Quraysh, but I was an ally to them. All the Emigrants who were with you have kinsmen (in Makkah) who can protect their families. So I wanted to do them a favor, so they might protect my relatives, as I have no blood relation with them. I did not do this out of disbelief or to renegade from my religion, nor did I do it to choose disbelief after Islam.' Allah's Messenger ﷺ said to his Companions,\nإِنَّهُ صَدَقَكُمْ\n(Regarding him, he has told you the truth.) 'Umar said, 'O Allah's Messenger! Allow me to chop off the head of this hypocrite!' The Prophet ﷺ said,\nإِنَّهُ قَدْ شَهِدَ بَدْرًا، وَمَا يُدْرِيكَ لَعَلَّ اللهَ اطَّلَعَ إِلَى أَهْلِ بَدْرٍ فَقَالَ:اعْمَلُوا مَا شِئْتُمْ فَقَدْ غَفَرْتُ لَكُمْ\n(He attended Badr. What can I tell you, perhaps Allah looked at those who attended Badr and said, \"O the people of Badr, do what you like, for I have forgiven you.\")\"\nThe Group with the exception of Ibn Majah, collected this Hadith using various chains of narration that included Sufyan bin 'Uyaynah. Al-Bukhari added in his narration in the chapter on the Prophet's battles, \"Then Allah revealed the Surah,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَتَّخِذُوا عَدُوِّي وَعَدُوَّكُمْ أَوْلِيَاءَ\n(O you who believe! Take not my enemies and your enemies as protecting friends...) \" Al-Bukhari said in another part of his Sahih, 'Amr (one of the narrators of the Hadith) said, \"This Ayah,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَتَّخِذُوا عَدُوِّي وَعَدُوَّكُمْ أَوْلِيَاءَ\n(O you who believe! Take not my enemies and your enemies as protecting friends'...) was revealed about Hatib, but I do not know if the Ayah was mentioned in the Hadith (or was added as an explanation by one of the narrators).\" Al-Bukhari also said that 'Ali bin Al-Madini said that Sufyan bin 'Uyaynah was asked, \"Is this why this Ayah,\nلَا تَتَّخِذُوا عَدُوِّي وَعَدُوَّكُمْ أَوْلِيَاءَ\n(O you who believe! Take not my enemies and your enemies as protecting friends.) was revealed?\" Sufyan said, \"This is the narration that I collected from 'Amr, I did not leave a letter out of it. I do not know if anyone else memorized the same words for it.\"\nThe Command to have Enmity towards the Disbelievers and to abandon supporting Them\nAllah's statement,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَتَّخِذُوا عَدُوِّي وَعَدُوَّكُمْ أَوْلِيَاءَ تُلْقُونَ إِلَيْهِمْ بِالْمَوَدَّةِ وَقَدْ كَفَرُوا بِمَا جَاءَكُمْ مِنَ الْحَقِّ\n(O you who believe! Take not My enemies and your enemies as protecting friends showing affection towards them, while they have disbelieved in what has come to you of the truth,) refers to the idolators and the disbelievers who are combatants against Allah, His Messenger ﷺ and the believers. It is they whom Allah has decided should be our enemies and should be fought. Allah has forbidden the believers to take them as friends, supporters or companions. Allah the Exalted said in another Ayah,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَتَّخِذُوا الْيَهُودَ وَالنَّصَارَىٰ أَوْلِيَاءَ ۘ بَعْضُهُمْ أَوْلِيَاءُ بَعْضٍ ۚ وَمَنْ يَتَوَلَّهُمْ مِنْكُمْ فَإِنَّهُ مِنْهُمْ ۗ\n(O you who believe! Take not the Jews and the Christians as protecting friends, they are but protecting friends of each other. And if any among you takes them (as such), then surely, he is one of them.)(5:51) This Ayah contains a stern warning and a sure threat. Allah the Exalted said,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَتَّخِذُوا الَّذِينَ اتَّخَذُوا دِينَكُمْ هُزُوًا وَلَعِبًا مِنَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ مِنْ قَبْلِكُمْ وَالْكُفَّارَ أَوْلِيَاءَ ۚ وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ مُؤْمِنِينَ\n(O you who believe! Take not as protecting friends those who take your religion as a mockery and fun from among those who received the Scripture before you, nor from among the disbelievers; and have Taqwa of Allah if you indeed are true believers.)(5:57)\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَتَّخِذُوا الْكَافِرِينَ أَوْلِيَاءَ مِنْ دُونِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ ۚ أَتُرِيدُونَ أَنْ تَجْعَلُوا لِلَّهِ عَلَيْكُمْ سُلْطَانًا مُبِينًا\n(O you who believe! Take not for protecting friends disbelievers instead of believers. Do you wish to offer Allah a manifest proof against yourselves?)(4:144) and,\nلَا يَتَّخِذِ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ الْكَافِرِينَ أَوْلِيَاءَ مِنْ دُونِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ ۖ وَمَنْ يَفْعَلْ ذَٰلِكَ فَلَيْسَ مِنَ اللَّهِ فِي شَيْءٍ إِلَّا أَنْ تَتَّقُوا مِنْهُمْ تُقَاةً ۗ وَيُحَذِّرُكُمُ اللَّهُ نَفْسَهُ ۗ\n(Let not the believers take the disbelievers as protecting friends instead of the believers, and whoever does that will never be helped by Allah in any way, except if you indeed fear a danger from them. And Allah warns you against Himself (His punishment).)(3:28)\nThis is why Allah's Messenger ﷺ accepted Hatib's excuse when he said that he only wanted to have a favor on the Quraysh, because of the property and family members he left behind in Makkah. Allah's statement,\nيُخْرِجُونَ الرَّسُولَ وَإِيَّاكُمْ\n(and have driven out the Messenger and yourselves (from your homeland)) follows His encouragement to fight against them and to avoid being their supporters. This is because they expelled the Messenger ﷺ and his Companions on account of their hatred for Tawhid and worshipping Allah alone in sincerity. This is why Allah the Exalted said,\nأَنْ تُؤْمِنُوا بِاللَّهِ رَبِّكُمْ\n(because you believe in Allah, your Lord!) meaning, 'your only fault is that you believed in Allah, Lord of all that exists.' Allah the Exalted said in other Ayat,\nوَمَا نَقَمُوا مِنْهُمْ إِلَّا أَنْ يُؤْمِنُوا بِاللَّهِ الْعَزِيزِ الْحَمِيدِ\n(And they had no fault except that they believed in Allah, Almighty, Al-Hamid!)(85:8) and,\nالَّذِينَ أُخْرِجُوا مِنْ دِيَارِهِمْ بِغَيْرِ حَقٍّ إِلَّا أَنْ يَقُولُوا رَبُّنَا اللَّهُ ۗ\n(Those who have been expelled from their homes unjustly only because they said: \"Our Lord is Allah.\")(22:40) Allah said,\nإِنْ كُنْتُمْ خَرَجْتُمْ جِهَادًا فِي سَبِيلِي وَابْتِغَاءَ مَرْضَاتِي\n(If you have come forth to strive in My cause and to seek My good pleasure.) Allah says, 'if you are as described here, then do not take the disbelievers as supporters. If you migrated in Jihad for My cause and for seeking My pleasure, then do not take My enemies and your enemies as protecting friends, after they expelled you from your homes and property in rage against you and rejection of your religion.' Allah's statement,\nتُسِرُّونَ إِلَيْهِمْ بِالْمَوَدَّةِ وَأَنَا أَعْلَمُ بِمَا أَخْفَيْتُمْ وَمَا أَعْلَنْتُمْ ۚ\n(You show friendship to them in secret, while I am All-Aware of what you conceal and what you reveal.) Allah asks, 'do you do this while I know the secrets of the hearts, the intentions and all apparent things,'\nوَمَنْ يَفْعَلْهُ مِنْكُمْ فَقَدْ ضَلَّ سَوَاءَ السَّبِيلِ - إِنْ يَثْقَفُوكُمْ يَكُونُوا لَكُمْ أَعْدَاءً وَيَبْسُطُوا إِلَيْكُمْ أَيْدِيَهُمْ وَأَلْسِنَتَهُمْ بِالسُّوءِ\n(And whosoever of you does that, then indeed he has gone astray from the straight path. Should they gain the upper hand over you, they would behave to you as enemies, and stretch forth their hands and their tongues against you with evil,) meaning, 'if they gain the upper hand over you, they would use every type of harm in their disposal to hurt you in words and action,'\nوَوَدُّوا لَوْ تَكْفُرُونَ\n(and they desire that you should disbelieve.) meaning, 'they are eager that you do not earn any good. Therefore, their enmity to you is outward and inward, so how can you become supporters of this type of people?' This also encourages the enmity. Allah's statement,\nلَنْ تَنْفَعَكُمْ أَرْحَامُكُمْ وَلَا أَوْلَادُكُمْ ۚ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ يَفْصِلُ بَيْنَكُمْ ۚ وَاللَّهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ بَصِيرٌ\n(Neither your relatives nor your children will benefit you on the Day of Resurrection. He will judge between you. And Allah is the All-Seer of what you do.) means, 'your family relations will not benefit you with Allah if Allah decided to cause harm your way. Your relations will not benefit you if you please them with what angers Allah.' Those who agree with their family being disbelievers in order to please them will have earned loss and failure and their deeds will be rendered invalid. Their relation will not benefit them with Allah, even if their relation was with a Prophet. Imam Ahmad recorded that Anas said that a man said, \"O Allah's Messenger! Where is my father?\" He said,\nفِي النَّارِ\n(In the Fire.) When the man went away, the Prophet ﷺ called him back and said:\nإِنَّ أَبِي وَأَبَاكَ فِي النَّارِ\n(Verily, my father and your father are in the Fire.) Muslim and Abu Dawud also collected this Hadith.","href":"/tafsir/60?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:60:4","title":"Ibn Kathir · 60:4–6","text":"Indeed there has been an excellent example for you in Ibrahim and those with him, when they said to their people: \"Verily, we are free from you and whatever you worship besides Allah, we have rejected you, and there has started between us and you, hostility and hatred forever until you believe in Allah alone,\" – except the saying of Ibrahim to his father: \"Verily, I will ask forgiveness for you, but I have no power to do anything for you before Allah.\" \"Our Lord! In You we put our trust, and to You we turn in repentance, and to You is the final Return. (4)\"Our Lord! Make us not a trial for the disbelievers, and forgive us, Our Lord! Verily, You, only You, are the Almighty, the All-Wise. (5)Certainly, there has been in them an excellent example for you to follow – for those who look forward to (the meeting with) Allah and the Last Day. And whosoever turns away, then verily, Allah is Al-Ghani, Al-Hamid (6)\nThe Good Example of Ibrahim and His Followers, when They disowned Their Disbelieving People\nAllah the Exalted says to His faithful servants, whom He commanded to disown the disbelievers, to be enemies with them, and to distant themselves and separate from them:\nقَدْ كَانَتْ لَكُمْ أُسْوَةٌ حَسَنَةٌ فِي إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَالَّذِينَ مَعَهُ\n(Indeed there has been an excellent example for you in Ibrahim and those with him,) meaning, his followers who believed in him,\nإِذْ قَالُوا لِقَوْمِهِمْ إِنَّا بُرَآءُ مِنْكُمْ\n(when they said to their people: \"Verily we are free from you...\") meaning, 'we disown you,'\nوَمِمَّا تَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ كَفَرْنَا بِكُمْ\n(and whatever you worship besides Allah: we rejected you,) meaning, 'we disbelieve in your religion and way,'\nوَبَدَا بَيْنَنَا وَبَيْنَكُمُ الْعَدَاوَةُ وَالْبَغْضَاءُ أَبَدًا\n(and there has started between us and you, hostility and hatred forever) meaning, 'Animosity and enmity have appeared between us and you from now and as long as you remain on your disbelief; we will always disown you and hate you,'\nحَتَّىٰ تُؤْمِنُوا بِاللَّهِ وَحْدَهُ\n(until you believe in Allah alone,) meaning, 'unless, and until, you worship Allah alone without partners and disbelieve in the idols and rivals that you worship besides Him.' Allah's statement,\nإِلَّا قَوْلَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ لِأَبِيهِ لَأَسْتَغْفِرَنَّ لَكَ\n(except the saying of Ibrahim to his father: \"Verily, I will ask forgiveness (from Allah) for you...\") means, 'you have a good example in Ibrahim and his people; as for Ibrahim's prayers for Allah his father, it was a promise that he made for his father.' When Ibrahim became sure that his father was an enemy of Allah, he declared himself innocent of him.\nSome of the believers used to invoke Allah for their parents who died as disbelievers, begging Him to forgive them. They did so claiming that Ibrahim used to invoke Allah to forgive his father. Allah the Exalted said in reply,\nمَا كَانَ لِلنَّبِيِّ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَنْ يَسْتَغْفِرُوا لِلْمُشْرِكِينَ وَلَوْ كَانُوا أُولِي قُرْبَىٰ مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا تَبَيَّنَ لَهُمْ أَنَّهُمْ أَصْحَابُ الْجَحِيمِ - وَمَا كَانَ اسْتِغْفَارُ إِبْرَاهِيمَ لِأَبِيهِ إِلَّا عَنْ مَوْعِدَةٍ وَعَدَهَا إِيَّاهُ فَلَمَّا تَبَيَّنَ لَهُ أَنَّهُ عَدُوٌّ لِلَّهِ تَبَرَّأَ مِنْهُ ۚ إِنَّ إِبْرَاهِيمَ لَأَوَّاهٌ حَلِيمٌ\n(It is not for the Prophet and those who believe to ask Allah's forgiveness for the idolators, even though they be of kin, after it has become clear to them that they are the dwellers of the Fire (because they died in a state of disbelief). And Ibrahim's request for his father's forgiveness was only because of a promise he made to him .But when it became clear to him that he was an enemy of Allah, he dissociated himself from him. Verily, Ibrahim was Awwah and was forbearing.)(9:113-114) Allah said here,\nقَدْ كَانَتْ لَكُمْ أُسْوَةٌ حَسَنَةٌ فِي إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَالَّذِينَ مَعَهُ إِذْ قَالُوا لِقَوْمِهِمْ إِنَّا بُرَآءُ مِنْكُمْ\n(Indeed there has been an excellent example for you in Ibrahim and those with him, when they said to their people: \"Verily, we are free from you...\") until,\nإِلَّا قَوْلَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ لِأَبِيهِ لَأَسْتَغْفِرَنَّ لَكَ وَمَا أَمْلِكُ لَكَ مِنَ اللَّهِ مِنْ شَيْءٍ\n(... except the saying of Ibrahim to his father: \"Verily, I will ask forgiveness for you, but I have no power to do anything for you before Allah.\") meaning, 'You cannot follow Ibrahim's example as proof in the case mentioned here, as being allowed to ask Allah to forgive those who died on Shirk.' This is the saying of Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, Qatadah, Muqatil bin Hayyan, Ad-Dahhak and several others.\nAllah the Exalted said that Ibrahim and his companions, who parted with their people and disowned their way, said afterwards, while invoking Allah in humility and submission,\nرَبَّنَا عَلَيْكَ تَوَكَّلْنَا وَإِلَيْكَ أَنَبْنَا وَإِلَيْكَ الْمَصِيرُ\n(Our Lord! In You we put our trust, and to You we turn in repentance, and to You is the final Return.) meaning, 'we trust in You for all matters, we surrender all of our affairs to You, and to You is the final Return in the Hereafter,'\nرَبَّنَا لَا تَجْعَلْنَا فِتْنَةً لِلَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا\n(Our Lord! Make us not a trial for the disbelievers,) Mujahid said, \"It means, 'Do not punish us by their hands, nor with a punishment from You.' Or they will say, 'Had these people been following the truth, the torment would not have struck them'.\" Ad-Dahhak said something similar. Qatadah said, \"Do not give the disbelievers victory over us, thus subjecting us to trials by their hands. Surely, if You do so, they would then think that they were given victory over us because they are on the truth.\" This is the meaning that Ibn Jarir preferred. 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported from Ibn 'Abbas: \"Do not give them dominance over us, lest we suffer trials by their hands.\" Allah's statement,\nوَاغْفِرْ لَنَا رَبَّنَا ۖ إِنَّكَ أَنْتَ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ\n(and forgive us, Our Lord! Verily, You, only You, are the Almighty, the All-Wise.) means, 'cover our mistakes from being exposed to other than You, and forgive us for what (sin) is between us and You.'\nإِنَّكَ أَنْتَ الْعَزِيزُ\n(Verily, You, only You, are the Almighty,) 'and those who seek refuge in Your majesty are never dealt with unjustly,'\nالْحَكِيمُ\n(the All-Wise.) 'in Your statements, actions, legislation and decrees.' Allah the Exalted said,\nلَقَدْ كَانَ لَكُمْ فِيهِمْ أُسْوَةٌ حَسَنَةٌ لِمَنْ كَانَ يَرْجُو اللَّهَ وَالْيَوْمَ الْآخِرَ ۚ\n(Certainly, there has been in them an excellent example for you to follow – for those who look forward to (the meeting with) Allah and the Last Day.) asserting what He has said before with the exemption mentioned, i.e., the good example that Allah mentioned before,\nلِمَنْ كَانَ يَرْجُو اللَّهَ وَالْيَوْمَ الْآخِرَ\n(for those who look forward to Allah and the Last Day.) thus encouraging the believers who believe in Allah and the Return to Him. Allah said,\nوَمَنْ يَتَوَلَّ\n(And whosoever turns away) meaning, from what Allah has ordained,\nفَإِنَّ اللَّهَ هُوَ الْغَنِيُّ الْحَمِيدُ\n(verily, Allah is Al-Ghani, Al-Hamid.) Allah said in another Ayah,\nإِنْ تَكْفُرُوا أَنْتُمْ وَمَنْ فِي الْأَرْضِ جَمِيعًا فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ لَغَنِيٌّ حَمِيدٌ\n(If you disbelieve, you and all on the earth together, then verily! Allah is Ghani, Hamid.)(14:8) 'Ali bin Talhah reported from Ibn 'Abbas,\nلَغَنِيٌّ\n\"(Ghani) is the One Who is perfectly rich.\" That is Allah. This is Allah's attribute that He alone is worthy of being described by; surely, He has no equal, none like unto Him. All praise is due to Allah, the One, the Irresistible.\nحَمِيدٌ\n(Hamid) means, the praiseworthy, in all His statements and actions, there is no (true) God except Him alone.","href":"/tafsir/60?verse=4","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:60:7","title":"Ibn Kathir · 60:7–9","text":"Perhaps Allah will make friendship between you and those whom you hold as enemies. And Allah has power (over all things), and Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful (7)Allah does not forbid you to deal justly and kindly with those who fought not against you on account of religion nor drove you out of your homes. Verily, Allah loves those who deal with equity (8)It is only as regards those who fought against you on account of religion, and have driven you out of your homes, and helped to drive you out, that Allah forbids you to befriend them. And whosoever will befriend them, then such are the wrongdoers (9)\nPerhaps Allah will make a Friendship between You and Those, whom You hold as Enemies\nAllah said to His faithful servants, after ordering them to be enemies with the disbelievers,\nعَسَى اللَّهُ أَنْ يَجْعَلَ بَيْنَكُمْ وَبَيْنَ الَّذِينَ عَادَيْتُمْ مِنْهُمْ مَوَدَّةً ۚ\n(Perhaps Allah will make friendship between you and those, whom you hold as enemies.) meaning affection after animosity, tenderness after coldness and coming together after parting from each other,\nوَاللَّهُ قَدِيرٌ ۚ\n(And Allah has power (over all things),) Allah is able to gather opposites and bring together hearts, after feeling hostility and hardness. In this case, the hearts will come together in agreement, just as Allah said when He mentioned His favor on the Ansar,\nوَاذْكُرُوا نِعْمَتَ اللَّهِ عَلَيْكُمْ إِذْ كُنْتُمْ أَعْدَاءً فَأَلَّفَ بَيْنَ قُلُوبِكُمْ فَأَصْبَحْتُمْ بِنِعْمَتِهِ إِخْوَانًا وَكُنْتُمْ عَلَىٰ شَفَا حُفْرَةٍ مِنَ النَّارِ فَأَنْقَذَكُمْ مِنْهَا ۗ\n(And remember Allah's favor on you, for you were enemies one to another but He joined your hearts together, so that, by His grace, you became brethren and were on the brink of a pit of Fire, and He saved you from it.)(3:103) Also the Prophet ﷺ said to them,\nأَلَمْ أَجِدْكُمْ ضُلَّالًا فَهَدَاكُمُ اللهُ بِي، وَكُنْتُمْ مُتَفَرِّقِينَ فَأَلَّفَكُمُ اللهُ بِي؟\n(Did I not find you misguided, and Allah guided you through me; and divided, and Allah united [your hearts] through me?) Allah the Exalted said,\nوَإِنْ يُرِيدُوا أَنْ يَخْدَعُوكَ فَإِنَّ حَسْبَكَ اللَّهُ ۚ هُوَ الَّذِي أَيَّدَكَ بِنَصْرِهِ وَبِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ - وَأَلَّفَ بَيْنَ قُلُوبِهِمْ ۚ لَوْ أَنْفَقْتَ مَا فِي الْأَرْضِ جَمِيعًا مَا أَلَّفْتَ بَيْنَ قُلُوبِهِمْ وَلَٰكِنَّ اللَّهَ أَلَّفَ بَيْنَهُمْ ۚ إِنَّهُ عَزِيزٌ حَكِيمٌ\n(He it is Who has supported you with His help and with the believers. And He has united their hearts. If you had spent all that is in the earth, you could not have united their hearts, but Allah has united them. Certainly He is Almighty, All-Wise.)(8:62,63) And in the Hadith:\nأَحْبِبْ حَبِيبَكَ هَوْنًا مَا، فَعَسَى أَنْ يَكُونَ بَغِيضَكَ يَوْمًا مَا، وَأَبْغِضْ بَغِيضَكَ هَوْنًا مَا، فَعَسَى أَنْ يَكُونَ حَبِيبَكَ يَوْمًا مَا\n(Love your loved one moderately, because one day, he might become your enemy. Hate your hated one moderately, because one day, he might become your loved one.) Allah's statement,\nوَاللَّهُ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ\n(And Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.) means, Allah forgives the disbelief of the disbelievers if they repent from it, returned to their Lord and surrendered to Him in Islam. Surely, He is the Oft-Forgiving, the Most-Merciful to those who repent to Him from their sins, no matter what type of the sin it is.\nThe Permissibility of being Kind to Disbelievers who do not fight against the Religion\nAnd Allah's statement;\nلَا يَنْهَاكُمُ اللَّهُ عَنِ الَّذِينَ لَمْ يُقَاتِلُوكُمْ فِي الدِّينِ وَلَمْ يُخْرِجُوكُمْ مِنْ دِيَارِكُمْ\n(Allah does not forbid you with those who fought not against you on account of religion nor drove you out of your homes,) means, those who did not have a role in your expulsion. Therefore, Allah does not forbid you from being kind to the disbelievers who do not fight you because of the religion, such as women and weak disbelievers,\nأَنْ تَبَرُّوهُمْ\n(to deal kindly) to be gentle with them,\nوَتُقْسِطُوا إِلَيْهِمْ\n(and justly with those) to be fair with them\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ يُحِبُّ الْمُقْسِطِينَ\n(Verily, Allah loves those who deal with equity.) Imam Ahmad recorded that Asma' bint Abu Bakr said, \"My mother, who was an idolatress at the time, came to me during the Treaty of Peace, the Prophet ﷺ conducted with the Quraysh. I came to the Prophet ﷺ and said, 'O Allah's Messenger! My mother came visiting, desiring something from me, should I treat her with good relations?' The Prophet ﷺ said,\nنَعَمْ صِلِي أُمَّكِ\n(Yes. Keep good relation with your mother.)\" The Two Sahihs recorded this Hadith. Imam Ahmad recorded that 'Abdullah bin Zubayr said, \"Qutaylah came visiting her daughter, Asma' bint Abi Bakr, with some gifts, such as Dibab, cheese and clarified (cooking) butter, and she was an idolatress at that time. Asma' refused to accept her mother's gifts and did not let her enter her house. 'A'ishah asked the Prophet ﷺ about his verdict and Allah sent down the Ayah,\nلَا يَنْهَاكُمُ اللَّهُ عَنِ الَّذِينَ لَمْ يُقَاتِلُوكُمْ فِي الدِّينِ\n(Allah does not forbid you with those who fought not against you on account of religion) until the end of the Ayah. Allah's Messenger ﷺ ordered Asma' to accept her mother's gifts and to let her enter her house.\" Allah's statement,\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ يُحِبُّ الْمُقْسِطِينَ\n(Allah loves those who deal with equity.) was duly explained in the Tafsir of Surat Al-Hujurat. We also mentioned the authentic Hadith,\nالْمُقْسِطُونَ عَلىٰ مَنَابِرَ مِنْ نُورٍ عَنْ يَمِينِ الْعَرْشِ، الَّذِينَ يَعْدِلُونَ فِي حُكْمِهِمْ وَأَهَالِيهِمْ وَمَا وَلُوا\n(The just, who are fair in their decisions, families and those under their authority, will be on podiums made of light, to the right of the Throne.)\nThe Prohibition of being Kind towards Combatant Disbelievers\nAllah's statement,\nإِنَّمَا يَنْهَاكُمُ اللَّهُ عَنِ الَّذِينَ قَاتَلُوكُمْ فِي الدِّينِ وَأَخْرَجُوكُمْ مِنْ دِيَارِكُمْ وَظَاهَرُوا عَلَىٰ إِخْرَاجِكُمْ أَنْ تَوَلَّوْهُمْ ۚ\n(It is only as regards those who fought against you on account of religion, and have driven you out of your homes, and helped to drive you out that Allah forbids you to befriend them.)(60:9) means, 'Allah forbids you from being kind and befriending with the disbelievers who are openly hostile to you, those who fought against you, expelled you and helped to expel you. Allah the Exalted forbids you from being their friends and orders you to be their enemy.'\nThen Allah stresses His threat against being friends with them, by saying,\nوَمَنْ يَتَوَلَّهُمْ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الظَّالِمُونَ\n(And whosoever will befriend them, then such are the wrongdoers.) As He said;\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَتَّخِذُوا الْيَهُودَ وَالنَّصَارَىٰ أَوْلِيَاءَ ۘ بَعْضُهُمْ أَوْلِيَاءُ بَعْضٍ ۚ وَمَنْ يَتَوَلَّهُمْ مِنْكُمْ فَإِنَّهُ مِنْهُمْ ۗ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ الظَّالِمِينَ\n(O you who believe! Take not the Jews and the Christians as protecting friends, they are but protecting friends of each other. And if any among you takes them (as protecting friends), then surely, he is one of them. Verily, Allah guides not those people who are the wrongdoers)(5:51)","href":"/tafsir/60?verse=7","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:60:10","title":"Ibn Kathir · 60:10–11","text":"O you who believe! When believing women come to you as emigrants, examine them; Allah knows best as to their faith, then if you ascertain that they are true believers, send them not back to the disbelievers. They are not lawful for the disbelievers nor are the disbelievers lawful for them. But give them (disbelievers) that which they have spent (on their dowery). And there will be no sin on you to marry them if you have paid their due to them. Likewise do not keep the disbelieving women, and ask for that which you have spent (on their dowery) and let them (the disbelievers) ask for that which they have spent. That is the judgement of Allah, He judges between you. And Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise (10)And if any of your wives have gone from you to the disbelievers then you succeed over them (gain victory); then pay those whose wives have gone, the equivalent of what they had spent. And have Taqwa of Allah, the One in Whom you are believers (11)\nAfter Al-Hudaybiyyah, Emigrant Muslim Women may not be returned to the Disbelievers\nIn Surat Al-Fath, we related the story of the treaty at Al-Hudaybiyyah that was conducted between the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and the disbelievers of Quraysh. In that treaty, there were these words, \"Everyman (in another narration, every person) who reverts from our side to your side, should be returned to us, even if he is a follower of your religion.\" This was said by 'Urwah, Ad-Dahhak, 'Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd, Az-Zuhri, Muqatil bin Hayyan and As-Suddi.\nSo according to this narration, this Ayah specifies and explains the Sunnah. And this is the best case of understanding. Yet according to another view of some of the Salaf, it abrogates it.\nAllah the Exalted and Most High ordered His faithful servants to test the faith of women who emigrate to them. When they are sure that they are faithful, they should not send them back to the disbelievers, for the disbelievers are not allowed for them and they are not allowed for the disbelievers. In the biography of 'Abdullah bin Abi Ahmad bin Jahsh in Al-Musnad Al-Kabir, we also mentioned that 'Abdullah bin Abi Ahmad said, \"Umm Kulthum bint 'Uqbah bin Abi Mu'ayt emigrated and her brothers, 'Umarah and Al-Walid, went after her. They came to Allah's Messenger ﷺ and talked to him about Umm Kulthum and asked that she be returned to them. Allah abolished the part of the treaty between the Prophet ﷺ and the idolators about the women particularly. So He forbade returning Muslim women to the idolators and revealed the Ayah about testing them.\"\nAl-'Awfi reported from Ibn 'Abbas, about Allah's saying:\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِذَا جَاءَكُمُ الْمُؤْمِنَاتُ مُهَاجِرَاتٍ فَامْتَحِنُوهُنَّ ۖ\n(O you who believe! When believing women come to you as emigrants, examine them;) \"Their examination was asking them to testify to La ilaha illallah, and that Muhammad is Allah's servant and His Messenger.\" Mujahid explained the Ayah,\nفَامْتَحِنُوهُنَّ\n(examine them) by saying, \"Ask them why they migrated. If they came because they were angry with their husbands, or for any other reason, and you realized that they did not embrace the faith, then send them back to their husbands.\" Allah's statement,\nفَإِنْ عَلِمْتُمُوهُنَّ مُؤْمِنَاتٍ فَلَا تَرْجِعُوهُنَّ إِلَى الْكُفَّارِ ۖ\n(then if you ascertain that they are true believers, send them not back to the disbelievers.) This Ayah indicates that faith can be recognized and affirmed.\nThe Believing Woman is prohibited from marrying an Idolator and the Believing Man is prohibited from marrying the idolateress\nAllah's statement,\nلَا هُنَّ حِلٌّ لَهُمْ وَلَا هُمْ يَحِلُّونَ لَهُنَّ ۖ\n(They are not lawful for the disbelievers nor are the disbelievers lawful for them.)\nThis Ayah forbids Muslim women for idolators, which was a lawful marriage in the beginning of Islam.\nAbu Al-'As bin Ar-Rabi' was married to Zaynab, the Prophet's daughter. She was a Muslim, while Abu Al-'As was still an idolator like his people. When he was captured during the battle of Badr, his wife, Zaynab, sent his ransom, a necklace that belonged to the Prophet's first wife Khadijah. The Prophet ﷺ became very emotional when he saw the necklace and said to the Companions,\nإِنْ رَأَيْتُمْ أَنْ تُطْلِقُوا لَهَا أَسِيرَهَا فَافْعَلُوا\n(If you decide to set free the prisoner who belongs to her, then do so.)\nThey did, and Allah's Messenger set him free. His ransom was that he send his wife to Allah's Messenger . Abu Al-'As fulfilled his promise and sent Zaynab to Allah's Messenger along with Zayd bin Harithah.\nZaynab remained in Al-Madinah after the battle of Badr, which took place in the second year of Hijrah, until her husband Abu Al-'As bin Ar-Rahi' embraced Islam in the eighth year after the Hijrah. She returned to their marriage without renewing the dowery.\nAllah's statement,\nوَآتُوهُمْ مَا أَنْفَقُوا\n(But give them that which they have spent.) meaning, the husbands of the emigrant women who came from the idolators, return the dowery that they gave to their wives. This was said by Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, Qatadah, Az-Zuhri and several others. Allah's statement,\nوَلَا جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ أَنْ تَنْكِحُوهُنَّ إِذَا آتَيْتُمُوهُنَّ أُجُورَهُنَّ ۚ\n(And there will be no sin on you to marry them if you have paid their due to them.) means, when you wish to marry them, then give them their dowery. That is, marry them under the condition that their 'Iddah (waiting period) is finished and they have a legal guardian for their marriage etc. Allah said,\nوَلَا تُمْسِكُوا بِعِصَمِ الْكَوَافِرِ\n(Likewise do not keep disbelieving women,) thus forbidding His faithful servants from marrying idolator women or remaining married to them.\nIn the Sahih, it is recorded that Al-Miswar and Marwan bin Al-Hakam said that after the Messenger of Allah ﷺ conducted the treaty with the Quraysh idolators at Al-Hudaybiyyah, some Muslim women emigrated to him and Allah the Exalted sent down this Ayah about them,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِذَا جَاءَكُمُ الْمُؤْمِنَاتُ مُهَاجِرَاتٍ\n(O you who believe! When believing women come to you as emigrants) until,\nوَلَا تُمْسِكُوا بِعِصَمِ الْكَوَافِرِ\n(Likewise do not keep disbelieving women,) Then 'Umar bin Al-Khattab divorced two of his wives, who were idolatresses, and one of them got married to Mu'awiyah bin Abi Sufyan, while the other got married to Safwan bin Umayyah.\nIbn Thawr narrated that Ma'mar said that Az-Zuhri said, \"This Ayah was revealed to Allah's Messenger ﷺ while he was in the area of Al-Hudaybiyyah, after making peace. He agreed that whoever comes from the Quraysh to his side, will be returned to Makkah. When some women came, this Ayah was revealed. Allah commanded that the dowery that was paid to these women be returned to their husbands. Allah also ordered that if some Muslim women revert to the side of the idolators, the idolators should return their dowery to their Muslim husbands. Allah said,\nوَلَا تُمْسِكُوا بِعِصَمِ الْكَوَافِرِ\n(Likewise do not keep disbelieving women).\" Allah's statement,\nوَاسْأَلُوا مَا أَنْفَقْتُمْ وَلْيَسْأَلُوا مَا أَنْفَقُوا\n(and ask for that which you have spent and let them ask for that which they have spent.) means, ask them for what you have paid to your wives who reverted to the side of the idolators, and they are entitled to get back the dowery that they gave their wives who emigrated to the Muslims. Allah's statement,\nذَٰلِكُمْ حُكْمُ اللَّهِ ۖ يَحْكُمُ بَيْنَكُمْ ۚ\n(That is the judgement of Allah, He judges between you.) means, this judgement about the treaty and excluding women from its clauses, is a decision that Allah made for His creatures,\nوَاللَّهُ عَلِيمٌ حَكِيمٌ\n(And Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.) meaning, He knows what benefits His servants and is the Most Wise about that. Allah the Exalted said,\nوَإِنْ فَاتَكُمْ شَيْءٌ مِنْ أَزْوَاجِكُمْ إِلَى الْكُفَّارِ فَعَاقَبْتُمْ فَآتُوا الَّذِينَ ذَهَبَتْ أَزْوَاجُهُمْ مِثْلَ مَا أَنْفَقُوا ۚ\n(And if any of your wives have gone from you to the disbelievers – then you succeeded (gained victory) over them; then pay those whose wives have gone, the equivalent of what they had spent.)\nMujahid and Qatadah explained this Ayah, by saying, \"This is about the disbelievers who did not have a treaty of peace. If a woman flees to the disbelievers and they do not give back what that her husband spent on her, then if a women comes to them (the Muslims) they are not to return to her husband anything until they pay the Muslim whose wife went to them the equivalent of what he spent. \"\nIbn Jarir recorded that Az-Zuhri said, \"The believers abided by Allah's decree and paid what they owed the idolators to compensate for the dowery the idolators gave to the women (who emigrated). However, the idolators refused to accept Allah's judgement for what they owed the Muslims. Allah said to the faithful believers,\nوَإِنْ فَاتَكُمْ شَيْءٌ مِنْ أَزْوَاجِكُمْ إِلَى الْكُفَّارِ فَعَاقَبْتُمْ فَآتُوا الَّذِينَ ذَهَبَتْ أَزْوَاجُهُمْ مِثْلَ مَا أَنْفَقُوا ۚ وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ الَّذِي أَنْتُمْ بِهِ مُؤْمِنُونَ\n(And if any of your wives have gone from you to the disbelievers – then you succeeded (gained victory) over them; then pay those whose wives have gone, the equivalent of what they had spent. And have Taqwa of Allah, the One in Whom your are believers.)\nTherefore, if a Muslim woman reverts to the idolators, the believers should give back the dowery her Muslim husband paid her, from whatever money is left with them from the dowery of women who migrated to the Muslims. They were supposed to return this wealth to the idolator husbands of these emigrant women. If they still have anything they owed the idolators, then they should return it to them.\"","href":"/tafsir/60?verse=10","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:60:12","title":"Ibn Kathir · 60:12","text":"O Prophet! When the believing women come to you pledging to you that they will not associate anything with Allah, and that they will not steal, and that they will not commit Zina, and that they will not kill their children, and that they will not utter slander, fabricating from between their hands and their feet, and that they will not disobey you in Ma'ruf (good), then accept their pledge, and ask Allah to forgive them. Verily, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful (12)\nThe Matters the Women pledged to\nAl-Bukhari recorded that 'A'ishah the wife of the Prophet ﷺ said, \"Allah's Messenger ﷺ used to examine women who migrated to his side according to this Ayah,\nيَا أَيُّهَا النَّبِيُّ إِذَا جَاءَكَ الْمُؤْمِنَاتُ يُبَايِعْنَكَ\n(O Prophet! When believing women come to you pledging to you...) until,\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ\n(Verily, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.)\" 'Urwah said, \"'A'ishah said, 'When any believing woman agreed to these conditions, Allah's Messenger ﷺ would say to her,\nقَدْ بَايَعْتُكِ\n(I have accepted your pledge.) but, by Allah, he never touched the hand of any women at all while taking the pledge from them. He only took their pledge of allegiance by saying,\nقَدْ بَايَعْتُكِ عَلىٰ ذَلِكِ\n(I have accepted your pledge.)\" This is the wording of Al-Bukhari. Imam Ahmad recorded that Umaymah bint Ruqayqah said, \"I came to Allah's Messenger ﷺ with some women to give him our pledge and he took the pledge from us that is mentioned in the Qur'an, that we associate none with Allah, etc; as in the Ayah. Then he ﷺ said,\nفِيمَا اسْتَطَعْتُنَّ وَأَطَقْتُنَّ\n(As much as you can bear to implement.) We said, 'Surely, Allah and His Messenger are more merciful with us than we are with ourselves.' We then said, 'O Allah's Messenger, should you not shake hands with us?' He said,\nإِنِّي لَا أُصَافِحُ النِّسَاءَ، إِنَّمَا قَوْلِي لِامْرَأَةٍ وَاحِدَةٍ كَقَوْلِي لِمِائَةِ امْرَأَةٍ\n(I do not shake hands with women, for my statement to one woman is as sufficient as my statement to a hundred women.)\" This Hadith has an authentic chain of narration; At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa'i and Ibn Majah collected it.\nAl-Bukhari also recorded that Umm 'Atiyah said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ took our pledge and recited to us the Ayah,\nأَنْ لَا يُشْرِكْنَ بِاللَّهِ شَيْئًا\n(...that they will not associate anything with Allah,) and forbade us to wail for the dead. Thereupon, a lady withdrew her hand saying, 'But such and such lady shared with me in lamenting (over one of my relatives), so I must reward hers.' The Prophet ﷺ did not object to that, so she went there and returned to the Prophet and he accepted her pledge of allegiance.\" Muslim also collected this Hadith.\nImam Ahmad recorded that 'Ubadah bin As-Samit said, \"While we were with the Prophet ﷺ, he said,\nتُبَايِعُونِي عَلىٰ أَنْ لَا تُشْرِكُوا بِاللهِ شَيْئًا، وَلَا تَسْرِقُوا، وَلَا تَزْنُوا، وَلَا تَقْتُلُوا أَوْلَادَكُمْ\n(Pledge to me in that you will not associate any with Allah, nor steal, nor commit Zina, nor kill your children.) Then he recited the Ayah that begins;\nإِذَا جَاءَكَ الْمُؤْمِنَاتُ\n(when the believing women come to you...) and took the pledge of allegiance from the women. He ﷺ then added,\nفَمَنْ وَفَى مِنْكُمْ فَأَجْرُهُ عَلَى اللهِ، وَمَنْ أَصَابَ مِنْ ذَلِكَ شَيْئًا فَعُوقِبَ بِهِ فَهُوَ كَفَّارَةٌ لَهُ، وَمَنْ أَصَابَ مِنْ ذَلِكَ شَيْئًا فَسَتَرَهُ اللهُ عَلَيْهِ فَهُوَ إِلَى اللهِ، إِنْ شَاءَ غَفَرَ لَهُ، وَإِنْ شَاءَ عَذَّبَهُ\n(Those among you who fulfill this pledge, will receive their reward from Allah. Those who deviate from any of it and receive the legal punishment (in this life), the punishment will be expiation for that sin. Whoever deviates from any of it and Allah screens him, then it is up to Allah to punish or forgive if He wills.) The Two Sahihs recorded this Hadith. Allah's statement,\nيَا أَيُّهَا النَّبِيُّ إِذَا جَاءَكَ الْمُؤْمِنَاتُ يُبَايِعْنَكَ\n(O Prophet! When the believing women come to you pledging to you) means, 'if any woman comes to you to give you the pledge and she accepts these conditions, then accept the pledge from her,'\nعَلَىٰ أَنْ لَا يُشْرِكْنَ بِاللَّهِ شَيْئًا وَلَا يَسْرِقْنَ\n(that they will not associate anything with Allah, that they will not steal,) meaning, the property of other people. In the case where a husband is not fulfilling his duty of spending on his wife, then she is allowed to use a part of his wealth, what is reasonable, to spend on herself. This is the case regardless of whether the husband knows about his wife's actions or not, because of the Hadith in which Hind bint 'Utbah said, \"O Allah's Messenger! Abu Sufyan is a miser! He does not give me sufficient money for the living expense of our family and myself. Am I allowed to secretly take from his money without his knowledge\" Allah's Messenger ﷺ said to her,\nخُذِي مِنْ مَالِهِ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ، مَا يَكْفِيكِ وَيَكْفِي بَنِيكِ\n(You may take from what is reasonable and appropriate for you and your children) This Hadith was recorded in the two Sahihs. Allah's statement,\nوَلَا يَزْنِينَ\n(they will not commit Zina,) is similar to His other statement,\nوَلَا تَقْرَبُوا الزِّنَا ۖ إِنَّهُ كَانَ فَاحِشَةً وَسَاءَ سَبِيلًا\n(And come not near to Az-Zina. Verily, it is a Fahishah (immoral act) and an evil way.)(17:32)\nA Hadith collected from Samurah mentions that for the adulterers and fornicators there is a painful torment in the fire of Hell. Imam Ahmad recorded that 'A'ishah said, \"Fatimah bint 'Utbah came to give her pledge to Allah's Messenger ﷺ, who took the pledge from her,\nأَنْ لَا يُشْرِكْنَ بِاللَّهِ شَيْئًا وَلَا يَسْرِقْنَ وَلَا يَزْنِينَ\n(that they will not associate anything with Allah, they will not steal, that they will not commit Zina (fornication and adultery),)\nFatimah bashfully placed her hand on her head in shyness. The Prophet liked what she did. 'A'ishah said, 'O woman! Accept the pledge, because by Allah, we all gave the pledge to the same.' She said, 'Yes then,' and she gave her pledge to the same things mentioned in the Ayah.\" Allah's statement,\nوَلَا يَقْتُلْنَ أَوْلَادَهُنَّ\n(that they will not kill their children,) includes killing children after they are born. The people of Jahiliyyah used to kill their children because they feared poverty. The Ayah includes killing the fetus, just as some ignorant women do for various evil reasons. Allah's statement,\nوَلَا يَأْتِينَ بِبُهْتَانٍ يَفْتَرِينَهُ بَيْنَ أَيْدِيهِنَّ وَأَرْجُلِهِنَّ\n(and that they will not utter slander, fabricating from between their hands and their feet,)\nIbn 'Abbas said, \"It means that they not to attribute to their husbands other than their legitimate children.\" Muqatil said similarly. Allah's statement,\nوَلَا يَعْصِينَكَ فِي مَعْرُوفٍ\n(and that they will not disobey you in Ma'ruf (good),) means, 'that they will obey you when you order them to do good and forbid them from evil.' Al-Bukhari recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said about Allah's statement,\nوَلَا يَعْصِينَكَ فِي مَعْرُوفٍ\n(and that they will not disobey you in any Ma'ruf (good),) \"This was one of the conditions which Allah imposed on the women.\" Maymun bin Mihran said, \"Allah did not order obedience to His Prophet for other than Ma'ruf, and Ma'ruf is itself obedience.\" Ibn Zayd said, \"Allah commanded that His Messenger, the best of His creation, be obeyed in that which is Ma'ruf.\"\nIbn Jarir recorded that Umm 'Atiyah Al-Ansariyah said, \"Among the conditions included in our pledge to Allah's Messenger to good was not to wail. A woman said, 'So-and-so family brought comfort to me (by wailing over my dead relative), so I will first pay them back.' So she went and paid them back in the same (wailed for their dead), and then came and gave her pledge. Only she and Umm Sulaym bint Milhan, the mother of Anas bin Malik, did so.\" Al-Bukhari collected this Hadith from the way of Hafsah bint Sirin from Umm 'Atiyah Nusaybah Al-Ansariyah, may Allah be pleased with her.\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that Asid bin Abi Asid Al-Barrad said that one of the women who gave the pledge to Allah's Messenger ﷺ said, \"Among the conditions included in the pledge that the Messenger took from us, is that we do not disobey any act of Ma'ruf (good) that he ordains. We should neither scratch our faces, pull our hair (in grief), tear our clothes nor wail.\"","href":"/tafsir/60?verse=12","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:60:13","title":"Ibn Kathir · 60:13","text":"O you who believe! Take not as friends the people who incurred the wrath of Allah. Surely, they have despaired of the Hereafter, just as the disbelievers have despaired of those (buried) in graves (13)\nJust like in the beginning of the Surah, Allah the Exalted forbids taking the disbelievers as protecting friends at the end of the Surah, saying,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَتَوَلَّوْا قَوْمًا غَضِبَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِمْ\n(O you who believe! Take not as friends the people who incurred the wrath of Allah.) referring to the Jews, Christians and the rest of the disbelievers whom Allah became angry with and cursed. Those who deserved being rejected and banished by Him. (Allah says here), 'how can you become their allies, friends and companions, after Allah decided that they earn the despair of receiving any good or delights in the Hereafter?'\nAllah's statement,\nكَمَا يَئِسَ الْكُفَّارُ مِنْ أَصْحَابِ الْقُبُورِ\n(just as the disbelievers have despaired of those (buried) in graves.) This has two possible meanings. First, the disbelievers despair of ever again meeting their relatives buried in graves, because they do not believe in Resurrection or being brought back to life. Therefore, they have no hope that they will meet them again, according to their creed. Secondly, just as the disbelievers who are buried in graves have lost hope in receiving any kind of goodness (i.e., after seeing the punishment and knowing that Resurrection is true).\nAl-A'mash reported from Abu Ad-Duha from Masruq that Ibn Mas'ud said,\nكَمَا يَئِسَ الْكُفَّارُ مِنْ أَصْحَابِ الْقُبُورِ\n(just as the disbelievers have despaired of those (buried) in graves.)\n\"Just as the disbeliever despairs when he dies and realizes and knows his (evil) recompense.\" This is the saying of Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Muqatil, Ibn Zayd, Al-Kalbi and Mansur; Ibn Jarir preferred this explanation.\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Al-Mumtahanah, all praise and thanks be to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/60?verse=13","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:61:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 61:1–4","text":"The Virtues of Surat As-Saff\nImam Ahmad recorded that 'Abdullah bin Salam said, \"We asked, 'Who among us should go to the Messenger ﷺ and ask him about the dearest actions to Allah?' None among us volunteered. The Messenger ﷺ sent a man to us and that man gathered us and recited this Surah, Surat As-Saff, in its entirety.'\"\nبِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nسَبَّحَ لِلَّهِ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ ۖ وَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ - يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لِمَ تَقُولُونَ مَا لَا تَفْعَلُونَ - كَبُرَ مَقْتًا عِنْدَ اللَّهِ أَنْ تَقُولُوا مَا لَا تَفْعَلُونَ - إِنَّ اللَّهَ يُحِبُّ الَّذِينَ يُقَاتِلُونَ فِي سَبِيلِهِ صَفًّا كَأَنَّهُمْ بُنْيَانٌ مَرْصُوصٌ\n(1. Whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth glorifies Allah. And He is the Almighty, the All-Wise.)(2. O you who believe! Why do you say that which you do not do?)(3. Most hateful it is with Allah that you say that which you do not do.)(4. Verily, Allah loves those who fight in His cause in rows as if they were a solid structure.)\nChastising Those Who say what They do not do\nWe mentioned in many a places before the meaning of Allah's statement,\nسَبَّحَ لِلَّهِ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ ۖ وَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ\n(Whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth glorifies Allah. And He is the Almighty, the All-Wise.) Therefore, we do not need to repeat its meaning here. Allah's statement,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لِمَ تَقُولُونَ مَا لَا تَفْعَلُونَ\n(O you who believe! Why do you say that which you do not do?)\nThis refutes those who neglect to fulfill their promises. This honorable Ayah supports the view that several scholars of the Salaf held, that it is necessary to fulfill the promise, regardless of whether the promise includes some type of wealth for the person receiving the promise or otherwise. They also argue from the Sunnah, with the Hadith recorded in the Two Sahihs in which Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nآيَةُ الْمُنَافِقِ ثَلَاثٌ: إِذَا وَعَدَ أَخْلَفَ، وَإِذَا حَدَّثَ كَذَبَ، وَإِذَا اؤْتُمِنَ خَانَ\n(There are three signs for a hypocrite: when he promises, he breaks his promise; when speaks, he lies; and when he is entrusted, he betrays.) And in another Hadith in the Sahih,\nأَرْبَعٌ مَنْ كُنَّ فِيهِ كَانَ مُنَافِقًا خَالِصًا،وَمَنْ كَانَتْ فِيهِ وَاحِدَةٌ مِنْهُنَّ كَانَتْ فِيهِ خَصْلَةٌ مِنْ نِفَاقٍ حَتّٰى يَدَعَهَا\n(There are four characteristics which if one has all of them, he is the pure hypocrite, and if anyone has any of them, he has a characteristic of hypocrisy, until he abandons it.)\nSo he mentioned breaking the promise among these four characteristics. We mentioned the meaning of these two Hadiths in the beginning of the explanation of Sahih Al-Bukhari, and to Allah is the praise and the thanks. Therefore Allah implied this meaning, when He continued His admonishment by saying,\nكَبُرَ مَقْتًا عِنْدَ اللَّهِ أَنْ تَقُولُوا مَا لَا تَفْعَلُونَ\n(Most hateful it is with Allah that you say that which you do not do.)\nImam Ahmad and Abu Dawud recorded that 'Abdullah bin 'Amir bin Rabi'ah said, \"Allah's Messenger ﷺ came to us while I was a young boy, and I went out to play. My mother said, 'O 'Abdullah! Come, I want to give you something.' Allah's Messenger ﷺ said to her,\nوَمَا أَرَدْتِ أَنْ تُعْطِيَهُ؟\n(What did you want to give him?) She said, 'Dates.' He said,\nأَمَا إِنَّكِ لَوْ لَمْ تَفْعَلِي كُتِبَتْ عَلَيْكِ كَذْبَةٌ\n(If you had not given them to him, it would have been written as a lie in your record.)\" Muqatil bin Hayyan said, \"The faithful believers said, 'If we only knew the dearest good actions to Allah, we would perform them.' Thus, Allah told them about the dearest actions to Him,saying,\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ يُحِبُّ الَّذِينَ يُقَاتِلُونَ فِي سَبِيلِهِ صَفًّا\n(Verily, Allah loves those who fight in His cause in rows) Allah stated what He likes, and they were tested on the day of Uhud. However, they retreated and fled, leaving the Prophet ﷺ behind. It was about their case that Allah revealed this Ayah:\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لِمَ تَقُولُونَ مَا لَا تَفْعَلُونَ\n(O you who believe! Why do you say that which you do not do?) Allah says here, 'The dearest of you to Me, is he who fights in My cause.'\"\nSome said that it was revealed about the gravity of fighting in battle, when one says that he fought and endured the battle, even though he did not do so. Qatadah and Ad-Dahhak said that this Ayah was sent down to admonish some people who used to say that they killed, fought, stabbed, and did such and such during battle, even though they did not do any of it.\nSa'id bin Jubayr said about Allah's statement,\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ يُحِبُّ الَّذِينَ يُقَاتِلُونَ فِي سَبِيلِهِ صَفًّا\n(Verily, Allah loves those who fight in His cause in rows (ranks)) \"Before Allah's Messenger ﷺ began the battle against the enemy, he liked to line up his forces in rows; in this Surah, Allah teaches the believers to do the same.\"\nHe also said that Allah's statement,\nكَأَنَّهُمْ بُنْيَانٌ مَرْصُوصٌ\n(as if they were a solid structure.) means, its parts are firmly connected to each other; in rows for battle. Muqatil bin Hayyan said, \"Firmly connected to each other.\" Ibn 'Abbas commented on the meaning of the Ayah,\nكَأَنَّهُمْ بُنْيَانٌ مَرْصُوصٌ\n(as if they were a solid structure.) by saying, \"They are like a firm structure that does not move, because its parts are cemented to each other.\"","href":"/tafsir/61?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:61:5","title":"Ibn Kathir · 61:5–6","text":"And when Musa said to his people: \"O my people! Why do you annoy me while you know certainly that I am the Messenger of Allah to you? So, when they turned away (from the path of Allah), Allah turned their hearts away (from the right path). And Allah guides not the people who are rebellious (5)And (remember) when 'Isa, son of Maryam, said: \"O Children of Israel! I am the Messenger of Allah unto you, confirming the Tawrah [which came] before me, and giving glad tidings of a Messenger to come after me, whose name shall be Ahmad. \"But when he came to them with clear proofs, they said: \"This is plain magic. (6)\nMusa admonishes His People for annoying Him\nAllah states that His servant and Messenger Musa, son of 'Imran, to whom Allah spoke directly, said to his people,\nلِمَ تُؤْذُونَنِي وَقَدْ تَعْلَمُونَ أَنِّي رَسُولُ اللَّهِ إِلَيْكُمْ\n(Why do you annoy me while you know certainly that I am the Messenger of Allah to you?) meaning, 'why do you annoy me even though you know my truth regarding the Message that I brought you?'\nThis brings consolation for Allah's Messenger ﷺ for what the disbelievers among his people and others did to him.\nAnd it orders him to be patient. This is why he once said,\nرَحْمَةُ اللهِ عَلَى مُوسَى لَقَدْ أُوذِيَ بِأَكْثَرَ مِنْ هَذَا فَصَبَرَ\n(May Allah have mercy with Musa: he was annoyed more than this, yet he was patient.)\nBy it believers are prohibited from harming or bothering the Prophet ﷺ in any way or form. As Allah the Exalted said,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَكُونُوا كَالَّذِينَ آذَوْا مُوسَىٰ فَبَرَّأَهُ اللَّهُ مِمَّا قَالُوا ۚ وَكَانَ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ وَجِيهًا\n(O you who believe! Be not like those who annoyed Musa, but Allah cleared him of that which they alleged, and he was honorable before Allah.)(33:69) And His saying:\nفَلَمَّا زَاغُوا أَزَاغَ اللَّهُ قُلُوبَهُمْ ۚ\n(So, when they turned away, Allah turned their hearts away.), means, when the Jews turned away from following the guidance, even though they knew it, Allah turned their hearts away from the guidance. Instead, Allah placed doubts, suspicion and failure in their hearts, just as He said,\nوَنُقَلِّبُ أَفْئِدَتَهُمْ وَأَبْصَارَهُمْ كَمَا لَمْ يُؤْمِنُوا بِهِ أَوَّلَ مَرَّةٍ وَنَذَرُهُمْ فِي طُغْيَانِهِمْ يَعْمَهُونَ\n(And We shall turn their hearts and vision away, as they refused to believe therin for the first time, and we shall leave them in their trespass to wander blindly.)(6:110) And His saying;\nوَمَنْ يُشَاقِقِ الرَّسُولَ مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا تَبَيَّنَ لَهُ الْهُدَىٰ وَيَتَّبِعْ غَيْرَ سَبِيلِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ نُوَلِّهِ مَا تَوَلَّىٰ وَنُصْلِهِ جَهَنَّمَ ۖ وَسَاءَتْ مَصِيرًا\n(And whoever contradicts and opposes the Messenger after the right path has been shown clearly to him, and follows other than the believers' way, We shall keep him in the path he has chosen, and enter him in Hell, what an evil destination it is!)(4:115), and, Similarly Allah said;\nوَاللَّهُ لَا يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ الْفَاسِقِينَ\n(And Allah guides not the people who are rebellious.)(9:24)\nThe Good News of 'Isa about Our Prophet (ﷺ) and that His Name is Ahmad\nAllah said;\nوَإِذْ قَالَ عِيسَى ابْنُ مَرْيَمَ يَا بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ إِنِّي رَسُولُ اللَّهِ إِلَيْكُمْ مُصَدِّقًا لِمَا بَيْنَ يَدَيَّ مِنَ التَّوْرَاةِ وَمُبَشِّرًا بِرَسُولٍ يَأْتِي مِنْ بَعْدِي اسْمُهُ أَحْمَدُ ۖ\n(And when 'Isa, son of Maryam, said: \"O Children of Israel! I am the Messenger of Allah unto you, confirming the Tawrah before me, and giving glad tidings of a Messenger to come after me, whose name shall be Ahmad.\")\nIsa said, \"The Tawrah conveyed the glad tidings of my coming, and my coming confirms the truth of the Tawrah. I convey the glad tidings of the Prophet who will come after me. He is the unlettered, Makkan, Arab Prophet and Messenger, Ahmad.\"\n'Isa, peace be upon him, is the last and final Messenger from among the Children of Israel. He remained among the Children of Israel for a while, conveying the good news of the coming of Muhammad, whose name is also Ahmad, the Last and Final Prophet and Messenger. After Muhammad, there will be no prophethood or Messengers. How admirable the Hadith is that Al-Bukhari collected in his Sahih from Jubayr bin Mut'im, who said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ say,\nإِنَّ لِي أَسْمَاءً: أَنَا مُحَمَّدٌ، وَأَنَا أَحْمَدُ، وَأَنَا الْمَاحِي الَّذِي يَمْحُو اللهُ بِهِ الْكُفْرَ،وَأَنَا الْحَاشِرُ الَّذِي يُحْشَرُ النَّاسُ عَلَى قَدَمَيَّ، وَأَنَا الْعَاقِبُ\n(I have names. I am Muhammad and Ahmad. I am Al-Mahi through whom Allah will eliminate disbelief. I am Al-Hashir who will be the first to be resurrected, with the people being resurrected Hereafter. I am also Al-'Aqib (i.e., there will be no Prophet after me).\") Also Muslim collected this Hadith from Az-Zuhri from Jubayr.\nMuhammad bin Ishaq recorded that Khalid bin Ma'dan said that some Companions of Allah's Messenger ﷺ said, \"O Allah's Messenger! Tell us about yourself.\" He said,\nدَعْوَةُ أَبِي إِبْرَاهِيمَ، وَبُشْرَى عِيسَى، وَرَأَتْ أُمِّي حِينَ حَمَلَتْ بِي كَأَنَّهُ خَرَجَ مِنْها نُورٌ أَضَاءَتْ لَهُ قُصُورُ بُصْرَى مِنْ أَرْضِ الشَّامِ\n(I am the (result of the) invocation made to Allah from my father Ibrahim and the good news 'Isa delivered. When my mother was pregnant with me, she had a dream in which she saw a light emanating from her that radiated the palaces of Busra in Ash-Sham.\" This Hadith has a good chain of narration that is supported by other similar narrations.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Al-'Irbad bin Sariyah said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nإِنِّي عِنْدَ اللهِ لَخَاتَمُ النَّبِيِّينَ، وَإِنَّ آدَمَ لَمُنْجَدِلٌ فِي طِينَتِهِ، وَسَأُنَبِّئُكُمْ بِأَوَّلِ ذَلِكَ: دَعْوَةُ أَبِي إِبْرَاهِيمَ، وَبِشَارَةُ عِيسَى بِي، وَرُؤْيَا أُمِّي الَّتِي رَأَتْ، وَكَذَلِكَ أُمَّهَاتُ النَّبِيِّينَ يَرَيْنَ\n(I was written with Allah as the Last and Final of the Prophet, even when Adam was still clay. I will tell of the first good news announcing my advent, the (result of the) invocation to Allah made from my father Ibrahim, the good news 'Isa conveyed, and the dream that my mother saw. The mothers of all Prophets see similar dreams.\")\nImam Ahmad recorded that Abu Umamah said, \"I said, 'O Allah's Messenger! What was the first good news of your coming?' He said,\nدَعْوَةُ أَبِي إِبْرَاهِيمَ، وَبُشْرَى عِيسَى، وَرَأَتْ أُمِّي أَنَّهُ يَخْرُجُ مِنْهَا نُورٌ أَضَاءَتْ لَهُ قُصُورُ الشَّامِ\n(The (result of the) invocation to Allah made from my father Ibrahim and the good news 'Isa conveyed. My mother saw a light emanating from her that filled the palaces of Ash- Sham in a dream.)\"\nImam Ahmad recorded that 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ sent eighty men, including 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud, Ja'far bin Abi Talib, 'Abdullah bin 'Urfutah, 'Uthman bin Maz'un, Abu Musa, and others, to An-Najashi. The Quraysh sent 'Amr bin Al-'As and 'Umarah bin Al-Walid with a gift for An-Najashi. When they, 'Amr and 'Umarah, came to An-Najashi, they prostrated before him and stood to his right and left. 'Amr and 'Umarah said, \"Some of our cousins migrated to your land; they have abandoned us and our religion.\" An-Najashi said, \"Where are they?\" They said, \"They are in your land, so send for them,\" so An-Najashi summoned the Muslims. Ja'far said to the Muslims, \"I will be your speaker today.\" So, the Muslims followed Ja'far and when he entered on the king he did not prostrate after greeting him. They said to Ja'far, \"Why do you not prostrate before the king?\" Ja'far said, \"We only prostrate for Allah, the Exalted and Most Honored.\" They said, \"Why?\" He said, \"Allah has sent a Messenger to us from Him, who ordered us not to prostrate to anyone except Allah, the Exalted and Most Honored. He also ordered to perform prayer and give charity.\"\nAmr bin Al-'As said, \"They contradict your creed about 'Isa, son of Maryam.\" The king asked, \"What do you say about 'Isa and his mother Maryam?\" Ja'far said, \"We only say what Allah said about him, that he is Allah's Word, a soul created by Allah and sent down to the honorable virgin who was not touched by a man nor bearing children before.\" An-Najashi lifted a straw of wood and said, \"O Ethiopians, monks and priests! By Allah, what they say about 'Isa is no more than what we say about him, not even a difference that equals this straw. You are welcomed among us, and greetings to him who sent you. I bear witness that he is Allah's Messenger whom we read about in the Injil. He is the Prophet who 'Isa, son of Maryam, foretold the good news about his advent. Live wherever you wish. By Allah, had I not been entrusted with the responsibilities of kingship, I would have gone to him, so that I could be honored by carrying his slippers and his water for ablution.\"\nThe king ordered that the gifts of the idolators be returned to them. 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud soon returned and later on participated in the battle of Badr. He said that when the Prophet ﷺ received the news that An-Najashi died, he invoked Allah to forgive him. Allah said,\nفَلَمَّا جَاءَهُمْ بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ قَالُوا هَٰذَا سِحْرٌ مُبِينٌ\n(But when he came to them with clear proofs, they said: \"This is plain magic.\") this refers to Ahmad, who was anticipated, in accordance with the early Scriptures and early generations, according to Ibn Jurayj and Ibn Jarir. When the Prophet appeared bringing clear signs, the disbelievers and rejecters said,\nهَٰذَا سِحْرٌ مُبِينٌ\n(This is plain magic)","href":"/tafsir/61?verse=5","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:61:7","title":"Ibn Kathir · 61:7–9","text":"And who does more wrong than the one who invents a lie against Allah, while he is being invited to Islam? And Allah guides not the people who are wrongdoers (7)They intend to put out the Light of Allah with their mouths. But Allah will bring His Light to perfection even though the disbelievers hate (it)(8)He it is Who has sent His Messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to make it victorious over all religions even though idolators hate (it)(9)\nThe Most Unjust among all People\nAllah said,\nوَمَنْ أَظْلَمُ مِمَّنِ افْتَرَىٰ عَلَى اللَّهِ الْكَذِبَ وَهُوَ يُدْعَىٰ إِلَى الْإِسْلَامِ ۚ\n(And who does more wrong than the one who invents a lie against Allah, while he is being invited to Islam?) meaning, none is more unjust than he who lies about Allah and calls upon rivals and associates partners with Him, even while he is being invited to Tawhid and sincerely worshipping Him. This is why Allah said,\nوَاللَّهُ لَا يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ الظَّالِمِينَ\n(And Allah guides not the people who are wrongdoers.) Allah said,\nيُرِيدُونَ لِيُطْفِئُوا نُورَ اللَّهِ بِأَفْوَاهِهِمْ\n(They intend to put out the Light of Allah with their mouths.) indicating that the disbelievers will try to contradict the truth with falsehood. Their attempts are similar to one's attempt to extinguish the sun with his mouth, which is impossible. Likewise is the case of their attempt to extinguish truth. So Allah said,\nوَاللَّهُ مُتِمُّ نُورِهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْكَافِرُونَ - هُوَ الَّذِي أَرْسَلَ رَسُولَهُ بِالْهُدَىٰ وَدِينِ الْحَقِّ لِيُظْهِرَهُ عَلَى الدِّينِ كُلِّهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْمُشْرِكُونَ\n(But Allah will bring His Light to perfection even though the disbelievers hate (it). He it is Who has sent His Messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to make it victorious over all (other) religions even though the idolators hate (it).)\nWe explained the meanings of similar Ayat before, in the Tafsir of Surah Bara'ah. All praise and thanks are due to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/61?verse=7","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:61:10","title":"Ibn Kathir · 61:10–13","text":"O you who believe! Shall I guide you to a trade that will save you from a painful torment (10)That you believe in Allah and His Messenger, and that you strive hard and fight in the cause of Allah with your wealth and your lives, that will be better for you, if you but know (11)(If you do so) He will forgive you your sins, and admit you into Gardens under which rivers flow, and pleasant dwellings in 'Adn (Eternal) Paradise; that is indeed the great success (12)And also (He will give you) another (blessing) which you love, help from Allah and a near victory. And give glad tidings to the believers (13)\nThe Trade that saves One from the Painful Torment\nWe mentioned a Hadith from 'Abdullah bin Salam in that the Companions wanted to ask the Prophet of Allah ﷺ about the best actions with Allah the Exalted and Most Honored, so they could practice them. Allah the Exalted sent down this Surah, including this Ayah,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا هَلْ أَدُلُّكُمْ عَلَىٰ تِجَارَةٍ تُنْجِيكُمْ مِنْ عَذَابٍ أَلِيمٍ\n(O you who believe! Shall I guide you to a trade that will save you from a painful torment?)\nAllah then explained this great trade that will never fail, the trade that will earn one what he wishes and saves him from what he dislikes. Allah the Exalted said,\nتُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ وَتُجَاهِدُونَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ بِأَمْوَالِكُمْ وَأَنْفُسِكُمْ ۚ ذَٰلِكُمْ خَيْرٌ لَكُمْ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ\n(That you believe in Allah and His Messenger, and that you strive hard and fight in the cause of Allah with your wealth and your lives, that will be better for you, if you but know!) this is better than the trade of this life and striving hard for it and amassing it. Allah the Exalted said,\nيَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ ذُنُوبَكُمْ\n(He will forgive you your sins,) meaning, 'if you fulfill what I commanded you and guided you to, then I will forgive your sins and admit you into the Gardens of Paradise. In them, you will have exalted residences and high postitions.' This is why Allah the Exalted said,\nوَيُدْخِلْكُمْ جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ وَمَسَاكِنَ طَيِّبَةً فِي جَنَّاتِ عَدْنٍ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ\n(and admit you into Gardens under which rivers flow, and pleasant dwellings in 'Adn (Eternal) Paradise; that is indeed the great success.)\nAllah said,\nوَأُخْرَىٰ تُحِبُّونَهَا ۖ\n(And also another (blessing) which you love,) meaning, 'I will grant you more favors that you like,'\nنَصْرٌ مِنَ اللَّهِ وَفَتْحٌ قَرِيبٌ ۗ\n(help from Allah and a near victory.) meaning, if you fight in Allah's cause and support His religion, He will grant you victory. Allah the Exalted said,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِنْ تَنْصُرُوا اللَّهَ يَنْصُرْكُمْ وَيُثَبِّتْ أَقْدَامَكُمْ\n(O you who believe! If you help (in the cause of) Allah, He will help you, and make your foothold firm.)(47:7), and,\nوَلَيَنْصُرَنَّ اللَّهُ مَنْ يَنْصُرُهُ ۗ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَقَوِيٌّ عَزِيزٌ\n(Verily, Allah will help those who help His (cause). Truly, Allah is All Strong, All-Wise.)(22:40) Allah's statement,\nوَفَتْحٌ قَرِيبٌ\n(and a near victory.) means, it will come sooner, and this is the increased favor that is earned in this life and continues, becoming the delight of the Hereafter. It is for those who obey Allah and His Messenger ﷺ and support Allah and His religion. Allah said;\nوَبَشِّرِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ\n(And give glad tidings to the believers.)","href":"/tafsir/61?verse=10","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:61:14","title":"Ibn Kathir · 61:14","text":"O you who believe! Be you helpers (in the cause) of Allah as said 'Isa, son of Maryam, to the Hawariyyin (the disciples): \"Who are my helpers (in the cause) of Allah?\" The Hawariyyun said: \"We are Allah's helpers\" (i.e., we will strive in His cause!). Then a group of the Children of Israel believed and a group disbelieved. So, We gave power to those who believed against their enemies, and they became the victorious (uppermost)(14)\nMuslims are always the Natural Supporters of Islam\nAllah the Exalted orders His faithful servants to be Allah's supporters at all times, in all their statements and actions, sacrificing their selves and wealth. Allah orders them to accept His and His Messenger's call, just as the disciples said to Prophet 'Isa when he said,\nمَنْ أَنْصَارِي إِلَى اللَّهِ\n(Who are my helpers (in the cause) of Allah?) meaning, 'who will support me in conveying the Message of Allah, the Exalted and Most Honored?'\nقَالَ الْحَوَارِيُّونَ\n(The Hawariyyun said:) in reference to the followers of 'Isa, peace be upon him,\nنَحْنُ أَنْصَارُ اللَّهِ\n(We are Allah's helpers) meaning, 'we will support you with regards to the Message you have been sent with and will help you convey it.' Whereby, 'Isa sent the disciples to the various areas of Ash-Sham to call the Greeks and the Israelites to Islam.\nSimilarly, during the days of Hajj, Allah's Messenger ﷺ used to ask,\nمَنْ رَجُلٌ يُؤْوِينِي حَتّٰى أُبَلِّغَ رِسَالَةَ رَبِّي؟ فَإِنَّ قُرَيْشًا قَدْ مَنَعُونِي أَنْ أُبَلِّغَ رِسَالَةَ رَبِّي\n(Who will support me in conveying the Message of my Lord? Verily, the Quraysh have prevented me from conveying the Message of my Lord.)\nAllah the Exalted and Most Honored raised Al-Aws and Al-Khazraj to support the Prophet ﷺ. They were the residents of Al-Madinah who gave the pledge to him and supported him, vowing to protect him from mankind and the Jinns if he migrated to them. When he migrated to them with his Companions, they fulfilled their vow to Allah. This is the reason why Allah and His Messenger ﷺ called them, Al-Ansar, the Supporters. The name became synonymous with them. May Allah be pleased with them and please them, as well.\nA Group of the Children of Israel believed in 'Isa and a Group of Them disbelieved\nAllah said,\nفَآمَنَتْ طَائِفَةٌ مِنْ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ وَكَفَرَتْ طَائِفَةٌ ۖ\n(Then a group of the Children of Israel believed and a group disbelieved.)\nWhen 'Isa, peace be on him, conveyed the Message of his Lord to his people and the disciples supported him, a group from the Children of Israel believed. They accepted the guidance that 'Isa brought to them, while another group, was led astray. This group rejected what 'Isa brought them, denied his prophethood and invented terrible lies about him and his mother. They are the Jews, may Allah curse them until the Day of Judgement.\nAnother group exaggerated over 'Isa, until they elevated him to more than the level of prophethood that Allah gave him. They divided into sects and factions, some saying that 'Isa was the son of Allah, while others said that he was one in a trinity, and this is why they invoke the father, the son and the holy ghost! Some of them said that 'Isa was Allah, as we mentioned in the Tafsir of Surat An-Nisa'.\nAllah gives Victory to the Believing Group\nAllah said,\nفَأَيَّدْنَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا عَلَىٰ عَدُوِّهِمْ\n(So, We gave power to those who believed against their enemies,) vthat is, 'We gave them victory over the group of Christians which defied them,'\nفَأَصْبَحُوا ظَاهِرِينَ\n(and they became the victorious (uppermost).) 'over the disbelieving group, when We sent Muhammad.'\nImam Abu Ja'far bin Jarir At-Tabari reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"When Allah decided to raise 'Isa to heaven, 'Isa went to his companions while drops of water were dripping from his head. At that time, there were twelve men at the house. 'Isa said to them, 'Some of you will disbelieve in me twelve times after having believed in me.' He then asked, 'Who among you volunteers that he be made to resemble me and be killed instead of me; he will be with me in my place (in Paradise).' One of the youngest men present volunteered, but 'Isa commanded him to sit down. 'Isa repeated his statement and the young man again stood up and volunteered, and 'Isa again told him to sit down. 'Isa repeated the same statement and the young man volunteered. This time, 'Isa said, 'Then it will be you.' The appearance of 'Isa was cast upon that young man, while 'Isa, peace be on him, was raised to heaven through an opening in the roof of the house. The Jews came looking for 'Isa and arrested the one that appeared as him, killing him by crucifixion. Some of them disbelieved in 'Isa twelve times, after they had believed in him. They divided into three groups. One group, Al-Ya'qubiyyah (the Jacobites), said, 'Allah remained with us as much as He willed and then ascended to heaven.' Another group, An-Nasturiyyah (the Nestorians), said, 'Allah's son remained with us as much as Allah willed and He then rasied him up to heaven.' A third group said, 'Allah's servant and Messenger remained with us as much as Allah willed and then Allah raised him up to Him.' The last group was the Muslim group. The two disbelieving groups collaborated against the Muslim group and annihilated it. Islam remained unjustly concealed until Allah sent Muhammad ﷺ,\nفَآمَنَتْ طَائِفَةٌ مِنْ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ وَكَفَرَتْ طَائِفَةٌ ۖ\n(Then a group of the Children of Israel believed and a group disbelieved.)\nThis Ayah refers to the group among the Children of Israel that disbelieved and the group that believed, during the time of 'Isa,\nفَأَيَّدْنَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا عَلَىٰ عَدُوِّهِمْ فَأَصْبَحُوا ظَاهِرِينَ\n(So, We gave power to those who believed against their enemies, and they became the victorious (uppermost).) through the victory that Muhammad ﷺ gained over the religion of the disbelievers, which brought the dominance of their religion.\"\nThis is the wording in his book for the Tafsir of this honorable Ayah. Similarly, An-Nasa'i collected this statement of Ibn 'Abbas in his Sunan.\nTherefore, the Ummah of Muhammad ﷺ will always be prevalent on the truth until Allah's command (the Final Hour) commences, while they are on this path. The last group of them will fight against Ad-Dajjal along with 'Isa, peace be on him, according to Hadiths in the authentic collections.\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat As-Saff. All praise and thanks are due to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/61?verse=14","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:62:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 62:1–4","text":"The Virtues of Surat Al-Jumu'ah\nIbn 'Abbas and Abu Hurayrah narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ used to recite Surat Al-Jumu'ah and Surat Al-Munafiqin during the Friday Prayer. Muslim collected this Hadith in his Sahih.\nبِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nيُسَبِّحُ لِلَّهِ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ الْمَلِكِ الْقُدُّوسِ الْعَزِيزِ الْحَكِيمِ - هُوَ الَّذِي بَعَثَ فِي الْأُمِّيِّينَ رَسُولًا مِنْهُمْ يَتْلُو عَلَيْهِمْ آيَاتِهِ وَيُزَكِّيهِمْ وَيُعَلِّمُهُمُ الْكِتَابَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ وَإِنْ كَانُوا مِنْ قَبْلُ لَفِي ضَلَالٍ مُبِينٍ - وَآخَرِينَ مِنْهُمْ لَمَّا يَلْحَقُوا بِهِمْ ۚ وَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ - ذَٰلِكَ فَضْلُ اللَّهِ يُؤْتِيهِ مَنْ يَشَاءُ ۚ وَاللَّهُ ذُو الْفَضْلِ الْعَظِيمِ\n(1. Whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth glorifies Allah – the King, the Holy, the Almighty, the All-Wise.)(2. He it is Who sent among the unlettered ones a Messenger from among themselves, reciting to them His Ayat, purifying them, and teaching them the Book and the Hikmah. And verily, they had been before in manifest error.)(3. And others among them who have not yet joined them. And He is the Almighty, the All-Wise.)(4. That is the grace of Allah, which He bestows on whom He wills. And Allah is the Owner of mighty grace.)\nEverything praises and glorifies Allah\nAllah states that everything in the heavens and the earth glorifies His praises,including all types of living creatures and inanimate objects.Allah the Exalted said in another Ayah,\nوَإِنْ مِنْ شَيْءٍ إِلَّا يُسَبِّحُ بِحَمْدِهِ\n(Glorify Him and there is not a thing but glorifies His praise)(17:44) Allah said,\nالْمَلِكِ الْقُدُّوسِ\n(the King, the Holy,) meaning that He is the Owner and King of the heavens and the earth Who has perfect control over their affairs. He is the Holy, free of all shortcomings, His attributes are perfect,\nالْعَزِيزِ الْحَكِيمِ\n(the Almighty, the All-Wise.) whose explanation is already discussed in many places.\nThe Favor that Allah granted by sending Muhammad (ﷺ)\nAllah the Exalted said,\nهُوَ الَّذِي بَعَثَ فِي الْأُمِّيِّينَ رَسُولًا مِنْهُمْ\n(He it is Who sent among the unlettered ones a Messenger from among themselves,) the word 'unlettered' here refers to the Arabs. Allah the Exalted said in another Ayah,\nوَقُلْ لِلَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ وَالْأُمِّيِّينَ أَأَسْلَمْتُمْ ۚ فَإِنْ أَسْلَمُوا فَقَدِ اهْتَدَوْا ۖ وَإِنْ تَوَلَّوْا فَإِنَّمَا عَلَيْكَ الْبَلَاغُ ۗ وَاللَّهُ بَصِيرٌ بِالْعِبَادِ\n(And say to those who were given the Scripture and those who are illiterates: \"Do you submit yourselves? If they do, they are rightly guided; but if they turn away, your duty is only to convey the message; and Allah is All-Seer of (His) servants.)(3:20)\nMentioning the unlettered ones in specific here does not mean that Muhammad ﷺ was only sent to them, because the blessing to the Arabs is greater than that of other nations. In another Ayah, Allah said,\nوَإِنَّهُ لَذِكْرٌ لَكَ وَلِقَوْمِكَ ۖ\n(And verily, this is indeed a Reminder for you and your people)(43:44).\nSurely, the Qur'an is also a reminder for those other than Arabs to take heed. Allah the Exalted said,\nوَأَنْذِرْ عَشِيرَتَكَ الْأَقْرَبِينَ\n(And warn your tribe of near kindred.)(26:214) These Ayat do not negate Allah's statements,\nقُلْ يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنِّي رَسُولُ اللَّهِ إِلَيْكُمْ جَمِيعًا\n(Say: \"O mankind! verily, I am sent to you all as the Messenger of Allah.)(7:158), and,\nلِأُنْذِرَكُمْ بِهِ وَمَنْ بَلَغَ\n(that I may therewith warn you and whomsoever it may reach.)(6:19) and in His statement about the Qur'an,\nوَمَنْ يَكْفُرْ بِهِ مِنَ الْأَحْزَابِ فَالنَّارُ مَوْعِدُهُ ۚ\n(But those of the groups that reject it, the Fire will be their promised meeting place.)(11:17)\nThere are other Ayat that indicate that his Message is universal. He, may Allah's peace and blessings be upon him, was sent to all people, mankind and the Jinns alike. We mentioned this meaning before in Surat Al-An'am producing various Ayat and Hadiths. All praise and thanks are to due to Allah.\nThis Ayah testifies that Allah has indeed accepted the invocation of His friend Ibrahim when he supplicated Allah to send a Messenger to the people of Makkah from among them their own. One who will recite to them Allah's statements, purify them and teach them the Book and the Hikmah. So, Allah – all praise and thanks be to Him – sent him when the Messengers ceased and the way was obscure. Indeed it was a time when it was most needed. Especially since Allah hated the people of the earth, Arabs and non-Arabs alike, except for a few of the People of the Scripture, who kept to the true faith Allah the Exalted sent to 'Isa bin Maryam, peace be upon him. This is why Allah said,\nهُوَ الَّذِي بَعَثَ فِي الْأُمِّيِّينَ رَسُولًا مِنْهُمْ يَتْلُو عَلَيْهِمْ آيَاتِهِ وَيُزَكِّيهِمْ وَيُعَلِّمُهُمُ الْكِتَابَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ وَإِنْ كَانُوا مِنْ قَبْلُ لَفِي ضَلَالٍ مُبِينٍ\n(He it is Who sent among the unlettered ones a Messenger from among themselves, reciting to them His Ayat, purifying them, and teaching them the Book and the Hikmah. And verily, they had been before in manifest error.)\nIn ancient times, the Arabs used to adhere by the religion of Ibrahim, peace be upon him. They later changed, corrupted and contradicted it, choosing polytheism instead of Tawhid and doubts instead of certainty. They invented a religion that Allah did not legislate, just as the People of the Scriptures did when they changed and corrupted their Divine Books. Allah sent Muhammad ﷺ, with a great divine legislation, perfect religion that is suitable for all humans and Jinns. In it, there is guidance and explanations of all that they need in this life and the Hereafter. It draws them closer to Paradise and Allah's pleasure and takes them away from the Fire and earning Allah's anger. In it, there is the final judgement for all types of doubts and suspicion for all major and minor matters of the religion. In Muhammad ﷺ, Allah gathered all the good qualities of the Prophets before him, and gave him what He has never given the earlier and later generations of mankind. May Allah's peace and blessings be on Muhammad until the Day of Judgement.\nMuhammad (ﷺ) is the Messenger to Arabs and Non-Arabs alike\nAllah said,\nوَآخَرِينَ مِنْهُمْ لَمَّا يَلْحَقُوا بِهِمْ ۚ وَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ\n(And others among them who have not yet joined them. And He is the Almighty, the All-Wise.) Imam Abu 'Abdullah Al-Bukhari, may Allah have mercy upon him, recorded that Abu Hurayrah said, \"We were sitting with the Prophet ﷺ, when Surat Al-Jumu'ah was revealed to him;\nوَآخَرِينَ مِنْهُمْ لَمَّا يَلْحَقُوا بِهِمْ ۚ\n(And others among them who have not yet joined them.) They said, 'Who are they, O Allah's Messenger?' The Prophet ﷺ did not reply until they repeated the question thrice. At that time, Salman Al-Farisi was with us. So Allah's Messenger ﷺ placed his hand on Salman, saying,\nلَوْ كَانَ الْإِيمَانُ عِنْدَ الثُّرَيَّا لَنَالَهُ رِجَالٌ - أَوْ رَجُلٌ - مِنْ هٰؤُلَاءِ\n(If faith were on Ath-Thurayya (Pleiades), even then some men or a man from these people would attain it.)\" Muslim, At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa'i, Ibn Abi Hatim and Ibn Jarir collected this Hadith. This Hadith indicates that Surat Al-Jumu'ah was revealed in Al-Madinah and that the Messenger's Message is universal. The Prophet ﷺ explained Allah's statement,\nوَآخَرِينَ مِنْهُمْ\n(And others among them) by mentioning Persia. This is why the Prophet ﷺ sent messages to the kings of Persia and Rome, among other kings, calling them to Allah the Exalted and to follow what he was sent with. This is why Mujahid and several others said that Allah's statement,\nوَآخَرِينَ مِنْهُمْ لَمَّا يَلْحَقُوا بِهِمْ ۚ\n(And others among them who have not yet joined them.) refers to all non-Arabs who believe in the truth of the Prophet. Allah's statement,\nوَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ\n(And He is the Almighty, the All-Wise.) asserts that He is Almighty and All-Wise in His legislation and the destiny He appoints. Allah's statement,\nذَٰلِكَ فَضْلُ اللَّهِ يُؤْتِيهِ مَنْ يَشَاءُ ۚ وَاللَّهُ ذُو الْفَضْلِ الْعَظِيمِ\n(That is the grace of Allah, which He bestows on whom He wills. And Allah is the Owner of mighty grace.) refers to the great prophethood that He granted Muhammad ﷺ and the qualities that He favored his Ummah with, by sending Muhammad ﷺ to them.","href":"/tafsir/62?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:62:5","title":"Ibn Kathir · 62:5–8","text":"The likeness of those who were entrusted with the Tawrah, but did not carry it, is as the likeness of a donkey which carries huge burdens of books. How bad is the example of people who deny the Ayat of Allah. And Allah does not guide the people who are wrongdoers (5)Say: \"O you Jews! If you pretend that you are friends of Allah, to the exclusion of (all) other people, then long for death if you are truthful. (6)But they will never long for it, because of what their hands have sent before them! And Allah knows well the wrongdoers (7)Say: \"Verily, the death from which you flee, will surely meet you, then you will be sent back to the Knower of the unseen and the seen, and He will inform you about what you used to do. (8)\nAdmonishing the Jews and challenging Them to wish for Death\nAllah the Exalted admonishes the Jews who were entrusted with the Tawrah and were ordered to abide by it. However, they did not abide by it, and this is why Allah resembled them to the donkey that carries volumes of books. Surely, when the donkey carries books, it will not understand what these books contain because it is only carrying these books using its strength. This is the example of those who were entrusted with the Tawrah; they read its letter but did not understand its meanings nor abided by them. Rather, they even corrupted and changed the Tawrah. Therefore, they are worse than the donkey, because the donkey cannot understand. They, on the other hand, could have understood using their minds, but their minds were of no benefit. This is why Allah the Exalted said in another Ayah,\nأُولَٰئِكَ كَالْأَنْعَامِ بَلْ هُمْ أَضَلُّ ۚ أُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْغَافِلُونَ\n(They are like cattle, nay even more astray; those! They are the heedless.)(7:179), and said,\nبِئْسَ مَثَلُ الْقَوْمِ الَّذِينَ كَذَّبُوا بِآيَاتِ اللَّهِ ۚ وَاللَّهُ لَا يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ الظَّالِمِينَ\n(How bad is the example of people who deny the Ayat of Allah. And Allah does not guide the people who are wrongdoers.) Allah the Exalted said,\nقُلْ يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ هَادُوا إِنْ زَعَمْتُمْ أَنَّكُمْ أَوْلِيَاءُ لِلَّهِ مِنْ دُونِ النَّاسِ فَتَمَنَّوُا الْمَوْتَ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ صَادِقِينَ\n(Say: \"O you Jews! If you pretend that you are friends of Allah, to the exclusion of other people, then long for death if you are truthful.\") meaning, 'if you claim that you are on the correct guidance and that Muhammad and his Companions are being led astray, then invoke Allah to bring death to the misguided group among the two, if you are truthful in your claim.' Allah said,\nوَلَا يَتَمَنَّوْنَهُ أَبَدًا بِمَا قَدَّمَتْ أَيْدِيهِمْ ۚ\n(But they will never long for it, because of what their hands have sent before them!) meaning because of the disbelief, injustice and sins that they commit,\nوَاللَّهُ عَلِيمٌ بِالظَّالِمِينَ\n(And Allah knows well the wrongdoers.) We mentioned this challenge to the Jews before in Surat Al-Baqarah, where Allah said,\nقُلْ إِنْ كَانَتْ لَكُمُ الدَّارُ الْآخِرَةُ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ خَالِصَةً مِنْ دُونِ النَّاسِ فَتَمَنَّوُا الْمَوْتَ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ صَادِقِينَ - وَلَنْ يَتَمَنَّوْهُ أَبَدًا بِمَا قَدَّمَتْ أَيْدِيهِمْ ۗ وَاللَّهُ عَلِيمٌ بِالظَّالِمِينَ - وَلَتَجِدَنَّهُمْ أَحْرَصَ النَّاسِ عَلَىٰ حَيَاةٍ وَمِنَ الَّذِينَ أَشْرَكُوا ۚ يَوَدُّ أَحَدُهُمْ لَوْ يُعَمَّرُ أَلْفَ سَنَةٍ وَمَا هُوَ بِمُزَحْزِحِهِ مِنَ الْعَذَابِ أَنْ يُعَمَّرَ ۗ وَاللَّهُ بَصِيرٌ بِمَا يَعْمَلُونَ\n(Say: \"If the home of the Hereafter with Allah is indeed for you specially and not for others, of mankind, then long for death if you are truthful.\" But they will never long for it because of what their hands have sent forth before them. And Allah is Aware of the wrongdoers. And verily, you will find them the greediest of mankind for life and (even greedier) than those who ascribe partners to Allah. One of them wishes that he could be given a life of a thousand years. But the grant of such life will not save him even a little from punishment. And Allah is Seer of what they do.)(2:94-96)\nWe explained these meanings there, stating that the challenge was for the Jews to invoke Allah to destroy the misguided group, either they or their enemies. We also mentioned a similar challenge against the Christians in Surah Al 'Imran,\nفَمَنْ حَاجَّكَ فِيهِ مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا جَاءَكَ مِنَ الْعِلْمِ فَقُلْ تَعَالَوْا نَدْعُ أَبْنَاءَنَا وَأَبْنَاءَكُمْ وَنِسَاءَنَا وَنِسَاءَكُمْ وَأَنْفُسَنَا وَأَنْفُسَكُمْ ثُمَّ نَبْتَهِلْ فَنَجْعَلْ لَعْنَتَ اللَّهِ عَلَى الْكَاذِبِينَ\n(Then whoever disputes with you concerning him ['Isa] after (all this) knowledge that has come to you, say: \"Come, let us call our sons and your sons, our women and your women, ourselves and yourselves – then we pray and invoke the curse of Allah upon those who lie.\")(3:61) and against the idolators, in Surah Maryam,\nقُلْ مَنْ كَانَ فِي الضَّلَالَةِ فَلْيَمْدُدْ لَهُ الرَّحْمَٰنُ مَدًّا ۚ\n(Say whoever is in error, the Most Gracious will extend [circumstances] for him.)(19:75)\nImam Ahmad, may Allah be pleased with him recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Abu Jahl, may Allah curse him, said, 'If I see Muhammad praying at the Ka'bah, I will step on his neck.' When the Prophet ﷺ heard of that, he said,\nلَوْ فَعَلَ لَأَخَذَتْهُ الْمَلَائِكَةُ عَيَانًا وَلَوْ أَنَّ الْيَهُودَ تَمَنَّوُا الْمَوْتَ لَمَاتُوا وَرَأَوْا مَقَاعِدَهُمْ مِنَ النَّارِ، وَلَوْ خَرَجَ الَّذِينَ يُبَاهِلُونَ رَسُولَ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَسَلَّمَ لَرَجَعُوا لَا يَجِدُونَ أَهْلًا وَلَا مَالًا\n(Had he done so, the angels would have snatched him away in public. Had the Jews wished for death, they would all have perished and saw their seats in Hellfire. Had those accepted for invoking the curse of Allah with Allah's Messenger, they would not have found families or property when they returned home.)\" Al-Bukhari, At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa'i recorded it. His saying;\nقُلْ إِنَّ الْمَوْتَ الَّذِي تَفِرُّونَ مِنْهُ فَإِنَّهُ مُلَاقِيكُمْ ۖ ثُمَّ تُرَدُّونَ إِلَىٰ عَالِمِ الْغَيْبِ وَالشَّهَادَةِ فَيُنَبِّئُكُمْ بِمَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ\n(Say: \"Verily, the death from which you flee will surely meet you, then you will be sent back to the Knower of the unseen and the seen, and He will inform you about what you used to do.\") is like His saying in Surat An-Nisa':\nأَيْنَمَا تَكُونُوا يُدْرِكْكُمُ الْمَوْتُ وَلَوْ كُنْتُمْ فِي بُرُوجٍ مُشَيَّدَةٍ ۗ\n(Wheresoever you may be, death will overtake you even if you are in fortresses built up strong and high.)(4:78)","href":"/tafsir/62?verse=5","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:62:9","title":"Ibn Kathir · 62:9–10","text":"O you who believe! When the call is proclaimed for the Salah on Al-Jumu'ah (Friday), then hasten (Fas'aw) to the remembrance of Allah and leave off business. That is better for you if you did but know (9)Then when the Salah is complete, you may disperse through the land, and seek the bounty of Allah, and remember Allah much, that you may be successful (10)\nAl-Jumu'ah (Friday), and the Orders and Etiquette for Friday\nFriday is called Al-Jumu'ah because it is derived from Al-Jam', literally, gathering. The people of Islam gather weekly, on every Friday in the major places of worship. It was during Friday when Allah finished the creation, the sixth day, during which Allah created the heavens and earth. During Friday, Allah created Adam, and he was placed in Paradise, and ironically, it was a Friday when he was taken out of Paradise. It will be on a Friday when the Last Hour will commence. There is an hour during Friday, wherein no faithful servant asks Allah for something good, but Allah will give him what he asked for. All of this is based upon Hadiths in the authenic collections.\nIn the ancient language Friday was called, 'Arubah. It is a fact that previous nations were informed about Friday, but they were led astray from it. The Jews chose Saturday for their holy day, but Adam was not created on Saturday. The Christians chose Sunday, which is the day the creation was initiated. Allah chose Friday for this Ummah, because it is the day the creation was finished.\nAl-Bukhari and Muslim recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nنَحْنُ الْآخِرُونَ السَّابِقُونَ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ، بَيْدَ أَنَّهُمْ أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ مِنْ قَبْلِنَا، ثُمَّ إِنَّ هَذَا يَوْمَهُمُ الَّذِي فَرَضَ اللهُ عَلَيْهِمْ فَاخْتَلَفُوا فِيهِ فَهَدَانَا اللهُ لَهُ، فَالنَّاسُ لَنَا فِيهِ تَبَعٌ، الْيَهُودُ غَدًا وَالنَّصَارَى بَعْدَ غَدٍ\n(We are the last (to come) but the first on the Day of Resurrection, though the former nations were given the Scriptures before us. And this was their day (Friday) the celebration of which was made compulsory for them, but they differed about it. So, Allah gave us guidance to it, and all other people are coming after us: the Jews tomorrow and the Christians the day after tomorrow.\" This is the wording of Al-Bukhari in another narration of Muslim;\nأَضَلَّ اللهُ عَنِ الْجُمُعَةِ مَنْ كَانَ قَبْلَنَا، فَكَانَ لِلْيَهُودِ يَوْمُ السَّبْتِ، وَكَانَ لِلنَّصَارَى يَوْمُ الْأَحَدِ، فَجَاءَ اللهُ بِنَا فَهَدَانَا اللهُ لِيَوْمِ الْجُمُعَةِ، فَجَعَلَ الْجُمُعَةَ وَالسَّبْتَ وَالْأَحَدَ، وَكَذَلِكَ هُمْ تَبَعٌ لَنَا يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ نَحْنُ الْآخِرُونَ مِنْ أَهْلِ الدُّنْيَا، وَالْأَوَّلُونَ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ الْمَقْضِيُّ بَيْنَهُمْ قَبْلَ الْخَلَائِقِ\n(Allah diverted those who were before us from Friday. For the Jews there was Saturday, and for the Christians there was Sunday. Allah then brought us and guided us to Friday. He made them; Friday, Saturday and Sunday, and it is in this order they will come after us on the Day of Resurrection. We are the last of among the people of this world and the first among the created to be judged on the Day of Resurrection.)\nNecessity of the Remembrance of Allah on Friday, by attending the Khutbah and the Prayer\nAllah commanded the believers to gather to worship Him on Friday,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِذَا نُودِيَ لِلصَّلَاةِ مِنْ يَوْمِ الْجُمُعَةِ فَاسْعَوْا إِلَىٰ ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ\n(O you who believe! When the call is proclaimed for the Salah on Al-Jumu'ah (Friday), then hasten (Fas'aw) to the remembrance of Allah) meaning, go to it and head for it. The meaning of Sa'y (hasten) here does not refer to walking quickly. It only refers to the importance of it.\nUmar bin Al-Khattab and Ibn Mas'ud - may Allah be pleased with them - recited it;\n(فَامْضُوا إِلَى ذِكْرِ اللهِ)\n(\"Then proceed to the remembrance of Allah.\") As for walking in haste to the prayer, that was indeed prohibited, since it was recorded in the Two Sahihs from Abu Hurayrah that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nإِذَا سَمِعْتُمُ الْإِقَامَةَ فَامْشُوا إِلَى الصَّلَاةِ وَعَلَيْكُمُ السَّكِينَةَ وَالْوَقَارَ وَلَا تُسْرِعُوا، فَمَا أَدْرَكْتُمْ فَصَلُّوا وَمَا فَاتَكُمْ فَأَتِمُّوا\n(When you hear the Iqamah, proceed to offer the prayer with calmness and solemnity and do not rush. And pray whatever you catch, and complete whatever you have missed.)\nThis is the wording with Al-Bukhari. Abu Qatadah said, \"While we were praying behind the Messenger of Allah ﷺ he heard commotion. At the end of the prayer, the Prophet ﷺ said;\nمَا شَأْنُكُمْ\n(What is the matter with you?) They said, 'We hastened to the prayer.' The Prophet ﷺ said,\nفَلَا تَفْعَلُوا، إِذَا أَتَيْتُمُ الصَّلَاةَ فَامْشُوا وَعَلَيْكُمُ السَّكِينَةَ فَمَا أَدْرَكْتُمْ فَصَلُّوا وَمَا فَاتَكُمْ فَأَتِمُّوا\n(Don't do that. When you come for prayer, there should be tranquility upon you. Pray what remains of the prayer and complete what you have missed.)\"\nThe Two Sahihs collected this Hadith. Al-Hasan commented, \"By Allah! Hastening to the prayer is not accomplished by the feet. Indeed they were prohibited from coming to prayer without tranquility and dignity. Rather it is about the hearts, the intention, and the submission.\" Qatadah said,\nفَاسْعَوْا إِلَىٰ ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ\n\"(then hasten to the remembrance of Allah) means that you have to hasten to the prayer with your heart and actions, and walk to it.\"\nIt is recommended for those coming to the Friday prayer to perform Ghusl (taking bath) before they come. It is collected in the Two Sahihs that 'Abdullah bin 'Umar said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nإِذَا جَاءَ أَحَدُكُمُ الْجُمُعَةَ فَلْيَغْتَسِلْ\n(When one of you comes to the Friday prayer, then let him perform bath.)\nThe Two Sahihs recorded that Abu Sa'id said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nغُسْلُ يَوْمِ الْجُمُعَةِ وَاجِبٌ عَلىٰ كُلِّ مُحْتَلِمٍ\n(Ghusl on the day of Jumu'ah is Wajib (required) from every Muhtalim.)\nAbu Hurayrah narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nحَقٌّ لله عَلىٰ كُلِّ مُسْلِمٍ أَنْ يَغْتَسِلَ فِي كُلِّ سَبْعَةِ أَيَّامٍ، يَغْسِلُ رَأْسَهُ وَجَسَدَهُ\n(It is Allah's right on every Muslim to bathe during every seven days, by washing his head and body.) Muslim collected this Hadith. Jabir narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nعَلىٰ كُلِّ رَجُلٍ مُسْلِمٍ فِي كُلِّ سَبْعَةِ أَيَّامٍ غُسْلُ يَوْمٍ وَهُوَ يَوْمُ الْجُمُعَةِ\n(Within every seven days, every Muslim man has the obligation to perform Ghusl at least one day, the day of Jumu'ah.) Ahmad, An-Nasa'i and Ibn Hibban collected this Hadith.\nVirtues of Jumu'ah\nImam Ahmad recorded that 'Aws bin 'Aws Ath-Thaqafi said that he heard Allah's Messenger ﷺ say,\nمَنْ غَسَّلَ وَاغْتَسَلَ يَوْمَ الْجُمُعَةِ وَبَكَّرَ وَابْتَكَرَ وَمَشَى وَلَمْ يَرْكَبْ، وَدَنَا مِنَ الْإِمَامِ وَاسْتَمَعَ وَلَمْ يَلْغُ، كَانَ لَهُ بِكُلِّ خُطْوَةٍ أَجْرُ سَنَةٍ صِيَامُهَا وَقِيَامُهَا\n(Whoever performs Ghusl (well) on the day of Jumu'ah, leaves early, walking not riding, and sits close to the Imam and listens without talking, will earn the reward of fasting and performing standing (in prayer) for an entire year for every step he takes.)\nThis Hadith has various chains of narration, the compilers of the Four Sunan collected it, and At-Tirmidhi graded it Hasan. The Two Sahihs also recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَنِ اغْتَسَلَ يَوْمَ الْجُمُعَةِ غُسْلَ الْجَنَابَةِ ثُمَّ رَاحَ فِي السَّاعَةِ الْأُولَى فَكَأَنَّمَا قَرَّبَ بَدَنَةً، وَمَنْ رَاحَ فِي السَّاعَةِ الثَّانِيَةِ فَكَأَنَّمَا قَرَّبَ بَقَرَةً، وَمَنْ رَاحَ فِي السَّاعَةِ الثَّالِثَةِ فَكَأَنَّمَا قَرَّبَ كَبْشًا أَقْرَنَ، وَمَنْ رَاحَ فِي السَّاعَةِ الرَّابِعَةِ فَكَأَنَّمَا قَرَّبَ دَجَاجَةً، وَمَنْ رَاحَ فِي السَّاعَةِ الْخَامِسَةِ فَكَأَنَّمَا قَرَّبَ بَيْضَةً، فَإِذَا خَرَجَ الْإِمَامُ حَضَرَتِ الْمَلَائِكَةُ يَسْتَمِعُونَ الذِّكْرَ\n(Any person who takes a bath on Friday like the bath for sexual impurity and then goes for the prayer in the first hour, it is as if he had sacrificed a camel. Whoever goes in the second hour, it is as if he had sacrificed a cow. Whoever goes in the third hour, then it is as if he had sacrificed a horned ram. If one goes in the fourth hour, then it is as if he had sacrificed a hen. Whoever goes in the fifth hour, then it is as if he had offered an egg. When the Imam appears, the angels present themselves to listen to Allah's remembrance.)\nIt is recommended that one cleans his body, performs Ghusl, wears his best clothes, applies perfume and uses Siwak (tooth stick) for Jumu'ah. We mentioned that Abu Sa'id narrated that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nغُسْلُ يَوْمِ الْجُمُعَةِ وَاجِبٌ عَلىٰ كُلِّ مُحْتَلِمٍ وَالسِّوَاكُ وَأَنْ يَمَسَّ مِنْ طِيبِ أَهْلِهِ\n(Ghusl on the day of Jumu'ah is Wajib (required) from every Muhtalim and also using Siwak and applying some of his household's perfume.)\nImam Ahmad recorded that Abu Ayyub Al-Ansari said that he heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ say,\nمَنِ اغْتَسَلَ يَوْمَ الْجُمُعَةِ وَمَسَّ مِنْ طِيبِ أَهْلِهِ إِنْ كَانَ عِنْدَهُ وَلَبِسَ مِنْ أَحْسَنِ ثِيَابِهِ ثُمَّ خَرَجَ حَتّٰى يَأْتِيَ الْمَسْجِدَ فَيَرْكَعَ إِنْ بَدَا لَهُ وَلَمْ يُؤْذِ أَحَدًا، ثُمَّ أَنْصَتَ إِذَا خَرَجَ إِمَامُهُ حَتّٰى يُصَلِّيَ كَانَتْ كَفَّارَةً لِمَا بَيْنَهَا وَبَيْنَ الْجُمُعَةِ الْأُخْرَى\n(Whoever performs Ghusl on Friday and applies perfume, if he has any, wears his best clothes, then goes to the Masjid and performs voluntary prayer, if he wishes, does not bother anyone, listens when the Imam appears until he starts the prayer. Then all of this will be an expiation for whatever occurs between that Friday and the next Friday.)\nAbu Dawud and Ibn Majah recorded in their Sunans that 'Abdullah bin Salam said that he heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ say, while on the Minbar:\nمَا عَلَى أَحَدِكُمْ لَوِ اشْتَرَى ثَوْبَيْنِ لِيَوْمِ الْجُمُعَةِ سِوَى ثَوْبَيْ مِهْنَتِهِ\n(What harm would it cause if one of you bought two garments for the day of Jumu'ah, other than the garment he wears daily?)\nA'ishah said that during a speech he gave on a Friday when he saw people wearing Nimar garments, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَا عَلَى أَحَدِكُمْ إِنْ وَجَدَ سَعَةً أَنْ يَتَّخِذَ ثَوْبَيْنِ لِجُمُعَتِهِ سِوَى ثَوْبَيْ مِهْنَتِهِ\n(When one of you has wealth, he should keep two garments for Friday, other than the two garments he has for his daily wear.) Ibn Majah collected this Hadith.\nThe Meaning of the Call in the Ayah is the Adhan that precedes the Khutbah\nAllah said,\nإِذَا نُودِىَ لِلصَّلَوةِ مِن يَوْمِ الْجُمُعَةِ\n(When the call is proclaimed for the Salah on Friday,) referring to the Adhan which was called, during the time of the Prophet ﷺ, when he came out of his house and sat on the Minbar. The Adhan would be called before the Prophet ﷺ near the door of the Masjid. As for the earlier Adhan that the Leader of the faithful, 'Uthman bin Affan added, it was done because the Muslims increased in number during his time.\nAl-Bukhari recorded that As-Sa'ib bin Yazid said, \"In the lifetime of the Prophet ﷺ, Abu Bakr and 'Umar, the Adhan for the Friday prayer was pronounced while the Imam sat on the pulpit. But during 'Uthman's later time when the Muslims increased in number, an additional call was pronouced upon Az-Zawra', meaning the Adhan was called upon the house which was called Az-Zawra.\"\nAz-Zawra' was the tallest house in Al-Madinah near the Masjid.\nProhibiting buying and selling after the Call on Friday, and the Exhortation to seek Provisions after it\nAllah said,\nوَذَرُوا الْبَيْعَ\n(and leave off business.) means, hastening to the remembrance of Allah and abandoning business, when the call to the Friday prayer is made. Therefore, the scholars of Islam agree, it is prohibited for Muslims to engage in business transactions after the second Adhan. Allah's statement,\nذَٰلِكُمْ خَيْرٌ لَكُمْ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ\n(That is better for you if you did but know!) means, 'your abandoning buying and selling, and instead, corcentrating your attention to Allah's remembrance and the prayer are better for you in this life and the Hereafter, if you but knew.' Allah's statement,\nفَإِذَا قُضِيَتِ الصَّلَاةُ\n(Then when the Salah is complete,) means, when the Friday prayer is finished,\nفَانْتَشِرُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ وَابْتَغُوا مِنْ فَضْلِ اللَّهِ\n(you may disperse through the land, and seek the bounty of Allah,) After Allah forbade Muslims from working after hearing the Adhan and ordered them to gather for the Friday prayer, He allowed them to spread throughout the earth and seek bounty after the prayer is finished.\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that when the Friday prayer finished, 'Irak bin Malik would stand by the gate of the Masjid and invoke Allah, saying, \"O Allah! I have accepted and complied with Your Call, performed the prayer You ordered and dispersed as You ordered me. Therefore, grant me of Your favor and You are the best of those who grant provisions.\" Allah's statement,\nوَاذْكُرُوا اللَّهَ كَثِيرًا لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ\n(and remember Allah much, that you may be successful.) means, while you are buying and selling, giving and taking, remember Allah much and do not let this life busy you from what benefits you in the Hereafter. There is a Hadith that states,\nمَنْ دَخَلَ سُوقًا مِنَ الْأَسْوَاقِ فَقَالَ: لَا إِلَهَ إِلَّا اللهُ وَحْدَهُ لَا شَرِيكَ لَهُ، لَهُ الْمُلْكُ وَلَهُ الْحَمْدُ وَهُوَ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ، كَتَبَ اللهُ لَهُ أَلْفَ أَلْفِ حَسَنَةٍ وَمَحَا عَنْهُ أَلْفَ أَلْفِ سَيِّئَةٍ\n(Whoever enters a marketplace and says, \"La ilaha illallah, He is alone without partners, His is the sovreignty and His is the praise, and He is Able to do all things.\" Then Allah will record a thousand-thousand (a million) good deeds for him and will erase a thousand-thousand evil deeds.)\nMujahid said, \"A servant (of Allah) will not be among those who remember Allah often, until he does so while standing, sitting and lying down.\"","href":"/tafsir/62?verse=9","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:62:11","title":"Ibn Kathir · 62:11","text":"And when they see some merchandise or some amusement, they disperse headlong to it, and leave you standing. Say: \"That which Allah has is better than any amusement or merchandise! And Allah is the best of providers. (11)\nThe Prohibition of leaving the Masjid while the Imam is delivering the Friday Sermon\nAllah criticizes what happened during one Friday sermon, when a caravan arrived at Al-Madinah and the people rushed out to the merchandise. Allah said,\nوَإِذَا رَأَوْا تِجَارَةً أَوْ لَهْوًا انْفَضُّوا إِلَيْهَا وَتَرَكُوكَ قَائِمًا ۚ\n(And when they see some merchandise or some amusement, they disperse headlong to it, and leave you standing.) meaning, on the Minbar, delivering the Khutbah. Several of the Tabi'in said this, such as Abu Al-'Aliyah, Al-Hasan, Zayd bin Aslam and Qatadah. Muqatil bin Hayyan said that the caravan belonged to Dihyah bin Khalifah before he became a Muslim, and there were drums accompanying it.\nSo they rushed to the caravan and left Allah's Messenger ﷺ standing on the Minbar. Only a few remained, according to the authentic Hadith that Imam Ahmad recorded that Jabir said, \"Once, a caravan arrived at Al-Madinah while Allah's Messenger ﷺ was giving a Khutbah. So, the people left, and only twelve men remained [with the Messenger ﷺ]. Then Allah sent down this Ayah,\nوَإِذَا رَأَوْا تِجَارَةً أَوْ لَهْوًا انْفَضُّوا إِلَيْهَا\n(And when they see some merchandise or some amusement, they disperse headlong to it,)\" The Two Sahihs also recorded this Hadith. Allah's statement,\nوَتَرَكُوكَ قَائِمًا\n(And leave you standing.) proves that the Imam should deliver the speech on Friday while standing. In his Sahih, Imam Muslim recorded that Jabir bin Samurah said, \"(During Jumu'ah,) the Prophet ﷺ gave two speeches, and he used to sit between them. The Prophet ﷺ would recite the Qur'an and remind the people (of Allah).\" Allah's statement,\nقُلْ مَا عِنْدَ اللَّهِ\n(Say: \"That which Allah has...\") means the reward that is with Allah in the Hereafter,\nخَيْرٌ مِنَ اللَّهْوِ وَمِنَ التِّجَارَةِ ۚ وَاللَّهُ خَيْرُ الرَّازِقِينَ\n(is better than any amusement or merchandise! And Allah is the best of providers.) means, for those who trust in Him and seek His provisions when they are allowed to do so.\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Al-Jumu'ah. All praise and thanks are due to Allah and from Him comes the success and immunity from error.","href":"/tafsir/62?verse=11","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:63:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 63:1–4","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nإِذَا جَاءَكَ الْمُنَافِقُونَ قَالُوا نَشْهَدُ إِنَّكَ لَرَسُولُ اللَّهِ ۗ وَاللَّهُ يَعْلَمُ إِنَّكَ لَرَسُولُهُ وَاللَّهُ يَشْهَدُ إِنَّ الْمُنَافِقِينَ لَكَاذِبُونَ - اتَّخَذُوا أَيْمَانَهُمْ جُنَّةً فَصَدُّوا عَنْ سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ ۚ إِنَّهُمْ سَاءَ مَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ - ذَٰلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ آمَنُوا ثُمَّ كَفَرُوا فَطُبِعَ عَلَىٰ قُلُوبِهِمْ فَهُمْ لَا يَفْقَهُونَ - وَإِذَا رَأَيْتَهُمْ تُعْجِبُكَ أَجْسَامُهُمْ ۖ وَإِنْ يَقُولُوا تَسْمَعْ لِقَوْلِهِمْ ۖ كَأَنَّهُمْ خُشُبٌ مُسَنَّدَةٌ ۖ يَحْسَبُونَ كُلَّ صَيْحَةٍ عَلَيْهِمْ ۚ هُمُ الْعَدُوُّ فَاحْذَرْهُمْ ۚ قَاتَلَهُمُ اللَّهُ ۖ أَنَّىٰ يُؤْفَكُونَ\n(1. When the hypocrites come to you, they say: \"We bear witness that you are indeed the Messenger of Allah.\" Allah knows that you are indeed His Messenger, and Allah bears witness that the hypocrites are liars indeed.)(2. They have made their oaths a screen. Thus they hinder (others) from the path of Allah. Verily, evil is what they used to do.)(3. That is because they believed, and then disbelieved; therefore their hearts are sealed, so they understand not.)(4. And when you look at them, their bodies please you; and when they speak, you listen to their words. They are as blocks of wood propped up. They think that every cry is against them. They are the enemies, so beware of them. May Allah curse them! How are they denying the right path?)\nThe Case of the Hypocrites and their Behavior\nAllah the Exalted states that the hypocrites pretended to be Muslims when they went to the Prophet ﷺ. In reality, they were not Muslims, but rather the opposite. This is why Allah the Exalted said,\nإِذَا جَاءَكَ الْمُنَافِقُونَ قَالُوا نَشْهَدُ إِنَّكَ لَرَسُولُ اللَّهِ ۗ\n(When the hypocrites come to you, they say: \"We bear witness that you are indeed the Messenger of Allah.\") meaning, 'when the hypocrites come to you, they announce this statement and pretend to believe in it.' Allah informs that there is no substance to their statement, and this is why He said,\nوَاللَّهُ يَعْلَمُ إِنَّكَ لَرَسُولُهُ\n(Allah knows that you are indeed His Messenger,) then said,\nوَاللَّهُ يَشْهَدُ إِنَّ الْمُنَافِقِينَ لَكَاذِبُونَ\n(And Allah bears witness that the hypocrites are liars indeed.) meaning, their claims, even though it is true about the Prophet. But they did not believe inwardly in what they declared outwardly, and this is why Allah declared their falsehood about their creed. Allah's statement,\nاتَّخَذُوا أَيْمَانَهُمْ جُنَّةً فَصَدُّوا عَنْ سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ ۚ\n(They have made their oaths a screen. Thus they hinder (others) from the path of Allah.) meaning, the hypocrites shield themselves from Muslims when they falsely and sinfully swear to be what they are not in reality. Some Muslims were deceived because they did not know their falsehood, and thus, thought that they were Muslims. Some Muslims believed what hypocrites say and even imitated them in their outward behavior. However, inwardly, hypocrites seek the destruction of Islam and its people, and this is why trusting them might bring great harm to many people. This is why Allah said next,\nفَصَدُّوا عَنْ سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ ۚ إِنَّهُمْ سَاءَ مَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ\n(Thus they hinder (others) from the path of Allah. Verily, evil is what they used to do.) Allah said,\nذَٰلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ آمَنُوا ثُمَّ كَفَرُوا فَطُبِعَ عَلَىٰ قُلُوبِهِمْ فَهُمْ لَا يَفْقَهُونَ\n(That is because they believed, and then disbelieved; therefore their hearts are sealed, so they understand not.) meaning, He has decreed them to be hypocrites because they reverted from faith to disbelief and exchanged guidance for misguidance. Therefore, Allah stamped and sealed their hearts and because of it, they cannot comprehend the guidance, nor any goodness can reach their hearts. Truly, their hearts neither understand, nor attain guidance. Allah said,\nوَإِذَا رَأَيْتَهُمْ تُعْجِبُكَ أَجْسَامُهُمْ ۖ وَإِنْ يَقُولُوا تَسْمَعْ لِقَوْلِهِمْ\n(And when you look at them, their bodies please you; and when they speak, you listen to their words.) meaning, hypocrites have a graceful outer appearance and are eloquent. When one hears them speak, he will listen to their eloquent words, even though hypocrites are truly weak and feeble, full of fear, fright and cowardice. Allah's statement,\nيَحْسَبُونَ كُلَّ صَيْحَةٍ عَلَيْهِمْ ۚ\n(They think that every cry is against them.) means, every time an incident occurs or something frightening happens, they think that it is headed their way. This is indicative of their cowardice, just as Allah said about them,\nأَشِحَّةً عَلَيْكُمْ ۖ فَإِذَا جَاءَ الْخَوْفُ رَأَيْتَهُمْ يَنْظُرُونَ إِلَيْكَ تَدُورُ أَعْيُنُهُمْ كَالَّذِي يُغْشَىٰ عَلَيْهِ مِنَ الْمَوْتِ ۖ فَإِذَا ذَهَبَ الْخَوْفُ سَلَقُوكُمْ بِأَلْسِنَةٍ حِدَادٍ أَشِحَّةً عَلَى الْخَيْرِ ۚ أُولَٰئِكَ لَمْ يُؤْمِنُوا فَأَحْبَطَ اللَّهُ أَعْمَالَهُمْ ۚ وَكَانَ ذَٰلِكَ عَلَى اللَّهِ يَسِيرًا\n(Being miserly towards you then when fear comes, you will see them looking to you, their eyes revolving like (those of) one over whom hovers death; but when the fear departs, they will smite you with sharp tongues, miserly towards good. Such have not believed. Therefore Allah makes their deeds fruitless and that is ever easy for Allah.)(33:19)\nThey are shapes that do not have much substance, and this is why Allah said,\nهُمُ الْعَدُوُّ فَاحْذَرْهُمْ ۚ قَاتَلَهُمُ اللَّهُ ۖ أَنَّىٰ يُؤْفَكُونَ\n(They are the enemies, so beware of them. May Allah curse them! How are they denying the right path?) means, how they are being led astray to the misguidance, away from the guidance.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ لِلْمُنَافِقِينَ عَلَامَاتٍ يُعْرَفُونَ بِهَا: تَحِيَّتُهُمْ لَعْنَةٌ وَطَعَامُهُمْ نُهْبَةٌ وَغَنِيمَتُهُمْ غُلُولٌ لَا يَقْرَبُونَ الْمَسَاجِدَ إِلَّا هَجْرًا، وَلَا يَأْتُونَ الصَّلَاةَ إِلَّا دَبْرًا، مُسْتَكْبِرِينَ لَا يَأْلَفُونَ وَلَا يُؤْلَفُونَ، خُشُبٌ بِاللَّيْلِ صُخُبٌ بِالنَّهَارِ - وفِي رِوَايَةٍ - سُخُبٌ بِالنَّهَارِ\n(Hypocrites have certain signs that they are known by. Their greeting is really a curse, their food is from stealing and the war booty they collect is from theft. They shun the Masjid and they do not come to the prayer but at its end. They are arrogant; it is neither easy for them to blend in, nor it is easy for people to blend with them. They are like pieces of wood by night and are noisy by day.)","href":"/tafsir/63?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:63:5","title":"Ibn Kathir · 63:5–8","text":"And when it is said to them: \"Come, so that the Messenger of Allah may ask forgiveness from Allah for you,\" they twist their heads, and you would see them turning away their faces in pride (5)It is equal to them whether you ask forgiveness or ask not forgiveness for them, Allah will never forgive them. Verily, Allah guides not the people who are the rebellious (6)They are the ones who say: \"Spend not on those who are with Allah's Messenger, until they desert him.\" And to Allah belong the treasures of the heavens and the earth, but the hypocrites comprehend not (7)They say: \"If we return to Al-Madinah, indeed the more honorable will expel therefrom the weaker.\" But Al-'Izzah belongs to Allah, and to His Messenger, and to the believers, but the hypocrites know not (8)\nHypocrites are not interested to ask the prophet (ﷺ) to ask Allah to forgive Them\nAllah the Exalted states about the hypocrites, may Allah curse them,\nوَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ تَعَالَوْا يَسْتَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ لَوَّوْا رُءُوسَهُمْ\n(And when it is said to them: \"Come, so that the Messenger of Allah may ask forgiveness from Allah for you,\" they twist their heads,) meaning, they turn away, ignoring this call in arrogance, belittling what they are invited to. This is why Allah the Exalted said,\nوَرَأَيْتَهُمْ يَصُدُّونَ وَهُمْ مُسْتَكْبِرُونَ\n(and you would see them turning away their faces in pride.) Allah punished them for this behavior, saying,\nسَوَاءٌ عَلَيْهِمْ أَسْتَغْفَرْتَ لَهُمْ أَمْ لَمْ تَسْتَغْفِرْ لَهُمْ لَنْ يَغْفِرَ اللَّهُ لَهُمْ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ الْفَاسِقِينَ\n(It is equal to them whether you ask forgiveness or ask not forgiveness for them, Allah will never forgive them. Verily, Allah guides not the people who are the rebellious.)\nAs Allah said in Surat Bara'ah, and a discussion preceded there, and here we will present some of the Hadiths reported that are related to it.\nSeveral of the Salaf mentioned that this entire passage was revealed in the case of 'Abdullah bin Ubay bin Salul, as we will soon mention, Allah willing and our trust and reliance are on Him.\nIn his book, As-Sirah, Muhammad bin Ishaq said, \"After the battle of Uhud ended, the Prophet ﷺ returned to Al-Madinah. 'Abdullah bin Ubay bin Salul – as Ibn Shihab narrated to me – would stand up every Friday, without objection from anyone because he was a chief of his people, when the Prophet ﷺ would sit on the Minbar, just before he delivered the Jumu'ah Khutbah to the people. 'Abdullah bin Ubay would say, 'O people! This is the Messenger of Allah ﷺ with you. Allah has honored us by sending him and gave you might through him. Support him, honor him and listen to and obey him.' He would then sit down. So after the battle of Uhud, even after he did what he did, that is, returning to Al-Madinah with a third of the army, he stood up to say the same words. But the Muslims held on to his clothes and said to him, 'Sit down, O enemy of Allah! You are not worthy to stand after you did what you did.' 'Abdullah went out of the Masjid crossing people's lines and saying, 'By Allah, it is as if I said something awful when I wanted to support him.' Some men from Al-Ansar met him at the gate of the Masjid and asked him what happened. He said, 'I just stood up to support him and some men, his Companions, jumped at me, pulled me back and admonished me, as if what I said was an awful thing; I merely wanted to support him.' They said to him, 'Woe to you! Go back so that Allah's Messenger ﷺ asks Allah to forgive you.' He said, 'By Allah, I do not wish that he ask Allah to forgive me.'\"\nQatadah and As-Suddi said, \"This Ayah was revealed about 'Abdullah bin Ubay. A young relative of his went to Allah's Messenger ﷺ and conveyed to him an awful statement that 'Abdullah said. The Messenger ﷺ called 'Abdullah, who swore by Allah that he did not say anything. The Ansar went to that boy and admonished him. However, Allah sent down what you hear about 'Abdullah's case and Allah's enemy was told, 'Go to Allah's Messenger,' but he turned his head away, saying that he will not do it.\"\nMuhammad bin Ishaq said that Muhammad bin Yahya bin Hibban, 'Abdullah bin Abi Bakr and 'Asim bin 'Umar bin Qatadah narrated to him the story of Bani Al-Mustaliq. They said that while the Messenger of Allah ﷺ was in that area, Jahjah bin Sa'id Al-Ghifari, a hired hand for 'Umar, and Sinan bin Wabr fought over the water source. Sinan called out, \"O Ansar\", while Al-Jahjah called, \"O Muhajirin!\" Zayd bin Arqam and several Ansar men were sitting with 'Abdullah bin Ubay bin Salul at that time. When 'Abdullah heard what happened, he said, \"They are bothering us in our land. By Allah, the parable of us and these foolish Quraysh men, is the parable that goes, 'Feed your dog until it becomes strong, and it will eat you.' By Allah, when we go back to Al-Madinah, the most mighty will expel the weak from it.\"\nHe then addressed his people who were sitting with him, saying to them, \"What have you done to yourselves? You let them settle in your land and shared your wealth with them. By Allah, if you abandon them, they will have to move to another area other than yours.\" Zayd bin Arqam heard these words and conveyed them to Allah's Messenger ﷺ. Zayd was a young boy then. 'Umar bin Al-Khattab was with the Messenger and he said, \"O Allah's Messenger! Order 'Abbad bin Bishr to cut off his head at his neck.\" The Prophet ﷺ replied,\nفَكَيْفَ إِذَا تَحَدَّثَ النَّاسُ يَا عُمَرُ أَنَّ مُحَمَّدًا يَقْتُلُ أَصْحَابَهُ، لَا، وَلَكِنْ نَادِ يَا عُمَرُ الرَّحِيلَ\n(What if people started saying that Muhammad kills his companions, O 'Umar? No. However, order the people to start the journey (back to Al-Madinah).)\nWhen 'Abdullah bin Ubay bin Salul was told that his statement reached Allah's Prophet ﷺ, he went to him and denied saying it. He swore by Allah that he did not utter the statement that Zayd bin Arqam conveyed. 'Abdullah bin Ubay was a chief of his people and they said, \"O Allah's Messenger! May be the young boy merely guessed and did not hear what was said correctly.\"\nAllah's Messenger ﷺ started the journey at an unusual hour of the day and was met by Usayd bin Al-Hudayr, who greeted him acknowledging his prophethood. Usayd said, \"By Allah! You are about to begin the journey at an unusual time.\" The Prophet ﷺ said,\nأَمَا بَلَغَكَ مَا قَالَ صَاحِبُكَ ابْنُ أُبَيٍّ؟ زَعَمَ أَنَّهُ إِذَا قَدِمَ الْمَدِينَةَ سَيُخْرِجُ الْأَعَزُّ مِنْهَا الْأَذَلَّ\n(Did not the statement of your friend, Ibn Ubay reach you? He claimed that when he returns to Al-Madinah, the mighty one will expel the weak one out of it.)\nUsayd said, \"Indeed, you are the mighty one, O Allah's Messenger, and he is the disgraced one.\" Usayd said, \"Take it easy with him, O Allah's Messenger! By Allah, when Allah brought you to us, we were about to gather the pearls (of a crown) so that we appoint him king over us. He thinks that you have rid him of his kingship.\" The Messenger of Allah ﷺ traveled with the people until the night fell, then the rest of the night until the beginning of the next day and then set camp with the people. He wanted to busy them from talking about what had happened. The minute people felt the ground under their feet, they went to sleep and Surat Al-Munafiqin was revealed.\nAl-Hafiz Abu Bakr Al-Bayhaqi recorded that Jabir bin 'Abdullah said, \"We were in a battle with Allah's Messenger ﷺ and a man from the Emigrants kicked an Ansari man. The Ansari man called out, 'O Ansar!' and the Emigrant called out, 'O Emigrants!' Allah's Messenger ﷺ heard that and said,\nمَا بَالُ دَعْوَى الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ؟ دَعُوهَا فَإِنَّهَا مُنْتِنَةٌ\n(What is this call of Jahiliyyah? Abandon it because it is offensive.)\nAbdullah bin Ubay heard that and said, 'Have they (the Emigrants) done so? By Allah, if we return to Al-Madinah, surely, the more honorable will expel therefrom the meaner.'\nThe Ansar at that time, were more numerous that the Emigrants when the Messenger of Allah ﷺ came to Al-Madinah, but later on the Emigrants imcreased in number. When this statement reached the Prophet ﷺ, 'Umar got up and said, 'O Allah's Messenger! Let me chop off the head of this hypocrite!' The Prophet ﷺ said:\nدَعْهُ، لَا يَتَحَدَّثُ النَّاسُ أَنَّ مُحَمَّدًا يَقْتُلُ أَصْحَابَهُ\n(Leave him, lest the people say that Muhammad kills his companions.)\" Imam Ahmad, Al-Bukhari and Muslim collected this Hadith.\nIkrimah and Ibn Zayd and others said that when the Prophet ﷺ and his Companions went back to Al-Madinah, 'Abdullah, the son of 'Abdullah bin Ubay bin Salul, remained by the gate of Al-Madinah holding his sword. People passed by him as they returned to Al-Madinah, and then his father came. 'Abdullah, son of 'Abdullah, said to his father, \"Stay where you are,\" and his father asked what the matter was His son said, \"By Allah! You will enter through here until the Messenger of Allah allows you to do so, for he is the honorable one and you are the disgraced.\" When the Messenger of Allah ﷺ came by, and he used to be in the last lines, 'Abdullah bin Ubay complained to him about his son and his son said, \"By Allah, O Allah's Messenger! He will not enter it until you say so.\" The Messenger ﷺ gave his permission to 'Abdullah bin Ubay and his son said, \"Enter, now that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ gave you his permission.\"\nIn his Musnad, Abu Bakr 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubayr Al-Humaydi recorded from Abu Harun Al-Madani that 'Abdullah, the son of 'Abdullah bin Ubay bin Salul, said to his father, \"You will never enter Al-Madinah unless and until you say, 'Allah's Messenger ﷺ is the honorable one and I am the disgraced.\" When the Prophet ﷺ came, 'Abdullah, son of 'Abdullah bin Ubay bin Salul said to him, \"O Allah's Messenger! I was told that you have decided to have my father executed. By He Who has sent you with Truth, I never looked straight to his face out of respect for him. But if you wish, I will bring you his head, because I would hate to see the killer of my father.\"","href":"/tafsir/63?verse=5","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:63:9","title":"Ibn Kathir · 63:9–11","text":"O you who believe! Let not your properties or your children divert you from the remembrance of Allah. And whosoever does that, then they are the losers (9)And spend of that with which We have provided you before death comes to one of you, and he says: \"My Lord! If only You would give me respite for a little while, then I should give Sadaqah from my wealth, and be among the righteous (10)And Allah grants respite to none when his appointed time comes. And Allah is All-Aware of what you do (11)\nThe Importance of not being too concerned with the Matters of the Worldly Life, and being Charitable before Death\nAllah the Exalted orders His faithful servants to remember Him frequently and to refrain from being distracted from His remembrance by indulging in their properties and children excessively. Allah informs them that those who engage in this life, its delights and attributes and were busied from the obedience and remembrance of Allah, for which they were created, will be among the losers. They will lose themselves and their families on the Day of Resurrection. Allah encourages the believers to spend in His cause,\nوَأَنْفِقُوا مِنْ مَا رَزَقْنَاكُمْ مِنْ قَبْلِ أَنْ يَأْتِيَ أَحَدَكُمُ الْمَوْتُ فَيَقُولَ رَبِّ لَوْلَا أَخَّرْتَنِي إِلَىٰ أَجَلٍ قَرِيبٍ فَأَصَّدَّقَ وَأَكُنْ مِنَ الصَّالِحِينَ\n(And spend of that with which We have provided you before death comes to one of you, and he says: \"My Lord! If only You would give me respite for a little while, then I should give Sadaqah from my wealth, and be among the righteous.)\nSurely, every person who fell into shortcomings will regret it by the time of his death and will ask for respite, even a short period, so that he does better and attains what he missed. No, rather what occurred, has occurred and what is coming, shall indeed come. Each will be held accountable for his mistakes. As for the disbelievers, they will be as Allah said about them,\nوَأَنْذِرِ النَّاسَ يَوْمَ يَأْتِيهِمُ الْعَذَابُ فَيَقُولُ الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا رَبَّنَا أَخِّرْنَا إِلَىٰ أَجَلٍ قَرِيبٍ نُجِبْ دَعْوَتَكَ وَنَتَّبِعِ الرُّسُلَ ۗ أَوَلَمْ تَكُونُوا أَقْسَمْتُمْ مِنْ قَبْلُ مَا لَكُمْ مِنْ زَوَالٍ\n(And warn mankind of the Day when the torment will come unto them; then the wrongdoers will say:\"Our Lord! Respite us for a little while, we will answer Your call and follow the Messengers!\" (It will be said): \"Had you not sworn aforetime that you would not leave.\")(14:44), and,\nحَتَّىٰ إِذَا جَاءَ أَحَدَهُمُ الْمَوْتُ قَالَ رَبِّ ارْجِعُونِ - لَعَلِّي أَعْمَلُ صَالِحًا فِيمَا تَرَكْتُ ۚ كَلَّا ۚ إِنَّهَا كَلِمَةٌ هُوَ قَائِلُهَا ۖ وَمِنْ وَرَائِهِمْ بَرْزَخٌ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ يُبْعَثُونَ\n(Until, when death comes to one of them, he says: \"My Lord! send me back. So that I may do good in that which I have left behind!\" No! It is but a word that he speaks; and behind them is Barzakh (a barrier) until the Day when they will be resurrected.)(23:99-100) Then Allah said;\nوَلَنْ يُؤَخِّرَ اللَّهُ نَفْسًا إِذَا جَاءَ أَجَلُهَا ۚ وَاللَّهُ خَبِيرٌ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ\n(And Allah grants respite to none when his appointed time comes. And Allah is All-Aware of what you do.) meaning, when the time of death comes, no one will be granted respite. Surely, HSe is the Most Knowledgeable and t an what they did before. Allah said,\nوَاللَّهُ خَبِيرٌ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ\n(And Allah is All-Aware of what you do.)\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Al-Munafiqun. All praise and thanks are due to Allah, and all success and immunity from error come from Him.","href":"/tafsir/63?verse=9","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:64:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 64:1–4","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\n(In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nيُسَبِّحُ لِلَّهِ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ ۖ لَهُ الْمُلْكُ وَلَهُ الْحَمْدُ ۖ وَهُوَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ - هُوَ الَّذِي خَلَقَكُمْ فَمِنْكُمْ كَافِرٌ وَمِنْكُمْ مُؤْمِنٌ ۚ وَاللَّهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ بَصِيرٌ - خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ بِالْحَقِّ وَصَوَّرَكُمْ فَأَحْسَنَ صُوَرَكُمْ ۖ وَإِلَيْهِ الْمَصِيرُ - يَعْلَمُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَيَعْلَمُ مَا تُسِرُّونَ وَمَا تُعْلِنُونَ ۚ وَاللَّهُ عَلِيمٌ بِذَاتِ الصُّدُورِ\n(1. Whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth glorifies Allah. His is the dominion, and to Him belongs the praise, and He is Able to do all things.)(2. He it is Who created you, then some of you are disbelievers and some of you are believers. And Allah is All-Seer of what you do.)(3. He has created the heavens and the earth with truth, and He shaped you and made good your shapes. And to Him is the return.)(4. He knows what is in the heavens and on earth, and He knows what you conceal and what you reveal. And Allah is the All-Knower of what is in the breasts.)\nPraising Allah and mentioning His Creation and Knowledge\nThis is the last Surah among Al-Musabbihat. We mentioned before that all creatures praise the glory of Allah, their Creator and Owner. Allah the Exalted said,\nلَهُ الْمُلْكُ وَلَهُ الْحَمْدُ ۖ\n(His is the dominion, and to Him belongs the praise,) meaning, He is the One Who has control over all creation, the One praised for all He created and decreed. Allah's statement,\nوَهُوَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ\n(and He is Able to do all things.) means that whatever He wills occurs without resistance, and whatever He does not will, never occurs. Allah said,\nهُوَ الَّذِي خَلَقَكُمْ فَمِنْكُمْ كَافِرٌ وَمِنْكُمْ مُؤْمِنٌ ۚ\n(He it is Who created you, then some of you are disbelievers and some of you are believers.) meaning, Allah created you with these characteristics and He willed that for you. Therefore, there will be believers and disbelievers. Surely, Allah is the One Who sees those who deserve guidance and those who deserve misguidance. He is the Witness over His servant's deeds and He will completely recompense them. This is why Allah the Exalted said,\nوَاللَّهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ بَصِيرٌ\n(And Allah is All-Seer of what you do.) Allah said,\nخَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ بِالْحَقِّ\n(He has created the heavens and the earth with truth,) with equity and wisdom,\nوَصَوَّرَكُمْ فَأَحْسَنَ صُوَرَكُمْ ۖ\n(and He shaped you and made good your shapes.) He made you in the best shapes and forms. Allah the Exalted said,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الْإِنْسَانُ مَا غَرَّكَ بِرَبِّكَ الْكَرِيمِ - الَّذِي خَلَقَكَ فَسَوَّاكَ فَعَدَلَكَ - فِي أَيِّ صُورَةٍ مَا شَاءَ رَكَّبَكَ\n(O man! What has made you careless about your Lord, the most Generous? Who created you, fashioned you perfectly and gave you due proportion; in whatever form He willed, He put you together.)(82:6-8) And His saying,\nاللَّهُ الَّذِي جَعَلَ لَكُمُ الْأَرْضَ قَرَارًا وَالسَّمَاءَ بِنَاءً وَصَوَّرَكُمْ فَأَحْسَنَ صُوَرَكُمْ وَرَزَقَكُمْ مِنَ الطَّيِّبَاتِ ۚ\n(Allah, it is He Who has made for you the earth as a dwelling place and the sky as a canopy, and has given you shape and made your shapes good (looking) and has provided you with good things.)(40:64) and His saying;\nوَإِلَيْهِ الْمَصِيرُ\n(And to Him is the return.) means the return and final destination. Allah then informs of His knowledge of all that there is in the heavens, in the earth and in the souls, He said:\nيَعْلَمُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَيَعْلَمُ مَا تُسِرُّونَ وَمَا تُعْلِنُونَ ۚ وَاللَّهُ عَلِيمٌ بِذَاتِ الصُّدُورِ\n(He knows what is in the heavens and on earth, and He knows what you conceal and what you reveal. And Allah is the All-Knower of what is in the breasts.)","href":"/tafsir/64?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:64:5","title":"Ibn Kathir · 64:5–6","text":"Has not the news reached you of those who disbelieved aforetime? And so they tasted the evil result of their disbelief, and theirs will be a painful torment (5)That was because there came to them their Messengers with Bayyinat, but they said: \"Shall mere men guide us?\" So they disbelieved and turned away. But Allah was not in need. And Allah is not in need, Worthy of all praise (6)\nA Warning delivered through mentioning the End of the Disbelieving Nations\nInforming about the past nations and the torment and disciplinary lessons that they suffered because of opposing the Messengers and denying the truth. Allah says;\nأَلَمْ يَأْتِكُمْ نَبَأُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنْ قَبْلُ\n(Has not the news reached you of those who disbelieved aforetime?) meaning, information about them and what happened to them,\nفَذَاقُوا وَبَالَ أَمْرِهِمْ\n(And so they tasted the evil result of their disbelief.) They tasted the evil consequences of their denial and sinful actions. And it refers to the punishment and humiliation they received in the life of the world,\nوَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ\n(and theirs will be a painful torment.) in the Hereafter, added to the torment they received in this life. Allah explained why;\nذَٰلِكَ بِأَنَّهُ كَانَتْ تَأْتِيهِمْ رُسُلُهُمْ بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ\n(That was because there came to them their Messengers with Bayyinat,) supporting arguments, evidence, and clear proofs,\nفَقَالُوا أَبَشَرٌ يَهْدُونَنَا\n(but they said:\"Shall mere men guide us?\") They discounted and dismissed the possibility that the Message would be sent to a human and that their guidance would come by the hands of a man like themselves,\nفَكَفَرُوا وَتَوَلَّوْا\n(So they disbelieved and turned away.) they denied the truth and turned away from abiding by it,\nوَاسْتَغْنَى اللَّهُ ۚ\n(But Allah was not in need.) of them,\nوَاللَّهُ غَنِيٌّ حَمِيدٌ\n(And Allah is not need, Worthy of all praise.)","href":"/tafsir/64?verse=5","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:64:7","title":"Ibn Kathir · 64:7–10","text":"The disbelievers pretend that they will never be resurrected. Say: \"Yes! By my Lord, you will certainly be resurrected, then you will be informed of what you did; and that is easy for Allah. (7)Therefore, believe in Allah and His Messenger and in the Light which We have sent down. And Allah is All-Aware of what you do (8)The Day when He will gather you on the Day of Gathering, that will be the Day of At-Taghabun. And whosoever believes in Allah and performs righteous deeds, He will expiate from him his sins, and will admit him to Gardens beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein forever; that will be the great success (9)But those who disbelieved and denied Our Ayat, they will be the dwellers of the Fire, to dwell therein forever. And worst indeed is that destination (10)\nLife after Death is True\nAllah the Exalted informs about the disbelievers, idolators and the atheists that they claim that they will not be resurrected,\nقُلْ بَلَىٰ وَرَبِّي لَتُبْعَثُنَّ ثُمَّ لَتُنَبَّؤُنَّ بِمَا عَمِلْتُمْ\n(Say: \"Yes! By my Lord, you will certainly be resurrected, then you will be informed of what you did...\") meaning, 'you will be informed of all of your actions, whether major or minor, big or small,'\nوَذَٰلِكَ عَلَى اللَّهِ يَسِيرٌ\n(and that is easy for Allah.) 'resurrecting and recompensing you is easy for Allah.'\nThis is the third Ayah in which Allah orders His Messenger ﷺ to swear by His Lord, the Exalted and Most Honored, that Resurrection occurs. The first is in Surah Yunus,\nوَيَسْتَنْبِئُونَكَ أَحَقٌّ هُوَ ۖ قُلْ إِي وَرَبِّي إِنَّهُ لَحَقٌّ ۖ وَمَا أَنْتُمْ بِمُعْجِزِينَ\n(And they ask you to inform them: \"Is it true?\" Say: \"Yes! By my Lord! It is the very truth! and you can not escape it!\")(10:53), The second is in Surah Saba',\nوَقَالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَا تَأْتِينَا السَّاعَةُ ۖ قُلْ بَلَىٰ وَرَبِّي لَتَأْتِيَنَّكُمْ\n(Those who disbelieve say: \"The hour will not come to us.\" Say: \"Yes, by my Lord, it will come to you...\")(34:3), and the third is this Ayah,\nزَعَمَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا أَنْ لَنْ يُبْعَثُوا ۚ قُلْ بَلَىٰ وَرَبِّي لَتُبْعَثُنَّ ثُمَّ لَتُنَبَّؤُنَّ بِمَا عَمِلْتُمْ ۚ وَذَٰلِكَ عَلَى اللَّهِ يَسِيرٌ\n(The disbelievers pretend that they will never be resurrected. Say: \"Yes! By my Lord, you will certainly be resurrected, then you will be informed of what you did; and that is easy for Allah.\") Allah the Exalted said,\nفَآمِنُوا بِاللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ وَالنُّورِ الَّذِي أَنْزَلْنَا ۚ\n(Therefore, believe in Allah and in His Messenger and in the Light which We have sent down.) that is, the Qur'an,\nوَاللَّهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ خَبِيرٌ\n(And Allah is All-Aware of what you do.) none of your deeds ever escapes His knowledge.\nThe Day of At-Taghabun\nAllah said,\nيَوْمَ يَجْمَعُكُمْ لِيَوْمِ الْجَمْعِ ۖ\n(The Day when He will gather you on the Day of Gathering,) meaning the Day of Resurrection. This is the Day when the earlier and later generations will all be gathered in one area, a caller would be heard by them all, and one's vision would easily see them all. Allah said,\nذَٰلِكَ يَوْمٌ مَجْمُوعٌ لَهُ النَّاسُ وَذَٰلِكَ يَوْمٌ مَشْهُودٌ\n(That is the Day whereon mankind will be gathered together, that is a Day when all will be present.)(11:103), and,\nقُلْ إِنَّ الْأَوَّلِينَ وَالْآخِرِينَ - لَمَجْمُوعُونَ إِلَىٰ مِيقَاتِ يَوْمٍ مَعْلُومٍ\n(Say: \"(Yes) verily, those of old, and those of later times. All will surely be gathered together for appointed meeting of a known Day.\")(56:49-50) Allah's statement,\nذَٰلِكَ يَوْمُ التَّغَابُنِ ۗ\n(that will be the Day of At-Taghabun) Ibn 'Abbas said, \"It is one of the names of the Day of Judgement, and that is because the people of Paradise will have gained over the people of the Fire.\" Qatadah and Mujahid said similarly.\nMuqatil bin Hayyan said, \"There is no mutual loss and gain greater than these entering Paradise and those being taken to the Fire.\"\nAllah explained His statement saying;\nوَمَنْ يُؤْمِنْ بِاللَّهِ وَيَعْمَلْ صَالِحًا يُكَفِّرْ عَنْهُ سَيِّئَاتِهِ وَيُدْخِلْهُ جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا أَبَدًا ۚ ذَٰلِكَ الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ - وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَكَذَّبُوا بِآيَاتِنَا أُولَٰئِكَ أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا ۖ وَبِئْسَ الْمَصِيرُ\n(And whosoever believes in Allah and performs righteous deeds, He will expiate from him his sins, and will admit him to Gardens beneath which rivers flow (Paradise), to dwell therein forever; that will be the great success. But those who disbelieved and denied Our Ayat, they will be the dwellers of the Fire, to dwell therein forever. And worst indeed is that destination.) We explained these meanings several times before.","href":"/tafsir/64?verse=7","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:64:11","title":"Ibn Kathir · 64:11–13","text":"No calamity occurs, but by the permission of Allah, and whosoever believes in Allah, He guides his heart. And Allah is the All-Knower of everything (11)Obey Allah, and obey the Messenger; but if you turn away, then the duty of Our Messenger is only to convey clearly (12)Allah! La ilaha illa Huwa. And in Allah therefore let the believers put their trust (13)\nAll that occurs to Mankind is by Allah's Permission\nAllah informs us as He did in Surat Al-Hadid,\nمَا أَصَابَ مِنْ مُصِيبَةٍ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَلَا فِي أَنْفُسِكُمْ إِلَّا فِي كِتَابٍ مِنْ قَبْلِ أَنْ نَبْرَأَهَا ۚ إِنَّ ذَٰلِكَ عَلَى اللَّهِ يَسِيرٌ\n(No calamity occurs on the earth or in yourselves but it is inscribed in a record before We bring it into existence. Verily, that is easy for Allah.)(57:22) Allah said here,\nمَا أَصَابَ مِنْ مُصِيبَةٍ إِلَّا بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ ۗ\n(No calamity occurs, but by the permission of Allah,) Ibn 'Abbas said; \"By the command of Allah,\" meaning from His decree and will.\nوَمَنْ يُؤْمِنْ بِاللَّهِ يَهْدِ قَلْبَهُ ۚ وَاللَّهُ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ عَلِيمٌ\n(and whosoever believes in Allah, He guides his heart. And Allah is the All-Knower of everything.) meaning, whoever suffered an affliction and he knew that it occurred by Allah's judgement and decree, and he patiently abides, awaiting Allah's reward, then Allah guides his heart, and will compensate him for his loss in this life by granting guidance to his heart and certainty in faith. Allah will replace whatever he lost for Him with the same or what is better. 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported from Ibn 'Abbas,\nوَمَنْ يُؤْمِنْ بِاللَّهِ يَهْدِ قَلْبَهُ\n(and whosoever believes in Allah, He guides his heart.) \"Allah will guide his heart to certainty. Therefore, he will know that what reached him would not have missed him and what has missed him would not have reached him.\"\nThere is an agreed upon Hadith [that Al-Bukhari and Muslim collected and] which states,\nعَجَبًا لِلْمُؤْمِنِ لَا يَقْضِي اللهُ لَهُ قَضَاءً إِلَّا كَانَ خَيْرًا لَهُ، إِنْ أَصَابَتْهُ ضَرَّاءُ صَبَرَ فَكَانَ خَيْرًا لَهُ، وَإِنْ أَصَابَتْهُ سَرَّاءُ شَكَرَ فَكَانَ خَيْرًا لَهُ، وَلَيْسَ ذَلِكَ لِأَحَدٍ إِلَّا لِلْمُؤْمِنِ\n(Amazing is the believer: There is no decree that Allah writes for him, but is better for him. If an affliction strikes him, he is patient and this is better for him. If a bounty is granted to him, he is thankful and this is better for him. This trait is only for the faithful believer.)\nThe Order to obey Allah and His Messenger (ﷺ)\nAllah said,\nوَأَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُوا الرَّسُولَ ۚ\n(Obey Allah, and obey the Messenger;) Allah commands obedience to Him and to His Messenger ﷺ in all that His legislates and in implementing His orders. Allah also forbids one from all that His Messenger ﷺ forbids and prohibits. Allah the Exalted said,\nفَإِنْ تَوَلَّيْتُمْ فَإِنَّمَا عَلَىٰ رَسُولِنَا الْبَلَاغُ الْمُبِينُ\n(but if you turn away, then the duty of Our Messenger is only to convey clearly.) meaning, 'if you refrain from abiding by the faith, then the Messenger's mission is to convey and your mission is to hear and obey. 'Az-Zuhri said, \"From Allah comes the Message, its deliverance is up to the Messenger, and the adherence is up to us.\"\nTawhid\nAllah states that He is the One, Whom all creations need and seek, the One other than Whom there is no (true) God.\nاللَّهُ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ ۚ وَعَلَى اللَّهِ فَلْيَتَوَكَّلِ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ\n(Allah! La ilaha illa Huwa. And in Allah therefore let the believers put their trust.)\nSo, He first informs about Tawhid and its meaning. The implied meaning is to single Him out for deification, being purely devoted to Him, and relying upon Him, as He said;\nرَبُّ الْمَشْرِقِ وَالْمَغْرِبِ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ فَاتَّخِذْهُ وَكِيلًا\n(The Lord of the east and the west; La ilaha illa Huwa. So take Him alone as Trustee.)(73:9)","href":"/tafsir/64?verse=11","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:64:14","title":"Ibn Kathir · 64:14–18","text":"O you who believe! Verily, among your wives and your children there are enemies for you; therefore beware of them! But if you pardon (them) and overlook, and forgive, then verily, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful (14)Your wealth and your children are only a Fitnah, whereas Allah! With Him is a great reward (15)So have Taqwa of Allah as much as you can; listen and obey, and spend in charity; that is better for yourselves. And whosoever is saved from his own greed, then they are the successful ones (16)If you lend to Allah a handsome loan, He will double it for you, and will forgive you. And Allah is Shakur, Halim (17)All-Knower of the unseen and seen, the Almighty, the All-Wise (18)\nWarning against the Fitnah of Spouses and Offspring\nAllah states that some wives and children are enemies to their husbands and fathers, in that they might be busied with them rather than with performing the good deeds. Allah said in another Ayah,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تُلْهِكُمْ أَمْوَالُكُمْ وَلَا أَوْلَادُكُمْ عَنْ ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ ۚ وَمَنْ يَفْعَلْ ذَٰلِكَ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْخَاسِرُونَ\n(O you who believe! Let not your properties or you children divert you from the remembrance of Allah. And whosoever does that then they are the losers.)(63:9) Allah the Exalted said here,\nفَاحْذَرُوهُمْ\n(therefore, beware of them!) for your religion, according to Ibn Zayd. Mujahid explained the Ayah ,\nإِنَّ مِنْ أَزْوَاجِكُمْ وَأَوْلَادِكُمْ عَدُوًّا لَكُمْ\n(Verily, among your wives and your children there are enemies for you;) by saying, \"They might direct the man to sever his relation or disobey his Lord. The man, who loves his wives and children, might obey them in this case.\" Ibn Abi Hatim recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said to a man who asked him about this Ayah,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِنَّ مِنْ أَزْوَاجِكُمْ وَأَوْلَادِكُمْ عَدُوًّا لَكُمْ فَاحْذَرُوهُمْ ۚ\n(O you who believe! Verily, among your wives and your children there are enemies for you; therefore beware of them!) \"There were men who embraced Islam in Makkah and wanted to migrate to Allah's Messenger ﷺ. However, their wives and children refused to allow them. Later when they joined Allah's Messenger ﷺ, they found that those who were with him (the Companions) have gained knowledge in the religion, so they were about to punish their wives and children. Allah the Exalted sent down this Ayah,\nوَإِنْ تَعْفُوا وَتَصْفَحُوا وَتَغْفِرُوا فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ\n(But if you pardon (them) and overlook, and forgive, then verily, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.)\" At-Tirmidhi collected this Hadith and said that it is Hasan Sahih. Allah's statement,\nإِنَّمَا أَمْوَالُكُمْ وَأَوْلَادُكُمْ فِتْنَةٌ ۚ وَاللَّهُ عِنْدَهُ أَجْرٌ عَظِيمٌ\n(Your wealth and your children are only a Fintah, whereas Allah! With Him is a great reward.) Allah said that the wealth and children are a test and trial from Allah the Exalted for His creatures, so that He knows those who obey Him and those who disobey Him. Allah's statement,\nوَاللَّهُ عِنْدَهُ\n(whereas Allah! With Him) meaning, on the Day of Resurrection,\nأَجْرٌ عَظِيمٌ\n(is a great reward.) As Allah said;\nزُيِّنَ لِلنَّاسِ حُبُّ الشَّهَوَاتِ مِنَ النِّسَاءِ وَالْبَنِينَ وَالْقَنَاطِيرِ الْمُقَنْطَرَةِ مِنَ الذَّهَبِ وَالْفِضَّةِ وَالْخَيْلِ الْمُسَوَّمَةِ وَالْأَنْعَامِ وَالْحَرْثِ ۗ ذَٰلِكَ مَتَاعُ الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا ۖ وَاللَّهُ عِنْدَهُ حُسْنُ الْمَآبِ\n(Beautified for men is the love of things they covet; women children, Qanatir Al-Muqantarah of gold and silver, branded beautiful horses, cattle and well-tilled land. This is the pleasure of the present world's life; but Allah has the excellent return with him.)(3:14), and the Ayah after it.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Buraydah said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ was giving a speech and Al-Hasan and Husayn came in wearing red shirts, walking and tripping. The Messenger ﷺ descended from the Minbar, held them and placed them in front of them and said,\nصَدَقَ اللهُ وَرَسُولُهُ إِنَّمَا أَمْوَالُكُمْ وَأَوْلَادُكُمْ فِتْنَةٌ، نَظَرْتُ إِلَىٰ هَذَيْنِ الصَّبِيَّيْنِ يَمْشِيَانِ وَيَعْثُرَانِ، فَلَمْ أَصْبِرْ حَتّٰى قَطَعْتُ حَدِيثِي وَرَفَعْتُهُمَا\n(Allah and His Messenger said the truth,'Verily, your wealth and your children are a Fitnah.' I saw these two boys walking and tripping and could not be patient until I stopped my speech and picked them up.)\" This was recorded by the Sunan compilers, and At-Tirmidhi said, \"Hasan Gharib.\"\nThe Order for Taqwa, as much as One is Capable\nAllah said,\nفَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ مَا اسْتَطَعْتُمْ\n(So have Taqwa of Allah as much as you can;) meaning, as much as you are able and can bear or endure. The Two Sahihs recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nإِذَا أَمَرْتُكُمْ بِأَمْرٍ فَائْتُوا مِنْهُ مَا اسْتَطَعْتُمْ، وَمَا نَهَيْتُكُمْ عَنْهُ فَاجْتَنِبُوهُ\n(When I command you to do something, do as much as you can of it, and whatever I forbid for you, then avoid it.) Allah's statement,\nوَاسْمَعُوا وَأَطِيعُوا\n(listen and obey,) means, obey what Allah and His Messenger ﷺ command you to do and do not stray from it to the right or left. Do not utter a statement or make a decision before Allah and His Messenger ﷺ issue a statement or decision. Do not ignore what you were ordered to do, nor commit what you were forbidden from doing.\nEncouraging Charity\nAllah the Exalted said,\nوَأَنْفِقُوا خَيْرًا لِأَنْفُسِكُمْ\n(and spend in charity; that is better for yourselves.) meaning, give from what Allah has granted you to your relatives, the poor, the needy and the weak. Be kind to Allah's creatures, just as Allah was and still is kind with you. This will be better for you in this life and the Hereafter. Otherwise, if you do not do it, it will be worse for you in this life and the Hereafter. Allah said;\nوَمَنْ يُوقَ شُحَّ نَفْسِهِ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْمُفْلِحُونَ\n(And whosoever is saved from his own greed, then they are the successful ones.) This was explained with a similar Ayah in Surat Al-Hashr, where we also mentioned the relevant Hadiths. Therefore, we do not need to repeat them here, all praise and gratitude is due to Allah. Allah the Exalted said,\nإِنْ تُقْرِضُوا اللَّهَ قَرْضًا حَسَنًا يُضَاعِفْهُ لَكُمْ وَيَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ ۚ\n(If you lend to Allah a handsome loan, He will double it for you, and will forgive you.) meaning, whatever you spend, then Allah will replace it, and on Him will be the reward of whatever you give away in charity.\nAllah considered giving charity as if it is a loan to Him, just as Allah said in a Qudsi Hadith,\nمَنْ يُقْرِضُ غَيْرَ ظَلُومٍ وَلَا عَدِيمٍ\n(\"Who will give a loan to He Who is neither unjust nor poor?\") This is why Allah the Exalted said in Surat Al-Baqarah,\nفَيُضَاعِفَهُ لَهُ أَضْعَافًا كَثِيرَةً\n(So that He may multiply it to him many times)(2:245) Allah said;\nوَيَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ\n(and will forgive you.) meaning, He will erase your mistakes,\nوَاللَّهُ شَكُورٌ\n(And Allah is Shakur) meaning, He gives abundantly in return for what was little,\nحَلِيمٌ\n(Halim) means, He forgives, pardons, covers and absolves the sins, mistakes, errors and shortcomings,\nعَالِمُ الْغَيْبِ وَالشَّهَادَةِ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ\n(All-Knower of the unseen and seen, the Almighty, the All-Wise.)\nIts explanation has already preceded several times. This is the end of the Tafsir of Surat At-Taghabun, all the praise and appreciation is due to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/64?verse=14","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:65:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 65:1","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\n(In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nيَا أَيُّهَا النَّبِيُّ إِذَا طَلَّقْتُمُ النِّسَاءَ فَطَلِّقُوهُنَّ لِعِدَّتِهِنَّ وَأَحْصُوا الْعِدَّةَ ۖ وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ رَبَّكُمْ ۖ لَا تُخْرِجُوهُنَّ مِنْ بُيُوتِهِنَّ وَلَا يَخْرُجْنَ إِلَّا أَنْ يَأْتِينَ بِفَاحِشَةٍ مُبَيِّنَةٍ ۚ وَتِلْكَ حُدُودُ اللَّهِ ۚ وَمَنْ يَتَعَدَّ حُدُودَ اللَّهِ فَقَدْ ظَلَمَ نَفْسَهُ ۚ لَا تَدْرِي لَعَلَّ اللَّهَ يُحْدِثُ بَعْدَ ذَٰلِكَ أَمْرًا\n(1. O Prophet! When you divorce women, divorce them at their 'Iddah and count their 'Iddah. And have Taqwa of Allah, your Lord. And turn them not out of their homes nor shall they leave, except in case they are guilty of Fahishah Mubayyinah. And those are the set limits of Allah. And whosoever transgresses the set limits of Allah, then indeed he has wronged himself. You know not, it may be that Allah will afterward bring some new thing to pass.)\nThere is a Period during which Divorced Women remain in Their Homes\nThe Prophet ﷺ was addressed first in this Ayah, to honor him, even though his Ummah is also being addressed in Allah's statement,\nيَا أَيُّهَا النَّبِيُّ إِذَا طَلَّقْتُمُ النِّسَاءَ فَطَلِّقُوهُنَّ لِعِدَّتِهِنَّ\n(O Prophet! When you divorce women, divorce them at their 'Iddah)\nAl-Bukhari recorded that 'Abdullah bin 'Umar divorced his wife, during the lifetime of Allah's Messenger ﷺ, while she was menstruating. 'Umar bin Al-Khattab mentioned that to Allah's Messenger . Allah's Messenger ﷺ became angry and said,\nلِيُرَاجِعْهَا ثُمَّ يُمْسِكْهَا حَتّٰى تَطْهُرَ، ثُمَّ تَحِيضَ فَتَطْهُرَ، فَإِنْ بَدَا لَهُ أَنْ يُطَلِّقَهَا، فَلْيُطَلِّقْهَا طَاهِرًا قَبْلَ أَنْ يَمَسَّهَا، فَتِلْكَ الْعِدَّةُ الَّتِي أَمَرَ بِهَا اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ\n(Order him to take her back and keep her until she is clean from her menses, and then to wait until she gets her next period and becomes clean again. Then, if he wishes to divorce her, he can divorce her when she is clean from her menses, before he has sexual intercourse with her. This is the 'Iddah which Allah the Exalted and Most Honored has fixed.)\nAl-Bukhari recorded this Hadith in several parts of his Sahih. Muslim collected this Hadith and his narration uses these words,\nفَتِلْكَ الْعِدَّةُ الَّتِي أَمَرَ اللهُ أَنْ يُطَلَّقَ لَهَا النِّسَاءُ\n(This is the 'Iddah which Allah has fixed for the women being divorced.)\nIn his Sahih, Muslim has recorded a Hadith which is a more appropriate version from a narration of Ibn Jurayj who said that Abu Az-Zubayr informed him that he heard 'Abdur-Rahman bin Ayman, the freed slave of 'Azzah, questioning 'Abdullah bin 'Umar. And Abu Az-Zubayr heard the question, \"What about a man who divorces his wife while she is still on her menses?\" 'Abdullah answered, \"During the time of Allah's Messenger ﷺ, 'Abdullah bin 'Umar divorced his wife who was menstruating in the life time of Allah's Messenger ﷺ. So Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nلِيُرَاجِعْهَا\n(Let him take her back.) so she returned and he ﷺ said:\nإِذَا طَهُرَتْ فَلْيُطَلِّقْ أَوْ يُمْسِكْ\n(When she is pure, then either divorce or keep her.) 'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, \"Allah's Messenger ﷺ recited this Ayah:\nيَا أَيُّهَا النَّبِيُّ إِذَا طَلَّقْتُمُ النِّسَاءَ فَطَلِّقُوهُنَّ لِعِدَّتِهِنَّ\n(O Prophet! When you divorce women, divorce them at their 'Iddah)\nAnd 'Abdullah (Ibn Mas'ud) commented on Allah's statement,\nفَطَلِّقُوهُنَّ لِعِدَّتِهِنَّ\n(divorce them at their 'Iddah) He said, \"Purity without intercourse.\" Similar was reported from Ibn 'Umar, 'Ata', Mujahid, Al-Hasan, Ibn Sirin, Qatadah, Maymun bin Mihran and Muqatil bin Hayyan. It is also reported from 'Ikrimah and Ad-Dahhak.'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported from Ibn 'Abbas about the Ayah;\nفَطَلِّقُوهُنَّ لِعِدَّتِهِنَّ\n(divorce them at their 'Iddah), \"He does not divorce her while she is on her menses nor while she is pure if he has had intercourse during that (purity). Rather, he leaves her until she has her menses and after the menses ends, then he divorces her once.\" And 'Ikrimah said about\nفَطَلِّقُوهُنَّ لِعِدَّتِهِنَّ\n(divorce them at their 'Iddah), \"The 'Iddah is made up of cleanliness and the menstrual period.\" So he divorces her while it is clear that she is pregnant, or he does not due to having sex, or since he does not know if she is pregnant or not.\nThis is why the scholars said that there are two types of divorce, one that conforms to the Sunnah and another innovated.\nThe divorce that conforms to the Sunnah is one where the husband pronounces one divorce to his wife when she is not having her menses and without having had sexual intercourse with her after the menses ended. One could divorce his wife when it is clear that she is pregnant. As for the innovated divorce, it occurs when one divorces his wife when she is having her menses, or after the menses ends, has sexual intercourse with her and then divorces her, even though he does not know if she became pregnant or not. There is a third type of divorce, which is neither a Sunnah nor an innovation where one divorces a young wife who has not begun to have menses, the wife who is beyond the age of having menses, and divorcing one's wife before the marriage was consummated. Allah said,\nوَأَحْصُوا الْعِدَّةَ\n(and count their 'Iddah.) meaning, count for it and know its beginning and end, so that the 'Iddah does not become prolonged for the woman and she cannot get married again,\nوَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ رَبَّكُمْ ۖ\n(And have Taqwa of Allah, your Lord.) in this matter.\nSpending and Housing is up to the Husband during the Revocable 'Iddah Period\nAllah said,\nلَا تُخْرِجُوهُنَّ مِنْ بُيُوتِهِنَّ وَلَا يَخْرُجْنَ\n(And turn them not out of their homes nor shall they leave,) meaning, during the duration of the 'Iddah, she has the right to housing from her husband, as long as the 'Iddah period continues. Therefore, the husband does not have the right to force her out of her house, nor is she allowed to leave his house, because she is still tied to the marriage contract. Allah said,\nإِلَّا أَنْ يَأْتِينَ بِفَاحِشَةٍ مُبَيِّنَةٍ\n(except in case they are guilty of Fahishah Mubayyinah.) meaning that the divorced wife is not to abandon her husband's house unless she commits Fahishah Mubayyinah, in which case, she vacates her husband's house. For example, Fahishah Mubayyinah implies adultery, according to 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud, Ibn 'Abbas, Sa'id bin Al-Musayyib, Ash-Sha'bi, Al-Hasan, Ibn Sirin, Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Abu Qilabah, Abu Salih, Ad-Dahhak, Zayd bin Aslam, 'Ata' Al-Khurasani, As-Suddi, Sa'id bin Hilal and others. Fahishah Mubayyinah implies disobeying her husband openly or when she abuses her husband's family in words and actions, according to Ubay bin Ka'b, Ibn 'Abbas, 'Ikrimah and others. Allah's statement,\nوَتِلْكَ حُدُودُ اللَّهِ ۚ\n(And those are the set limits of Allah.) means, these are from His legislation and prohibitions,\nوَمَنْ يَتَعَدَّ حُدُودَ اللَّهِ\n(And whosoever transgresses the set limits of Allah,) meaning, whoever violates these limits, transgresses them and implements anything else besides them,\nفَقَدْ ظَلَمَ نَفْسَهُ\n(then indeed he has wronged himself.) by doing so.\nThe Wisdom of 'Iddah at the Husband's House\nAllah said,\nلَا تَدْرِي لَعَلَّ اللَّهَ يُحْدِثُ بَعْدَ ذَٰلِكَ أَمْرًا\n(You know not, it may be that Allah will afterward bring some new thing to pass.) meaning, 'We commanded that the divorced wife remains in her husband's house during the 'Iddah period, so that the husband might regret his action and Allah decides that the husband feels in his heart for the marriage to continue.' This way, returning to his wife will be easier for him.\nAz-Zuhri said that 'Ubaydullah bin 'Abdullah said that Fatimah bint Qays said about Allah's statement,\nلَا تَدْرِي لَعَلَّ اللَّهَ يُحْدِثُ بَعْدَ ذَٰلِكَ أَمْرًا\n(You know not, it may be that Allah will afterward bring some new thing to pass.) \"Taking her back.\" Similar was said by Ash-Sha'bi, 'Ata', Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak, Muqatil bin Hayyan and Ath-Thawri.\nThe Irrevocably Divorced Woman does not have a Right to Provisions and Accommodations from the Husband\nHere the view of the scholars of the Salaf and those who follow them is that housing is not obligatory in the case of the irrevocably divorced woman. They also relied on the Hadith of Fatimah bint Qays Al-Fihriyah when her husband Abu 'Amr bin Hafs divorced her the third and final time. He was away from her in Yemen at the time, and he sent her his decision to divorce her. He also sent some barley with his messenger, but she did not like the amount or method of compensation. He said, \"By Allah I am not obligated to spend upon you.\" So, she went to Allah's Messenger ﷺ, who said,\nلَيْسَ لَكِ عَلَيْهِ نَفَقَةٌ\n(There is no obligation on him to spend on you.) Muslim added in his narration,\nوَلَا سُكْنَى\n(nor housing.) And he ordered her to finish her 'Iddah period in the house of Umm Sharik. He then said,\nتِلْكَ امْرَأَةٌ يَغْشَاهَا أَصْحَابِي، اعْتَدِّي عِنْدَ ابْنِ أُمِّ مَكْتُومٍ، فَإِنَّهُ رَجُلٌ أَعْمَىٰ تَضَعِينَ ثِيَابَكِ\n(She is a woman my Companions visit. Spend this period in the house of Ibn Umm Maktum, for he is a blind man; [he cannot see you if] you take off your garments.)\nImam Ahmad collected this Hadith using another chain of narration. In his narration, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nانْظُرِي يَا بِنْتَ آلِ قَيْسٍ إِنَّمَا النَّفَقَةُ وَالسُّكْنَى لِلْمَرْأَةِ عَلَى زَوْجِهَا، مَا كَانَتْ لَهُ عَلَيْهَا رَجْعَةٌ، فَإِذَا لَمْ يَكُنْ لَهُ عَلَيْهَا رَجْعَةٌ فَلَا نَفَقَةَ وَلَا سُكْنَى،اخْرُجِي فَانْزِلِي عَلَى فُلَانَةَ\n(Look O daughter of the family of Qays! Spending and housing are required from the husband who can return to his wife. So if he does not have the right to return to her, then she does not have the right to spending and housing. So leave his house and go to so-and-so woman.) He then said,\nإِنَّهُ يُتَحَدَّثُ إِلَيْهَا، انْزِلِي عَلَى ابْنِ أُمِّ مَكْتُومٍ فَإِنَّهُ أَعْمَىٰ لَا يَرَاكِ\n(They speak to her. Therefore, go to Ibn Umm Maktum, for he is a blind man and cannot see you.)\nAbu Al-Qasim At-Tabarani recorded that 'Amir Ash-Sha'bi went to Fatimah bint Qays, sister of Ad-Dahhak bin Qays, from the tribe of Quraysh. Fatimah was married to Abu 'Amr bin Hafs bin Al-Mughirah, from Bani Makhzum. She said, \"Abu 'Amr bin Hafs sent me his decision to divorce me while he was in an army that had gone to Yemen. I asked his friends to provide me with financial provisions and housing. They said, 'He did not send us anything for that, nor did he request it from us.' I went to Allah's Messenger ﷺ and said to him, 'O Allah's Messenger! Abu 'Amr bin Hafs divorced me, and I asked his friends to provide me with spending and housing and they said that he did not send them anything for that.' Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nإِنَّمَا السُّكْنَى وَالنَّفَقَةُ لِلْمَرْأَةِ إِذَا كَانَ لِزَوْجِهَا عَلَيْهَا رَجْعَةٌ، فَإِذَا كَانَتْ لَا تَحِلُّ لَهُ حَتّٰى تَنْكِحَ زَوْجًا غَيْرَهُ:فَلَا نَفَقَةَ لَهَا وَلَا سُكْنَى\n(Spending and housing are required from the husband for his divorced wife if he can return to her. If she is not permitted for him anymore, until she marries another husband, then he does not have to provide her with spending and housing.)\" An-Nasa'i also recorded this narration.","href":"/tafsir/65?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:65:2","title":"Ibn Kathir · 65:2–3","text":"Then when they are about to attain their term appointed, either take them back in a good manner or part with them in a good manner. And take as witness two just persons from among you. And establish the testimony for Allah. That will be an admonition given to him who believes in Allah and the Last Day. And whosoever has Taqwa of Allah, He will make a way for him to get out (2)And He will provide him from where he never could imagine. And whosoever puts his trust in Allah, then He will suffice him. Verily, Allah will accomplish his purpose. Indeed Allah has set a measure for all things (3)\nOrdaining Kindness towards Divorced Women\nAllah the Exalted says that when the woman who is in her 'Iddah nears the end of the 'Iddah term, the husband must decide to reconcile with her, thus keeping their marriage together,\nبِمَعْرُوفٍ\n(in a good manner) while being kind to her in their companionship. Otherwise, he must decide to divorce her on good terms, without abusing, cursing, or admonishing her. To the contrary, he should divorce her on good terms, observing kindness and good manners.\nThe Command to have Witnesses for the Return\nAllah said,\nوَأَشْهِدُوا ذَوَيْ عَدْلٍ مِنْكُمْ\n(And take as witness two just persons from among you.) meaning when taking her back, if this is your decision. Abu Dawud and Ibn Majah recorded that 'Imran bin Husayn was asked about a man who divorced his wife and then had sexual intercourse with her, without notifying witnesses of when he divorced her and when he took her back. 'Imran said, \"His divorce and taking her back was in contradiction to the Sunnah. Incorporate the presence of witnesses for divorcing her and taking her back, and do not repeat your conduct.\" Ibn Jurayj said that 'Ata' commented on the Ayah,\nوَأَشْهِدُوا ذَوَيْ عَدْلٍ مِنْكُمْ\n(And take as witness two just persons from among you.) \"It is not permissible to marry, divorce or take back the divorced wife except with two just witnesses, just as Allah the Exalted has said, except when there is a valid excuse.\" Allah's statement,\nذَٰلِكُمْ يُوعَظُ بِهِ مَنْ كَانَ يُؤْمِنُ بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الْآخِرِ ۚ\n(That will be an admonition given to him who believes in Allah and the Last Day.) means, 'this, Our command to you to have witnesses in such cases and to establish the witness, is implemented by those who believe in Allah and the Last Day.' This legislation is meant to benefit those who fear Allah's punishment in the Hereafter.\nAllah provides, suffices, and makes a Way out of Every Hardship for Those Who have Taqwa\nAllah said,\nوَمَنْ يَتَّقِ اللَّهَ يَجْعَلْ لَهُ مَخْرَجًا - وَيَرْزُقْهُ مِنْ حَيْثُ لَا يَحْتَسِبُ ۚ\n(And whosoever has Taqwa of Allah, He will make a way for him to get out. And He will provide him from where he never could imagine.) meaning, whoever has Taqwa of Allah in what He has commanded and avoids what He has forbidden, then Allah will make a way out for him from every difficulty and will provide for him from resources he never anticipated or thought about.\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud said, \"The most comprehensive Ayah in the Qur'an is,\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ يَأْمُرُ بِالْعَدْلِ وَالْإِحْسَانِ\n(Verily, Allah enjoins Al-'Adl (justice) and Al-Ihsan (doing good)(16:90). The greatest Ayah in the Qur'an that contains relief is,\nوَمَنْ يَتَّقِ اللَّهَ يَجْعَلْ لَهُ مَخْرَجًا\n(And whosoever has Taqwa of Allah, He will make a way for him to get out.)\"\nIkrimah also commented on the Ayah, \"Whoever divorces as Allah commanded him, then Allah will make a way out for him.\" Similar was reported from Ibn 'Abbas and Ad-Dahhak.'Abdullah bin Mas'ud and Masruq commented on the Ayah,\nوَمَنْ يَتَّقِ اللَّهَ يَجْعَلْ لَهُ مَخْرَجًا\n(And whosoever has Taqwa of Allah, He will make a way for him to get out.) \"It pertains to when one knows that if Allah wills He gives, and if He wills He deprives,\nمِنْ حَيْثُ لَا يَحْتَسِبُ\n(from where he never could imagine.) from resources he did not anticipate\" Qatadah said,\nوَمَنْ يَتَّقِ اللَّهَ يَجْعَلْ لَهُ مَخْرَجًا\n(And whosoever has Taqwa of Allah, He will make a way for him to get out.) \"meaning, from every doubt and the horrors experienced at the time of death,\nوَيَرْزُقْهُ مِنْ حَيْثُ لَا يَحْتَسِبُ ۚ\n(And He will provide him from where he never could imagine) from where he never thought of or anticipated.\" Allah said,\nوَمَنْ يَتَوَكَّلْ عَلَى اللَّهِ فَهُوَ حَسْبُهُ ۚ\n(And whosoever puts his trust in Allah, then He will suffice him.)\nImam Ahmad recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said that he rode the Prophet's camel while sitting behind the Prophet , and the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said to him,\nيَا غُلَامُ! إِنِّي مُعَلِّمُكَ كَلِمَاتٍ: احْفَظِ اللهَ يَحْفَظْكَ، احْفَظِ اللهَ تَجِدْهُ تُجَاهَكَ، وَإِذَا سَأَلْتَ فَاسْأَلِ اللهَ، وَإِذَا اسْتَعَنْتَ فَاسْتَعِنْ بِاللهِ، وَاعْلَمْ أَنَّ الْأُمَّةَ لَوِ اجْتَمَعُوا عَلَى أَنْ يَنْفَعُوكَ لَمْ يَنْفَعُوكَ إِلَّا بِشَيْءٍ قَدْ كَتَبَهُ اللهُ لَكَ، وَلَوِ اجْتَمَعُوا عَلَى أَنْ يَضُرُّوكَ لَمْ يَضُرُّوكَ إِلَّا بِشَيْءٍ قَدْ كَتَبَهُ اللهُ عَلَيْكَ، رُفِعَتِ الْأَقْلَامُ وَجَفَّتِ الصُّحُفُ\n(O boy! I will teach you words [so learn them]. Be mindful of Allah and He will protect you, be mindful of Allah and He will be on your side. If you ask, ask Allah, and if you seek help, seek it from Allah. Know that if the Ummah gather their strength to bring you benefit, they will never bring you benefit, except that which Allah has decreed for you. Know that if they gather their strength to harm you, they will never harm you, except with that which Allah has decreed against you. The pens have been raised and the pages are dry.) At-Tirmidhi collected this Hadith and said: \"Hasan Sahih.\" Allah's statement,\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ بَالِغُ أَمْرِهِ ۚ\n(Verily, Allah will accomplish his purpose.) meaning, Allah will execute His decisions and judgement that He made for him, in whatever way He wills and chooses,\nقَدْ جَعَلَ اللَّهُ لِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدْرًا\n(Indeed Allah has set a measure for all things.) This is like His saying:\nوَكُلُّ شَيْءٍ عِنْدَهُ بِمِقْدَارٍ\n(Everything with Him is in (due) proportion.)(13:8)","href":"/tafsir/65?verse=2","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:65:4","title":"Ibn Kathir · 65:4–5","text":"Those in menopause among your women, for them the 'Iddah, if you have doubt, is three months; and for those who have no courses. And for those who are pregnant, their 'Iddah is until they lay down their burden; and whosoever has Taqwa of Allah, He will make his matter easy for him (4)That is the command of Allah, which He has sent down to you; and whosoever has Taqwa of Allah, He will expiate from him his sins, and will increase his reward (5)\nThe 'Iddah of Those in Menopause and Those Who do not have Menses\nAllah the Exalted clarifies the waiting period of the woman in menopause. And that is the one whose menstruation has stopped due to her older age. Her 'Iddah is three months instead of the three monthly cycles for those who menstruate, which is based upon the Ayah in (Surat) Al-Baqarah. [see 2:228]\nThe same for the young, who have not reached the years of menstruation. Their 'Iddah is three months like those in menopause. This is the meaning of His saying;\nوَاللَّائِي لَمْ يَحِضْنَ\n(and for those who have no courses...) as for His saying;\nإِنِ ارْتَبْتُمْ\n(if you have doubt...) There are two opinions: First, is the saying of a group of the Salaf, like Mujahid, Az-Zuhri and Ibn Zayd. That is, if they see blood and there is doubt if it was menstrual blood or not. The second, is that if you do not know the ruling in this case, then know that their 'Iddah is three months. This has been reported from Sa'id bin Jubayr and it is the view preferred by Ibn Jarir. And this is the more obvious meaning.\nSupporting this view is what is reported from Ubay bin Ka'b that he said, \"O Allah's Messenger! Some women were not mentioned in the Qur'an, the young, the old and the pregnant.\" Allah the Exalted and Most Honored sent down this Ayah,\nوَاللَّائِي يَئِسْنَ مِنَ الْمَحِيضِ مِنْ نِسَائِكُمْ إِنِ ارْتَبْتُمْ فَعِدَّتُهُنَّ ثَلَاثَةُ أَشْهُرٍ وَاللَّائِي لَمْ يَحِضْنَ ۚ وَأُولَاتُ الْأَحْمَالِ أَجَلُهُنَّ أَنْ يَضَعْنَ حَمْلَهُنَّ ۚ\n(Those in menopause among your women, for them the 'Iddah, if you have doubt, is three months; and for those who have no courses. And for those who are pregnant, their 'Iddah is until they lay down their burden.)\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded a simpler narration than this one from Ubay bin Ka'b who said, \"O Allah's Messenger! When the Ayah in Surat Al-Baqarah was revealed prescribing the 'Iddah of divorce, some people in Al-Madinah said, 'There are still some women whose 'Iddah has not been mentioned in the Qur'an. There are the young, the old whose menstruation is discontinued, and the pregnant.' Later on, this Ayah was revealed,\nوَاللَّائِي يَئِسْنَ مِنَ الْمَحِيضِ مِنْ نِسَائِكُمْ إِنِ ارْتَبْتُمْ فَعِدَّتُهُنَّ ثَلَاثَةُ أَشْهُرٍ وَاللَّائِي لَمْ يَحِضْنَ ۚ\n(Those in menopause among your women, for them the 'Iddah, if you have doubt, is three months; and for those who have no courses.)\"\nIddah of Pregnant Women\nAllah's statement,\nوَأُولَاتُ الْأَحْمَالِ أَجَلُهُنَّ أَنْ يَضَعْنَ حَمْلَهُنَّ ۚ\n(And for those who are pregnant, their 'Iddah is until they lay down their burden;)\nAllah says: the pregnant woman's 'Iddah ends when she gives birth, whether in the case of divorce or death of the husband, according to the agreement of the majority of scholars of the Salaf and later generations. This is based upon this honorable Ayah and what is mentioned in the Prophetic Sunnah.\nAl-Bukhari recorded that Abu Salamah said, \"A man came to Ibn 'Abbas while Abu Hurayrah was sitting with him and said, 'Give me your verdict regarding a lady who delivered a baby forty days after the death of her husband.' Ibn 'Abbas said,' [Her 'Iddah period lasts until] the end of the longest among the two prescribed periods.' I recited,\nوَأُولَاتُ الْأَحْمَالِ أَجَلُهُنَّ أَنْ يَضَعْنَ حَمْلَهُنَّ ۚ\n(For those who are pregnant, their prescribed period is until they deliver their burdens;)\nAbu Hurayrah said, 'I agree with my cousin (Abu Salamah).' Then Ibn 'Abbas sent his slave Kurayb to Umm Salamah to ask her. She replied, 'The husband of Subay'ah Al-Aslamiyyah was killed while she was pregnant, and she delivered a baby forty days after his death. Then she received a marriage proposal and Allah's Messenger ﷺ married her to somebody. Abu As-Sanabil was one of those who proposed to her.\" Al-Bukhari collected this short form of the Hadith, which Muslim and other scholars of Hadith collected using its longer form.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Al-Miswar bin Makhramah said, \"Subay'ah Al-Aslamiyyah gave birth to a child a few days after the death of her husband. When she finished the postdelivery term, she was proposed to. So she sought the permission of Allah's Messenger ﷺ for the marriage, and he permitted her to marry, so she got married.\" Al-Bukhari collected this narration, as did Muslim, Abu Dawud, An-Nasa'i and Ibn Majah with a different chain of narration from the Hadith of Subay'ah.\nMuslim bin Al-Hajjaj recorded that 'Ubaydullah bin 'Abdullah bin 'Utbah said that his father wrote to 'Umar bin 'Abdullah bin Al-Arqam Az-Zuhri, requesting that he go to Subay'ah bint Al-Harith Al-Aslamiyyah to ask her about the matter in question, and about what Allah's Messenger ﷺ said to her when she sought his verdict.\nUmar bin 'Abdullah wrote to 'Ubaydullah bin 'Abdullah bin 'Utbah informing him that Subay'ah told him that she had been married to Sa'd bin Khawlah, and he was one of those who participated in the battle of Badr. He died during the Farewell Pilgrimage, while she was pregnant.\nSoon after his death, she gave birth. When she passed the postnatal term, she beautified herself for those who might propose to her. Abu As-Sanabil bin Ba'kak came to her and said, 'Why do I see you have beautified yourself? Do you wish to remarry? By Allah, you cannot marry unless four months and ten days have passed.\"\nSubay'ah said, \"When he said that, I dressed myself in the evening and went to Allah's Messenger ﷺ and asked him about his verdict. He gave me a religious verdict that I was allowed to marry after I had given birth to my child, saying I could marry if I wish.\" This is the narration that Muslim collected. Al-Bukhari collected this Hadith in a shorter form.\nAllah's statement,\nوَمَنْ يَتَّقِ اللَّهَ يَجْعَلْ لَهُ مِنْ أَمْرِهِ يُسْرًا\n(and whosoever has Taqwa of Allah, He will make his matter easy for him.) means, Allah will make his matters lenient for him and will soon bring forth relief and a quick way out,\nذَٰلِكَ أَمْرُ اللَّهِ أَنْزَلَهُ إِلَيْكُمْ ۚ\n(That is the command of Allah, which He has sent down to you;) meaning, this is His commandment and legislation that He sent down to you through His Messenger ﷺ,\nوَمَنْ يَتَّقِ اللَّهَ يُكَفِّرْ عَنْهُ سَيِّئَاتِهِ وَيُعْظِمْ لَهُ أَجْرًا\n(and whosoever has Taqwa of Allah, He will expiate from him his sins, and will increase his reward.) means, Allah will prevent what he fears and multiply his reward even for the little good he does.","href":"/tafsir/65?verse=4","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:65:6","title":"Ibn Kathir · 65:6–7","text":"Lodge them where you dwell, according to what you have, and do not harm them so as to suppress them. And if they are pregnant, then spend on them till they lay down their burden. Then if they suckle the children for you, give them their due payment, and let each of you deal with each other in a mannerly way. But if you make difficulties for one another, then some other woman may suckle for him (6)Let the rich man spend according to his means; and the man whose resources are restricted, let him spend according to what Allah has given him. Allah puts no burden on any person beyond what He has given him. Allah will grant after hardship, ease (7)\nThe Divorced Woman has the Right to Decent Accommodations, and what is Reasonable\nAllah the Exalted orders His faithful servants that when one of them divorces his wife, he should provide housing for her until the end of her 'Iddah period,\nأَسْكِنُوهُنَّ مِنْ حَيْثُ سَكَنْتُمْ\n(Lodge them where you dwell,) means, with you,\nمِنْ وُجْدِكُمْ\n(according to what you have,) Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid and several others said, it refers to \"Your ability.\" Qatadah said, \"If you can only afford to accommodate her in a corner of your house, then do so.\"\nForbidding Ill-Treatment of Divorced Women\nAllah's statement,\nوَلَا تُضَارُّوهُنَّ لِتُضَيِّقُوا عَلَيْهِنَّ\n(and do not harm them in order to suppress them.) Muqatil bin Hayyan said, \"meaning, do not annoy her to force her to pay her way out nor expel her from your house.\" Ath-Thawri said from Mansur, from Abu Ad-Duha:\nوَلَا تُضَارُّوهُنَّ لِتُضَيِّقُوا عَلَيْهِنَّ\n(and do not harm them in order to suppress them) \"He divorces her, and when a few days remain, he takes her back.\"\nThe Irrevocable Divorced Pregnant Woman has the Right of Support (Maintenance) from Her Husband until she gives Birth\nAllah said,\nوَإِنْ كُنَّ أُولَاتِ حَمْلٍ فَأَنْفِقُوا عَلَيْهِنَّ حَتَّىٰ يَضَعْنَ حَمْلَهُنَّ ۚ\n(And if they are pregnant, then spend on them till they lay down their burden.) This is about the woman who is irrevocably divorced. If she is pregnant, then she is to be spent on her until she lays down her burden. This is supported due to the fact that if she is revocably divorced, the she has then right to receive her support (maintenance) whether she is pregnant or not.\nThe Divorced Mother may take Compensation for suckling Her Child\nAllah said,\nفَإِنْ أَرْضَعْنَ لَكُمْ\n(Then if they suckle them for you,) meaning, when pregnant women give birth and they are irrevocably divorced by the expiration of the 'Iddah, then at that time they may either suckle the child or not.\nBut that is only after she nourishes him with the milk, that is the early on milk which the infant's well-being depends upon. Then, if she suckles, she has the right to compensation for it. She is allowed to enter into a contract with the father or his representative in return for whatever payment they agree to. This is why Allah the Exalted said,\nفَإِنْ أَرْضَعْنَ لَكُمْ فَآتُوهُنَّ أُجُورَهُنَّ ۖ\n(Then if they suckle the children for you, give them their due payment,) Allah said,\nوَأْتَمِرُوا بَيْنَكُمْ بِمَعْرُوفٍ ۖ\n(and let each of you deal with each other in a mannerly way.) meaning, the affairs of the divorced couple should be managed in a just way without causing harm to either one of them, just as Allah the Exalted said in Surat Al-Baqarah,\nلَا تُضَارَّ وَالِدَةٌ بِوَلَدِهَا وَلَا مَوْلُودٌ لَهُ بِوَلَدِهِ ۚ\n(No mother shall be treated unfairly on account of her child, nor father on account of child.)(2:233) Allah said,\nوَإِنْ تَعَاسَرْتُمْ فَسَتُرْضِعُ لَهُ أُخْرَىٰ\n(But if you make difficulties for one another, then some other woman may suckle for him.) meaning, if the divorced couple disagrees, because the woman asks for an unreasonable fee for suckling their child, and the father refuses to pay the amount or offers an unreasonable amount, he may find another woman to suckle his child. If the mother agrees to accept the amount that was to be paid to the woman who agreed to suckle the child, then she has more right to suckle her own child. Allah's statement,\nلِيُنْفِقْ ذُو سَعَةٍ مِنْ سَعَتِهِ ۖ\n(Let the rich man spend according to his means;) means, the wealthy father or his representative should spend on the child according to his means,\nوَمَنْ قُدِرَ عَلَيْهِ رِزْقُهُ فَلْيُنْفِقْ مِمَّا آتَاهُ اللَّهُ ۚ لَا يُكَلِّفُ اللَّهُ نَفْسًا إِلَّا مَا آتَاهَا ۚ\n(and the man whose resources are restricted, let him spend according to what Allah has given him. Allah puts no burden on any person beyond what He has given him.) This is as Allah said,\nلَا يُكَلِّفُ اللَّهُ نَفْسًا إِلَّا وُسْعَهَا ۚ\n(Allah does not burden a person beyond what He can bear.)(2:286)\nA Story of a Woman who had Taqwa\nAllah's statement;\nسَيَجْعَلُ اللَّهُ بَعْدَ عُسْرٍ يُسْرًا\n(Allah will grant after hardship, ease.) This is a sure promise from Him, and indeed, Allah's promises are true and He never breaks them, This is an Allah's saying;\nفَإِنَّ مَعَ الْعُسْرِ يُسْرًا - إِنَّ مَعَ الْعُسْرِ يُسْرًا\n(Verily, along with every hardship is relief. Verily, along with every hardship is relief.)(94:5-6)\nThere is a relevant Hadith that we should mention here. Imam Ahmad recorded that Abu Hurayrah said, \"A man and his wife from an earlier generation were poor. Once when the man came back from a journey, he went to his wife saying to her, while feeling hunger and fatigued, 'Do you have anything to eat?' She said, 'Yes, receive the good news of Allah's provisions.' He again said to her, 'If you have anything to eat, bring it to me.' She said, 'Wait a little longer.' She was awaiting Allah's mercy. When the matter was prolonged, he said to her, 'Get up and bring me whatever you have to eat, because I am real hungry and fatigued.' She said, 'I will. Soon I will open the oven's cover, so do not be hasty.' When he was busy and refrained from insisting for a while, she said to herself, 'I should look in my oven.' So she got up and looked in her oven and found it full of the meat of a lamb, and her mortar and pestle was full of seed grains; it was crushing the seeds on its own. So, she took out what was in the mortar and pestle, after shaking it to remove everything from inside, and also took the meat out that she found in the oven.\"\nAbu Hurayrah added, \"By He in Whose Hand is the life of Abu Al-Qasim (Prophet Muhammad ﷺ)! This is the same statement that Muhammad ﷺ said,\nلَوْ أَخَذَتْ مَا فِي رَحْيَيْهَا وَلَمْ تَنْفُضْهَا (لَطَحَنَتْهَا) إِلىٰ يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ\n(Had she taken out what was in her mortar and not emptied it fully by shaking it, it would have continued crushing the seeds until the Day of Resurrection.)\"","href":"/tafsir/65?verse=6","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:65:8","title":"Ibn Kathir · 65:8–11","text":"And many a town revolted against the command of its Lord and His Messengers; and We called it to a severe account, and We shall punish it with a horrible torment (8)So it tasted the evil result of its affair, and the consequence of its affair was loss (9)Allah has prepared for them a severe torment. So have Taqwa of Allah, O men of understanding, those who believe! Allah has indeed sent down to you a Reminder (10)A Messenger, who recites to you the Ayat of Allah containing clear explanations, that He may take out those who believe and do righteous good deeds, from the darkness to the light. And whosoever believes in Allah and performs righteous deeds, He will admit him into Gardens under which rivers flow, to dwell therein forever. Allah has indeed granted for him an excellent provision (11)\nPunishment for defying Allah's Commandments\nAllah the Exalted threatens those who defy His commands, deny His Messengers and contradict His legislation, by informing them of the end that earlier nations met who did the same,\nوَكَأَيِّنْ مِنْ قَرْيَةٍ عَتَتْ عَنْ أَمْرِ رَبِّهَا وَرُسُلِهِ\n(And many a town revolted against the command of its Lord and His Messengers;) meaning, they rebelled, rejected and arrogantly refused to obey Allah and they would not follow His Messengers,\nفَحَاسَبْنَاهَا حِسَابًا شَدِيدًا وَعَذَّبْنَاهَا عَذَابًا نُكْرًا\n(and We called it to a severe account, and We shall punish it with a horrible torment.) meaning, horrendous and terrifying,\nفَذَاقَتْ وَبَالَ أَمْرِهَا\n(So it tasted the evil result of its affair,) meaning, they tasted the evil consequences of defiance and they regretted their actions when regret does not avail,\nوَكَانَ عَاقِبَةُ أَمْرِهَا خُسْرًا - أَعَدَّ اللَّهُ لَهُمْ عَذَابًا شَدِيدًا ۖ\n(and the consequence of its affair was loss. And Allah has prepared for them a severe torment.) means, in the Hereafter, added to the torment that was sent down on them in this life. Allah the Exalted said, after mentioning what happened to the disbelieving nations,\nفَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ يَا أُولِي الْأَلْبَابِ\n(So have Taqwa of Allah, O men of understanding,) meaning, 'O you who have sound understanding, do not be like them because if you do, you will suffer what they suffered, O people of comprehension,'\nالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا\n(who believe) meaning, in Allah and His Messengers,\nقَدْ أَنْزَلَ اللَّهُ إِلَيْكُمْ ذِكْرًا\n(Allah has indeed sent down to you a Reminder.) meaning, this Qur'an. Allah also said,\nإِنَّا نَحْنُ نَزَّلْنَا الذِّكْرَ وَإِنَّا لَهُ لَحَافِظُونَ\n(Verily, We, it is We Who have sent down the Dhikr and surely, We will preserve it.)(15:9)\nThe Qualities of the Messenger (ﷺ)\nAllah's statement,\nرَسُولًا يَتْلُو عَلَيْكُمْ آيَاتِ اللَّهِ مُبَيِّنَاتٍ\n(A Messenger, who recites to you the Ayat of Allah containing clear explanations,)\nSome said that the Messenger is the subject of what is being sent [as a reminder] because the Messenger is the one that conveys the Dhikr. Ibn Jarir said that what is correct is that the Messenger explains the Dhikr. This is why Allah the Exalted said here,\nرَسُولًا يَتْلُو عَلَيْكُمْ آيَاتِ اللَّهِ مُبَيِّنَاتٍ\n(A Messenger, who recites to you the Ayat of Allah containing clear explanations,) meaning, plain and apparent. The statement of Allah;\nلِيُخْرِجَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ مِنَ الظُّلُمَاتِ إِلَى النُّورِ\n(that He may take out those who believe and do righteous good deeds, from the darkness to the light.) Allah's is like saying;\nكِتَابٌ أَنْزَلْنَاهُ إِلَيْكَ لِتُخْرِجَ النَّاسَ مِنَ الظُّلُمَاتِ إِلَى النُّورِ\n(A Book which We have revealed unto you in order that you might lead mankind out of darkness)(14:1), and,\nاللَّهُ وَلِيُّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا يُخْرِجُهُمْ مِنَ الظُّلُمَاتِ إِلَى النُّورِ ۖ\n(Allah is the Guardian of those who believe. He brings them out from darkness into light.)(2:257) meaning, out of the darkness of disbelief and ignorance into the light of faith and knowledge. Allah the Exalted called the revelation that He has sent down, light, on account of the guidance that it brings. Allah also called it Ruh, in that, it brings life to the hearts,\nوَكَذَٰلِكَ أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْكَ رُوحًا مِنْ أَمْرِنَا ۚ مَا كُنْتَ تَدْرِي مَا الْكِتَابُ وَلَا الْإِيمَانُ وَلَٰكِنْ جَعَلْنَاهُ نُورًا نَهْدِي بِهِ مَنْ نَشَاءُ مِنْ عِبَادِنَا ۚ وَإِنَّكَ لَتَهْدِي إِلَىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ\n(And thus We have sent to you Ruh of our command. You knew not what is the book, nor what is faith? But We have made it a light wherewith we guide whosoever of Our servants We will. And verily, you are indeed guiding to the straight path.)(42:52) Allah's statement,\nوَمَنْ يُؤْمِنْ بِاللَّهِ وَيَعْمَلْ صَالِحًا يُدْخِلْهُ جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا أَبَدًا ۖ قَدْ أَحْسَنَ اللَّهُ لَهُ رِزْقًا\n(And whosoever believes in Allah and performs righteous good deeds, He will admit him into Gardens under which rivers flow, to dwell therein forever. Allah has indeed granted for him an excellent provision.) was explained several times before, and therefore, we do not need to repeat its explanation here. All the thanks and praises are due to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/65?verse=8","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:65:12","title":"Ibn Kathir · 65:12","text":"It is Allah Who has created seven heavens and of the earth the like thereof. His command descends between them, that you may know that Allah has power over all things, and that Allah surrounds all things with (His) knowledge (12)\nAllah's Perfect Power\nAllah the Exalted asserts His perfect power and infinite greatness, so that the great religion that He has legislated is honored and implemented,\nاللَّهُ الَّذِي خَلَقَ سَبْعَ سَمَاوَاتٍ\n(It is Allah Who has created seven heavens) Allah said in similar Ayat, like what Prophet Nuh said to his people,\nأَلَمْ تَرَوْا كَيْفَ خَلَقَ اللَّهُ سَبْعَ سَمَاوَاتٍ طِبَاقًا\n(See you not how Allah has created the seven heavens one above another?)(71:15), and,\nتُسَبِّحُ لَهُ السَّمَاوَاتُ السَّبْعُ وَالْأَرْضُ وَمَنْ فِيهِنَّ ۚ\n(The seven heavens and the earth and all that is therein, glorify him.)(17:44) Allah's statement,\nوَمِنَ الْأَرْضِ مِثْلَهُنَّ\n(and of the earth the like thereof.) means, He created seven earths. In the Two Sahihs, there is a Hadith that states,\nمَنْ ظَلَمَ قِيدَ شِبْرٍ مِنَ الْأَرْضِ طُوِّقَهُ مِنْ سَبْعِ أَرَضِينَ\n(Whoever usurps the land of somebody unjustly, even if it was a mere hand span, then his neck will be encircled with it down to the seven earths.) And in Sahih Al-Bukhari the wording is:\nخُسِفَ بِهِ إِلَى سَبْعِ أَرَضِينَ\n(...he will sink down to the seven earths.) In the beginning of my book, Al-Bidayah wan-Nihayah, I mentioned the various narrations for this Hadith when I narrated the story of the creation of the earth. All the thanks and praise is due to Allah.\nThose who explained this Hadith to mean the seven continents have brought an implausible explanation that contradicts the letter of the Qur'an and the Hadith without having proof.\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat At-Talaq, all the thanks and praise is due to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/65?verse=12","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:66:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 66:1–5","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\n(In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nيَا أَيُّهَا النَّبِيُّ لِمَ تُحَرِّمُ مَا أَحَلَّ اللَّهُ لَكَ ۖ تَبْتَغِي مَرْضَاتَ أَزْوَاجِكَ ۚ وَاللَّهُ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ - قَدْ فَرَضَ اللَّهُ لَكُمْ تَحِلَّةَ أَيْمَانِكُمْ ۚ وَاللَّهُ مَوْلَاكُمْ ۖ وَهُوَ الْعَلِيمُ الْحَكِيمُ - وَإِذْ أَسَرَّ النَّبِيُّ إِلَىٰ بَعْضِ أَزْوَاجِهِ حَدِيثًا فَلَمَّا نَبَّأَتْ بِهِ وَأَظْهَرَهُ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِ عَرَّفَ بَعْضَهُ وَأَعْرَضَ عَنْ بَعْضٍ ۖ فَلَمَّا نَبَّأَهَا بِهِ قَالَتْ مَنْ أَنْبَأَكَ هَٰذَا ۖ قَالَ نَبَّأَنِيَ الْعَلِيمُ الْخَبِيرُ - إِنْ تَتُوبَا إِلَى اللَّهِ فَقَدْ صَغَتْ قُلُوبُكُمَا ۖ وَإِنْ تَظَاهَرَا عَلَيْهِ فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ هُوَ مَوْلَاهُ وَجِبْرِيلُ وَصَالِحُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ ۖ وَالْمَلَائِكَةُ بَعْدَ ذَٰلِكَ ظَهِيرٌ - عَسَىٰ رَبُّهُ إِنْ طَلَّقَكُنَّ أَنْ يُبْدِلَهُ أَزْوَاجًا خَيْرًا مِنْكُنَّ مُسْلِمَاتٍ مُؤْمِنَاتٍ قَانِتَاتٍ تَائِبَاتٍ عَابِدَاتٍ سَائِحَاتٍ ثَيِّبَاتٍ وَأَبْكَارًا\n(1. O Prophet! Why do you forbid that which Allah has allowed to you, seeking to please your wives? And Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.)(2. Allah has already ordained for you (O men) the absolution from your oaths. And Allah is your Protector and He is the All-Knower, the All-Wise.)(3. And (remember) when the Prophet disclosed a matter in confidence to one of his wives, then she told it. And Allah made it known to him; he informed part thereof and left a part. Then when he told her thereof, she said: \"Who told you this?\" He said: \"The All-Knower, the All-Aware has told me.\")(4. If you two turn in repentance to Allah, your hearts are indeed so inclined; but if you help one another against him, then verily, Allah is his Protector, and Jibril, and the righteous among the believers; and after that the angels are his helpers.)(5. Maybe his Lord, if he divorces you, will give him instead of you, wives better than you - submitting, believers, obedient, turning to Allah in repentance, worshipping Allah sincerely, Sā'iḥāt, previously married, and virgins.)\nAllah censures His Prophet (ﷺ) for Prohibiting Himself from what He has allowed for Him\nIn the Book of Vows, Al-Bukhari recorded that 'Ubayd bin 'Umayr said that he heard 'A'ishah claiming that Allah's Messenger ﷺ used to stay for a period in the house of Zaynab bint Jahsh and drink honey in her house. (She said) \"Hafsah and I decided that when the Prophet ﷺ entered upon either of us, we would say, 'I smell Maghafir on you. Have you eaten Maghafir?' When he entered upon one of us, she said that to him. He replied (to her),\nلَا، بَلْ شَرِبْتُ عَسَلًا عِنْدَ زَيْنَبَ بِنْتِ جَحْشٍ وَلَنْ أَعُودَ لَهُ\n(No, but I drank honey in the house of Zaynab bint Jahsh, and I will never drink it again.)\" Then the following was revealed;\nيَا أَيُّهَا النَّبِيُّ لِمَ تُحَرِّمُ مَا أَحَلَّ اللَّهُ لَكَ ۖ\n(O Prophet! Why do you fobid that which Allah has allowed to you?) up to,\nإِنْ تَتُوبَا إِلَى اللَّهِ فَقَدْ صَغَتْ قُلُوبُكُمَا ۖ\n(If you both turn in repentance to Allah, your hearts are indeed so inclined;) in reference to 'A'ishah and Hafsah.\nوَإِذْ أَسَرَّ النَّبِيُّ إِلَىٰ بَعْضِ أَزْوَاجِهِ حَدِيثًا\n(And (remember) when the Prophet disclosed a matter in confidence to one of his wives,) which refers to this saying,\nبَلْ شَرِبْتُ عَسَلًا\n(But I have drunk honey.) Ibrahim bin Musa said that Hisham said that it also meant his saying,\nوَلَنْ أَعُودَ لَهُ وَقَدْ حَلَفْتُ فَلَا تُخْبِرِي بِذَلِكِ أَحَدًا\n(I will not drink it anymore, I have taken an oath to that. Therefore, do not inform anybody about it.)\nAl-Bukhari also recorded this Hadith in the Book of Divorce; then he said, \"Al-Maghafir is a type of sap, and in Ar-Rimth (a type of citrus) its taste is sweet...\"\nAl-Jawhari said, \"The 'Urfut is a tree of the shrub variety, which secretes Maghfur.\"\nMuslim collected this Hadith from 'A'ishah in the Book of Divorce in his Sahih, and his wording is the same as Al-Bukhari in the Book of Vows.\nIn the Book of Divorce, Al-Bukhari recorded that 'A'ishah said, \"Allah's Messenger ﷺ liked sweets and honey. After performing the 'Asr prayer, he used to visit his wives, going close to them. So he went to Hafsah, daughter of 'Umar, and stayed with her more than his usual stay. I ('A'ishah) became jealous and asked about that. It was said to me, 'A woman of her family sent her a small vessel of honey as a gift, and she gave a drink to Allah's Messenger made from it.' I said, 'By Allah, we will contrive a plot against him.' I said to Sawdah bint Zam'ah, 'When the Messenger visits you and draws close to you, say to him, 'Have you eaten Maghafir?' And when he says to you, 'No', then ask him, 'What is this odor?' He will say to you, 'Hafsah has given me a drink of honey.' Then you should say to him, 'The honeybees might have eaten from Urfut, and I will also say the same to him. Safiyyah, you should also say this.' Sawdah later said, 'It was under compulsion that I had decided to state that which you told me; soon, by Allah, he was standing at my door.' So when Allah's Messenger ﷺ came near her, she said, 'O Messenger of Allah! Did you eat Maghafir?' He said, 'No.' She again said, 'Then what is this odor?' He said,\nسَقَتْنِي حَفْصَةُ شَرْبَةَ عَسَلٍ\n(Hafsah gave me honey to drink.) She said, 'The honeybees might have eaten from 'Urfut.')\"\nA'ishah continued, \"When he came to me I said the same to him. He then visited Safiyyah and she also said similar to him. When he again visited Hafsah, she said, 'O Messenger of Allah, should I not give you that (drink)?' He said,\nلَا حَاجَةَ لِي فِيهِ\n(I do not need it.) Sawdah said, 'By Allah! We have prevented him from drinking honey.' I said to her, 'Keep quiet!'\" Muslim also recorded this Hadith, but this wording is from Al-Bukhari.\nIn the narration of Muslim, 'A'ishah said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to hate to have a bad odor coming from him.\" This is why they suggested to him that he ate Maghafir, because it causes a bad odor. When he said,\nبَلْ شَرِبْتُ عَسَلًا\n(No, I had some honey.) They said that the bees ate from a tree that is called Al-'Urfut, which has Maghafir gum, suggesting that this is the reason behind the bad odor they claimed was coming from him.\nThe latter narration, collected through 'Urwah from 'A'ishah, mentions that it was Hafsah who gave the Prophet ﷺ the honey.\nIn another narration collected from 'Ubayd bin 'Umayr, from 'A'ishah, it was Zaynab bint Jahsh who gave the honey to the Prophet ﷺ, while 'A'ishah and Hafsah were the plotters. Allah knows best. Some might say that they were two separate incidents. However, it is not likely that the Ayat were revealed about both incidents, if indeed they were two separate incidents. Allah knows best. A Hadith that Imam Ahmad collected in the Musnad mentions that 'A'ishah and Hafsah were the plotters. Imam Ahmad recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"I was eager to ask 'Umar about the two ladies among the wives of the Prophet ﷺ, about whom Allah said,\nإِنْ تَتُوبَا إِلَى اللَّهِ فَقَدْ صَغَتْ قُلُوبُكُمَا ۖ\n(If you two turn in repentance to Allah your hearts are indeed so inclined;) Then I performed Hajj along with 'Umar, and on our way back from Hajj he went aside (to relieve himself). I also went aside along with him carrying a tumbler of water. When he finished and returned, I poured water on his hands from the tumbler and he performed ablution. I said, 'O Commander of the faithful! Who were the two ladies among the wives of the Prophet ﷺ, to whom Allah said,\nإِنْ تَتُوبَا إِلَى اللَّهِ فَقَدْ صَغَتْ قُلُوبُكُمَا ۖ\n(If you two turn in repentance to Allah your hearts are indeed so inclined)?'\n‘Umar said, ‘I am astonished at your question, O Ibn ‘Abbas.''' - Az-Zuhri (a subnarrator) said that ‘Umar did not like the question, but he still answered it, saying that they were ‘A'ishah and Hafsah.\n\"Then ‘Umar went on relating the story and said, ‘We, the people of Quraysh, used to have authority over our women. But when we came to live with the Ansar, we noticed that the Ansari women had the upper hand over their men, so our women started acquiring the habits of the Ansari women. At that time, I was residing at the house of Umayyah bin Zayd, in Al-’Awali. Once I got angry with my wife, and she talked back to me; I disliked her answering me back. She said, ‘Why do you dislike me talking back to you? By Allah, the wives of the Prophet ﷺ talk back to him, and some of them may not speak with him for the whole day, until nightfall.'\nThen I went to Hafsah and asked her, ‘Do you talk back to Allah's Messenger?' She said, ‘Yes.' I asked, ‘Does any of you keep Allah's Messenger angry all day long, until night?' She replied, ‘Yes.' I said, ‘Whoever among you does this is a ruined, losing person! Doesn't she fear that Allah may get angry for the anger of His Messenger and, thus, she will be ruined? Don't ask Allah's Messenger too many things, and don't retort him in any case. Demand from me whatever you like, and don't be tempted to imitate your neighbor, for she is more beautiful than you, and more beloved to Allah's Messenger than you.' He meant ‘A'ishah.\nI, and an Ansari neighbor of mine used to visit the Prophet ﷺ in turns. He used to go one day, and I another day. When I went I would bring him the news of what had happened that day regarding the revelation and when he went, he used to do the same for me.\nIn those days it was rumored that the Ghassan (tribe) were preparing their horses to invade us. My companion went and returned to us at night and knocked at my door. I came out to him. He said that a grave thing happened. I asked him, ‘What is it? Have Ghassan come?' He replied that it was worse and more serious than that, adding that Allah's Messenger ﷺ had divorced all his wives. I said, ‘Hafsah is a ruined loser! I expected that would happen some day.'\nSo I dressed myself and I performed the Subh prayer. I went to Hafsah and found her weeping. I asked her, ‘Has Allah's Messenger divorced all of you?' She replied, ‘I don't know. He is there alone in the upper room.' I went to the upper room and asked a black slave of the Prophet ﷺ to ask for his permission to see me, and the boy went in and then came out saying, ‘I mentioned you to him and he remained silent.' I then went out and came to the Minbar and found a group of people around it and some of them were weeping.\nI sat with them for some time, but could not endure the situation. So, I requested to the boy, ‘Will you get the permission for ‘Umar?' He went in and then came out saying, ‘I mentioned you to him, but he did not reply.' So, I went to Minbar and sat with the people who were sitting by the Minbar, but I could not bear the situation, so I went to the boy again and said, ‘Will you get the permission for ‘Umar?' He went in and brought the same reply as before. When I was leaving, behold, he called me saying, ‘Allah's Messenger has granted you permission.' So, I entered the Prophet's room, greeted him with the Salam and saw him lying on a mat without bedding on it, and the mat had left its mark on the body of the Prophet ﷺ.\nI said, ‘Have you divorced your wives, O Allah's Messenger?' He raised his eyes to me and replied no. I said, ‘Allahu Akbar. O Allah's Messenger! We, the people of Quraysh used to have the upper hand over our women. But when we came to Al-Madinah, we found a people whose women had the upper hand over them. Our women started learning this behavior from them. Once, I got angry with my wife, and she talked back to me. I disliked that behavior from her and she said, ‘Why do you dislike that I talk back to you? By Allah, the Prophet's wives talk back to him and one of them would ignore him the whole day, until the night.' I said to her, ‘Whoever does this among them is the ruined loser! Does she feel safe from Allah getting angry with her on account of His Messenger's anger? In that case, she would be ruined.' On that the Prophet ﷺ smiled.\nI then said, ‘O Allah's Messenger! I went to Hafsah and said to her, ‘Do not be tempted to imitate your companion (‘A'ishah) for she is more beautiful than you and more beloved to the Prophet.' The Prophet ﷺ smiled again. When I saw him smiling, I said, ‘Does the Messenger feel calm?' He said, ‘Yes.' So, I sat down and cast a glance at the room, and by Allah, I couldn't see anything of importance, except three hides. I said, ‘Invoke Allah, O Allah's Messenger, to make your followers prosperous, for the Persians and the Byzantines have been made prosperous and given worldly luxuries, even though they do not worship Allah.' The Prophet ﷺ sat upright and said,\nأَفِي شَكٍّ أَنْتَ يَا ابْنَ الْخَطَّابِ! أُولَئِكَ قَوْمٌ عُجِّلَتْ لَهُمْ طَيِّبَاتُهُمْ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا\n(O Ibn Al-Khattab! Do you have any doubt? These people have been given rewards of their good deeds in this world only.)\nI asked the Prophet ﷺ, 'Please beg Allah's forgiveness for me, O Allah's Messenger.' The Prophet ﷺ swore that he would not go to his wives for one month, because of his severe anger towards them, until Allah the Exalted and Most Honored censured him.\" Al-Bukhari, Muslim, At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa'i also collected this Hadith using various chains of narration. Al-Bukhari and Muslim also collected it from Ibn 'Abbas, who said, \"For a whole year, I was eager to ask 'Umar bin Al-Khattab about an Ayah. However, I hesitated out of respect for him. Once, he went on a Hajj trip and I accompanied him. On our way back, he stopped to relieve himself behind some trees of Arak. I stopped until he finished and then walked along with him and asked him, 'O Leader of the believers! Who are the two women who helped each other (or plotted) against the Prophet ﷺ?'\" This is the narration that Al-Bukhari collected, while Muslim recorded that Ibn 'Abbas asked, \"Who are the two women about whom Allah the Exalted said,\nوَإِنْ تَظَاهَرَا عَلَيْهِ\n(but if you help one another against him,)?\" 'Umar replied, \"A'ishah and Hafsah.\" Muslim mentioned the rest of the Hadith.\nMuslim also recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said that 'Umar bin Al-Khattab said to him, \"When Allah's Messenger ﷺ stayed away from his wives, I entered the Masjid and found people striking the ground with pebbles. They said, 'Allah's Messenger has divorced his wives.' That occurred before Hijab was commanded. I said to myself, 'I must investigate this news today.'\"\nSo he mentioned the Hadith in which he went to 'A'ishah and Hafsah and admonished them. He then said, 'I went in and found Rabah, the servant of Allah's Messenger ﷺ, sitting on a window sill. I called, 'O Rabah, seek permission for me from Allah's Messenger.'\"\nHe then mentioned the story as we mentioned above. 'Umar continued, \"I said, 'O Messenger of Allah, what trouble do you feel from your wives? If you have divorced them, verily Allah is with you, His angels, Jibril, Mikal, I, Abu Bakr and the rest of believers are with you.'\nOften, when I talked, all praise is due to Allah, I hoped that Allah would testify to the words that I uttered. And so the Ayat of option was revealed. Allah said,\nعَسَىٰ رَبُّهُ إِنْ طَلَّقَكُنَّ أَنْ يُبْدِلَهُ أَزْوَاجًا خَيْرًا مِنْكُنَّ\n(Maybe his Lord, if he divorces you, will give him in your place wives better than you,) and,\nوَإِنْ تَظَاهَرَا عَلَيْهِ فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ هُوَ مَوْلَاهُ وَجِبْرِيلُ وَصَالِحُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ ۖ وَالْمَلَائِكَةُ بَعْدَ ذَٰلِكَ ظَهِيرٌ\n(but if you help one another against him, then verily, Allah is his Protector, and Jibril, and the righteous among the believers; and after that the angels are his helpers.)\nI said, 'Messenger of Allah, have you divorced them?' He said, 'No.' I stood at the door of the Masjid and called out at the top of my voice, 'The Messenger of Allah has not divorced his wives.' It was on this occasion that this Ayah was revealed,\nوَإِذَا جَاءَهُمْ أَمْرٌ مِنَ الْأَمْنِ أَوِ الْخَوْفِ أَذَاعُوا بِهِ ۖ وَلَوْ رَدُّوهُ إِلَى الرَّسُولِ وَإِلَىٰ أُولِي الْأَمْرِ مِنْهُمْ لَعَلِمَهُ الَّذِينَ يَسْتَنْبِطُونَهُ مِنْهُمْ ۗ\n(When any matter pertaining to peace or alarm comes to them, they broadcast it; whereas, if they would refer it to the Messenger and those who have been entrusted with authority among them, those of them who are engaged in obtaining intelligence would indeed know (what to do with) it.)(4:83)\nIt was I who understood (and properly investigated) this matter.\"\nSimilar was said by Sa'id bin Jubayr, 'Ikrimah, Muqatil bin Hayyan, Ad-Dahhak and others. The Ayah,\nوَصَالِحُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ\n(and the righteous among the believers;) refers to Abu Bakr and 'Umar. Al-Hasan Al-Basri added 'Uthman to them. Layth bin Abi Sulaym said from Mujahid:\nوَصَالِحُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ\n(and the righteous among the believers;) includes 'Ali bin Abi Talib also.\nAl-Bukhari recorded that Anas said, \"'Umar said, 'The wives of the Prophet ﷺ were all jealous for his affection, and I said to them,\nعَسَىٰ رَبُّهُ إِنْ طَلَّقَكُنَّ أَنْ يُبْدِلَهُ أَزْوَاجًا خَيْرًا مِنْكُنَّ\n(Maybe his Lord, if he divorces you, will give him instead of you, wives better than you.)\nThereafter, this Ayah was revealed.'\" We mentioned before that 'Umar said statements that were confirmed by the Qur'an, such as about the revelation about Hijab [see 33:53] and the captive idolators after the battle of Badr [see 8:67]. 'Umar's suggestion to take the Station of Ibrahim as a place for prayer and Allah revealed this Ayah;\nوَاتَّخِذُوا مِنْ مَقَامِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ مُصَلًّى\n(And take you the Maqam (station) of Ibrahim as a place of prayer.)(2:125)\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that Anas said that 'Umar bin Al-Khattab said, \"I heard news that the Mothers of the faithful had a dispute with the Prophet ﷺ. So I advised them, saying, 'Either stop bothering Allah's Messenger or Allah might provide him better wives than you. When I was talking to the last one among the Mothers of the faithful, she said, 'O 'Umar! Is it that the Messenger of Allah cannot advise his wives, so that you interfere between him and them?' I stopped upon hearing this from her, but Allah revealed:\nعَسَىٰ رَبُّهُ إِن طَلَّقَكُنَّ أَن يُبْدِلَهُ أَزْوَاجًا خَيْرًا مِّنكُنَّ مُسْلِمَاتٍ مُّؤْمِنَاتٍ قَانِتَاتٍ تَائِبَاتٍ عَابِدَاتٍ سَائِحَاتٍ ثَيِّبَاتٍ وَأَبْكَارًا\n(Maybe his Lord, if he divorces you, will give him instead of you, wives better than you, Muslims, believers, obedient (to Allah), turning to Allah in repentance, worshipping Allah sincerely, Sā'iḥāt, previously married and virgins.)\nThe wife mentioned here was Umm Salamah, and she is the one who advised 'Umar to stop interfering between the Prophet ﷺ and his wives, as is confirmed in Sahih Al-Bukhari. Allah's statement,\nمُسْلِمَاتٍ مُّؤْمِنَاتٍ قَانِتَاتٍ تَائِبَاتٍ عَابِدَاتٍ\n(Muslims, believers, obedient (to Allah), turning to Allah in repentance, worshipping Allah sincerely) is clear in its implications,while,\nسَائِحَاتٍ\n(Sā'iḥāt) means, fasting, according to Abu Hurayrah, 'A'ishah, Ibn 'Abbas, Ikrimah, Mujahid, Sa'id bin Jubayr, 'Ata', Muhammad bin ka'b Al-Qurazi, Abu Abdur-Rahman As-Sulami, Abu Malik,Ibrahim An-Nakhai, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, As-Suddi, and others.","href":"/tafsir/66?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:66:6","title":"Ibn Kathir · 66:6–8","text":"O you who believe! Protect yourselves and your families against a Fire (Hell) whose fuel is men and stones, over which are (appointed) angels stern (and) severe, who disobey not the commands they receive from Allah, but do that which they are commanded (6)(It will be said in the Hereafter) O you who disbelieve! Make no excuses this Day! You are being requited only for what you used to do (7)O you who believe! Turn to Allah with sincere repentance! It may be that your Lord will expiate from you your sins, and admit you into Gardens under which rivers flow – the Day that Allah will not disgrace the Prophet and those who believe with him. Their light will run forward before them and in their right hands. They will say: \"Our Lord! Keep perfect our light for us and grant us forgiveness. Verily, You are Able to do all things. (8)\nTeaching One's Family the Religion and Good Behavior\nAli bin Abi Talhah reported from Ibn 'Abbas;\nقُوا أَنْفُسَكُمْ وَأَهْلِيكُمْ نَارًا\n(Protect yourselves and your families against a Fire (Hell))\nHe said, \"Work in the obedience of Allah, avoid disobedience of Allah and order your families to remember Allah, then Allah will save you from the Fire.\" Mujahid also commented on:\nقُوا أَنْفُسَكُمْ وَأَهْلِيكُمْ نَارًا\n(Protect yourselves and your families against a Fire (Hell)) saying, \"Have Taqwa of Allah and order your family to have Taqwa of Him.\" Qatadah said, \"He commands obedience to Allah, to not disobey Allah, he orders his family to obey His orders and helps them to act upon His orders. When one sees disobedience, he stops them and forbids them from doing it.\" Similar was said by Ad-Dahhak and Muqatil; \"It is an obligation for the Muslim to teach his near family members, and his male and female slaves what Allah has made obligatory for them and what Allah has forbidden for them.\"\nThere is a Hadith that confirms the meaning of this Ayah. Ahmad, Abu Dawud and At-Tirmidhi recorded that Ar-Rabi' bin Sabrah said that his father said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمُرُوا الصَّبِيَّ بِالصَّلَاةِ إِذَا بَلَغَ سَبْعَ سِنِينَ، فَإِذَا بَلَغَ عَشْرَ سِنِينَ فَاضْرِبُوهُ عَلَيْهَا\n(Order the children to pray when they reach the age of seven and when they reach the age of ten, discipline them for (not performing) it.) This is the narration that Abu Dawud collected; At-Tirmidhi said, \"This Hadith is Hasan.\"\nFuel for Hell and a Description of its Angels\nAllah said,\nوَقُودُهَا النَّاسُ وَالْحِجَارَةُ\n(whose fuel is men and stones,) indicating that the Children of Adam will be fuel for the Fire that will feed it,\nوَالْحِجَارَةُ\n(and stones) in reference to the idols that were worshipped, just as Allah said in another Ayah,\nإِنَّكُمْ وَمَا تَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ حَصَبُ جَهَنَّمَ\n(Certainly you and that which you are worshipping now besides Allah, are (but) fuel for Hell!)(21:98)\nAbdullah bin Mas'ud, Mujahid, Abu Ja'far Al-Baqir and As-Suddi said that these are sulfur stones that are more putrid than rotten corpses, according to Mujahid. Allah's statement,\nعَلَيْهَا مَلَائِكَةٌ غِلَاظٌ شِدَادٌ\n(over which are (appointed) angels stern (and) severe,) means, their nature of behavior is stern, because the mercy has been taken out of their hearts for those who disbelieve in Allah,\nشِدَادٌ\n(severe) meaning, their structure is powerful, strong and frightening,\nلَا يَعْصُونَ اللَّهَ مَا أَمَرَهُمْ وَيَفْعَلُونَ مَا يُؤْمَرُونَ\n(who disobey not the commands they receive from Allah, but do that which they are commanded.) meaning, whatever Allah commands them, they rush to obey Him, without delay for even a twinkling of an eye. They are able to fulfill the command; they are called Az-Zabaniyah, meaning, the keepers and guards of Hell, may Allah give us shelter from them.\nNo Excuse will be accepted from the Disbeliever on the Day of Resurrection\nAllah said,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَا تَعْتَذِرُوا الْيَوْمَ ۖ إِنَّمَا تُجْزَوْنَ مَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ\n(O you who disbelieve! Make no excuses this Day! You are being requited only for what you used to do.) meaning, on the Day of Resurrection, the disbeliever will be told, \"Do not offer any excuse this Day, because it will not be accepted from you; you will only be recompensed for what you used to do. Today, you will receive the punishment for your actions.\"\nEncouraging sincere Repentance\nAllah the Exalted said,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا تُوبُوا إِلَى اللَّهِ تَوْبَةً نَصُوحًا\n(O you who believe! Turn to Allah with sincere repentance!) meaning, a true, firm repentance that erases the evil sins that preceded it and mend the shortcoming of the repenting person, encouraging and directing him to quit the evil that he used to do. Allah said,\nعَسَىٰ رَبُّكُمْ أَنْ يُكَفِّرَ عَنْكُمْ سَيِّئَاتِكُمْ وَيُدْخِلَكُمْ جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ\n(It may be that your Lord will expiate from you your sins, and admit you into Gardens under which rivers flow) And when Allah says, \"it may be,\" it means He shall.\nيَوْمَ لَا يُخْزِي اللَّهُ النَّبِيَّ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مَعَهُ\n(the Day that Allah will not disgrace the Prophet and those who believe with him) meaning, on the Day of Resurrection, Allah will not disgrace those who believed in the Prophet ﷺ,\nنُورُهُمْ يَسْعَىٰ بَيْنَ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَبِأَيْمَانِهِمْ\n(Their light will run forward before them and in their right hands.) as we explained in Surat Al-Hadid,\nيَقُولُونَ رَبَّنَا أَتْمِمْ لَنَا نُورَنَا وَاغْفِرْ لَنَا ۖ إِنَّكَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ\n(They will say:\"Our Lord! Keep perfect our light for us and grant us forgiveness. Verily, You are Able to do all things.\")\nMujahid, Ad-Dahhak and Al-Hasan Al-Basri and other said, \"This is the statement that the believers will say on the Day of Resurrection, when they witness the light of the hypocrites being extinguished.\"\nImam Ahmad recorded that a man from the tribe of Banu Kinanah said, \"I prayed behind the Messenger of Allah ﷺ during the year of the Conquest (of Makkah), and heard him say,\nاللّٰهُمَّ لَا تُخْزِنِي يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ\n(O Allah! Please, do not disgrace me on the Day of Resurrection.)\"","href":"/tafsir/66?verse=6","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:66:9","title":"Ibn Kathir · 66:9–10","text":"O Prophet! Strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites, and be severe against them; their abode will be Hell, and worst indeed is that destination (9)Allah sets forth an example for those who disbelieve: the wife of Nuh and the wife of Lut. They were under two of our righteous servants, but they both betrayed them. So, they availed them not against Allah and it was said: \"Enter the Fire along with those who enter! (10)\nThe Command for Jihad against the Disbelievers and the Hypocrites\nAllah the Exalted orders His Messenger ﷺ to perform Jihad against the disbelievers and hypocrites, the former with weapons and armaments and the later by establishing Allah's legislated penal code,\nوَاغْلُظْ عَلَيْهِمْ\n(and be severe against them) meaning, in this life,\nوَمَأْوَاهُمْ جَهَنَّمُ ۖ وَبِئْسَ الْمَصِيرُ\n(their abode will be Hell, and worst indeed is that destination.) that is, in the Hereafter.\nThe Disbeliever shall never benefit from His Believing Relative on the Day of Resurrection\nAllah the exalted said,\nضَرَبَ اللَّهُ مَثَلًا لِلَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا\n(Allah sets forth an example for those who disbelieve) meaning, the disbelievers who live together in this life with Muslims, their mixing and mingling with Muslims will not help the disbelievers, nor will it avail them with Allah, until and unless they gain faith in their hearts. Then Allah mentioned the parable, saying,\nامْرَأَتَ نُوحٍ وَامْرَأَتَ لُوطٍ ۖ كَانَتَا تَحْتَ عَبْدَيْنِ مِنْ عِبَادِنَا صَالِحَيْنِ\n(the wife of Nuh and the wife of Lut. They were under two of our righteous servants,) means, they were the wives of two of Allah's Messengers and were their companions by day and night, eating with them and sleeping with them, as much as any marriage contains of interaction between spouses. However,\nفَخَانَتَاهُمَا\n(they both betrayed them.) meaning, in the faith, they did not adhere to the faith sent through their husbands nor accepted their message. Therefore, all the intimate knowledge of their husbands neither helped them nor prevented punishment, hence Allah's statement,\nفَلَمْ يُغْنِيَا عَنْهُمَا مِنَ اللَّهِ شَيْئًا\n(So, they availed them not against Allah) means, because their wives were disbelievers,\nوَقِيلَ\n(and it was said) meaning, to these wives,\nادْخُلَا النَّارَ مَعَ الدَّاخِلِينَ\n(Enter the Fire along with those who enter!) The part of the Ayah that reads,\nفَخَانَتَاهُمَا\n(but they both betrayed them) does not pertain to committing illegal sexual intercourse, but to refusing to accept the religion. Surely, the wives of the Prophets were immune from committing illegal sexual intercourse on account of the honor that Allah has granted His Prophets, as we explained in Surat An-Nur.\nAl-'Awfi reported from Ibn 'Abbas, \"They betrayed them by not following their religion. The wife of Prophet Nuh used to expose his secrets, informing his oppressive people whenever any person embraced the faith with Nuh. As for the wife of Prophet Lut, she used to inform the people of the city (Sodom), who committed the awful sexual act (sodomy), whenever a guest was entertained by her husband.\" Ad-Dahhak reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"No wife of a Prophet ever committed adultery and fornication. Rather, they betrayed them by refusing to follow their religion.\" Similar was said by 'Ikrimah, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Ad-Dahhak and others.","href":"/tafsir/66?verse=9","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:66:11","title":"Ibn Kathir · 66:11–12","text":"And Allah has set forth an example for those who believe: the wife of Fir'awn, when she said: \"My Lord! Build for me a home with You in Paradise, and save me from Fir'awn and his work, and save me from the people who are wrongdoers (11)And Maryam, the daughter of 'Imran who guarded her chastity (private part). And We breathed into it through Our Ruh, and she testified to the truth of her Lords Kalimat, and His Kutub, and she was of the Qanitin (12)\nThe Disbelievers can cause no Harm to the Believers\nThis is a parable that Allah made of the believers, in that, if they needed to, their association with the disbelievers will not harm them. Allah the Exalted said,\nلَا يَتَّخِذِ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ الْكَافِرِينَ أَوْلِيَاءَ مِنْ دُونِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ ۖ وَمَنْ يَفْعَلْ ذَٰلِكَ فَلَيْسَ مِنَ اللَّهِ فِي شَيْءٍ إِلَّا أَنْ تَتَّقُوا مِنْهُمْ تُقَاةً ۗ\n(Let not the believers take the disbelievers as protecting friends instead of the believers, and whoever does that, will never be helped by Allah in any way, except you indeed fear a danger from them.)(3:28)\nQatadah said, \"Fir'awn was the most tyrannical among the people of the earth and the most disbelieving. By Allah! His wife was not affected by her husband's disbelief, because she obeyed her Lord. Therefore, let it be known that Allah is the Just Judge Who will not punish anyone except for their own sins.\"\nIbn Jarir recorded that Sulayman said, \"The wife of Fir'awn was tortured under the sun and when Fir'awn would finish the torture session, the angels would shade her with their wings. She was shown her house in Paradise.\"\nIbn Jarir said that Al-Qasim bin Abi Bazzah said, \"Fir'awn's wife used to ask, 'Who prevailed?' When she was told, 'Musa and Harun prevailed', she said, 'I believe in the Lord of Musa and Harun.' Fir'awn sent his aides to her and said to them, 'Find the biggest stone. If she insists on keeping her faith, throw the stone on her, otherwise she is my wife. When they came to her, she looked up to the sky and was able to see her house in Paradise. She persisted on the faith and her soul was then captured. The stone was thrown on her lifeless body.\" This is the meaning of her statement,\nرَبِّ ابْنِ لِي عِنْدَكَ بَيْتًا فِي الْجَنَّةِ وَنَجِّنِي مِنْ فِرْعَوْنَ وَعَمَلِهِ\n(My Lord! Build for me a home with You in Paradise, and save me from Fir'awn and his work,) means, 'deliver me from him, because I am innocent of his actions,'\nوَنَجِّنِي مِنَ الْقَوْمِ الظَّالِمِينَ\n(and save me from the people who are wrongdoers.) Her name was Asiyah bint Muzahim, may Allah be pleased with her. Allah said,\nوَمَرْيَمَ ابْنَتَ عِمْرَانَ الَّتِي أَحْصَنَتْ فَرْجَهَا\n(And Maryam, the daughter of 'Imran who guarded her chastity (private part).) meaning, who protected and purified her honor, by being chaste and free of immorality,\nفَنَفَخْنَا فِيهِ مِنْ رُوحِنَا\n(And We breathed into it (private part) through Our Ruh,) meaning, through the angel Jibril. Allah sent the angel Jibril to Maryam, and he came to her in the shape of a man in every respect. Allah commanded him to blow into a gap of her garment and that breath went into her womb through her private part; this is how 'Isa was conceived. This is why Allah said here,\nفَنَفَخْنَا فِيهِ مِنْ رُوحِنَا وَصَدَّقَتْ بِكَلِمَاتِ رَبِّهَا وَكُتُبِهِ\n(And We breathed into it through Our Ruh, and she testified to the truth of her Lords Kalimat, and His Kutub,) meaning His decree and His legislation.\nوَكَانَتْ مِنَ الْقَانِتِينَ\n(and she was of the Qanitin.) Imam Ahmad recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ drew four lines on the ground and said,\nأَتَدْرُونَ مَا هَذَا؟\n(Do you know what these lines represent?) They said, 'Allah and His Messenger know best.' He ﷺ said,\nأَفْضَلُ نِسَاءِ أَهْلِ الْجَنَّةِ: خَدِيجَةُ بِنْتُ خُوَيْلِدٍ، وَفَاطِمَةُ بِنْتُ مُحَمَّدٍ، وَمَرْيَمُ ابْنَةُ عِمْرَانَ، وَآسِيَةُ بِنْتُ مُزَاحِمٍ امْرَأَةُ فِرْعَوْنَ\n(The best among the women of Paradise are Khadijah bint Khuwaylid, Fatimah bint Muhammad, Maryam bint 'Imran and Asiyah bint Muzahim, wife of Fir'awn.)\nIt is confirmed in the Two Sahihs from Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nكَمُلَ مِنَ الرِّجَالِ كَثِيرٌ وَلَمْ يَكْمُلْ مِنَ النِّسَاءِ إِلَّا آسِيَةُ امْرَأَةُ فِرْعَوْنَ، وَمَرْيَمُ ابْنَةُ عِمْرَانَ، وَخَدِيجَةُ بِنْتُ خُوَيْلِدٍ، وَإِنَّ فَضْلَ عَائِشَةَ عَلَى النِّسَاءِ كَفَضْلِ الثَّرِيدِ عَلَى سَائِرِ الطَّعَامِ\n(Many men have reached the level of perfection, but none among women have reached this level except Asiyah – Fir'awn's wife, Maryam–the daughter of 'Imran, and Khadijah–the daughter of Khuwaylid. And no doubt, the superiority of 'A'ishah to other women is like the superiority of Tharid to other meals.)\nIn my book, Al-Bidayah wan-Nihayah, I have mentioned these Hadiths using their various chains of narration in relating the story of Prophet 'Isa and his mother Maryam, peace be upon them, all praise be to Allah.\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat At-Tahrim, all thanks and praise are due to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/66?verse=11","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:67:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 67:1–5","text":"The Virtues of Surat Al-Mulk\nImam Ahmad recorded from Abu Hurayrah that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ سُورَةً فِي الْقُرْآنِ ثَلَاثِينَ آيَةً شَفَعَتْ لِصَاحِبِهَا حَتّٰى غُفِرَ لَهُ:\nتَبَارَكَ الَّذِي بِيَدِهِ الْمُلْكُ\n(Verily, there is a chapter in the Qur'an which contains thirty Ayat that will intercede on behalf of its reciter until he is forgiven. (It is): (Blessed be He in Whose Hand is the dominion.))\nThis Hadith was collected by At-Tirmidhi and the four Sunan Compilers.\nAt-Tirmidhi said concerning it, \"This is a Hasan Hadith.\" At-Tabarani and Al-Hafiz Ad-Diya' Al-Maqdisi both recorded from Anas that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nسُورَةٌ فِي الْقُرْآنِ خَاصَمَتْ عَنْ صَاحِبِهَا حَتّٰى أَدْخَلَتْهُ الْجَنَّةَ:\nتَبَارَكَ الَّذِي بِيَدِهِ الْمُلْكُ\n(There is a chapter of the Qur'an that will argue on behalf of its reciter until it causes him to enter into Paradise. (It is): (Blessed be He in Whose Hand is the dominion.))\nبِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nتَبَارَكَ الَّذِي بِيَدِهِ الْمُلْكُ وَهُوَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ - الَّذِي خَلَقَ الْمَوْتَ وَالْحَيَاةَ لِيَبْلُوَكُمْ أَيُّكُمْ أَحْسَنُ عَمَلًا ۚ وَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الْغَفُورُ - الَّذِي خَلَقَ سَبْعَ سَمَاوَاتٍ طِبَاقًا ۖ مَا تَرَىٰ فِي خَلْقِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ مِنْ تَفَاوُتٍ ۖ فَارْجِعِ الْبَصَرَ هَلْ تَرَىٰ مِنْ فُطُورٍ - ثُمَّ ارْجِعِ الْبَصَرَ كَرَّتَيْنِ يَنْقَلِبْ إِلَيْكَ الْبَصَرُ خَاسِئًا وَهُوَ حَسِيرٌ - وَلَقَدْ زَيَّنَّا السَّمَاءَ الدُّنْيَا بِمَصَابِيحَ وَجَعَلْنَاهَا رُجُومًا لِلشَّيَاطِينِ ۖ وَأَعْتَدْنَا لَهُمْ عَذَابَ السَّعِيرِ\n(1. Blessed be He in Whose Hand is the dominion; and He is Able to do all things.)(2. Who has created death and life that He may test you which of you is best in deed. And He is the Almighty, the Oft-Forgiving;)(3. Who has created the seven heavens one above the other; you can see no fault in the creation of the Most Gracious. Then look again. Can you see any rifts?)(4. Then look again and yet again, your sight will return to you Khasi', and worn out.)(5. And indeed We have adorned the nearest heaven with lamps, and We have made such lamps (as) missiles to drive away the Shayatin, and have prepared for them the torment of the blazing Fire.)\nGlorification of Allah and mentioning the Creation of Death, Life, the Heavens and the Stars\nAllah the Exalted glorifies His Noble Self and informs that the dominion is in His Hand. This means that He deals with all of His creatures however He wishes and there is none who can reverse His decree. He is not questioned concerning what He does because of His force, His wisdom and His justice. For this reason Allah says,\nوَهُوَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ\n(and He is Able to do all things.) Then Allah says,\nالَّذِي خَلَقَ الْمَوْتَ وَالْحَيَاةَ\n(Who has created death and life) Those who say that death is an existing creation use this Ayah as a proof because it is something that has been created. This Ayah means that He brought creation into existence from nothing in order to test the creatures. He examines them to see which of them will be best in deeds. This is similar to Allah's statement,\nكَيْفَ تَكْفُرُونَ بِاللَّهِ وَكُنْتُمْ أَمْوَاتًا فَأَحْيَاكُمْ ۖ\n(How can you disbelieve in Allah? Seeing that you were dead and He gave you life.)(2:28)\nIn this Ayah Allah named the first stage, which is non-existence, \"death.\" Then he named the origin or beginning of existence, \"life.\" This is why Allah says,\nثُمَّ يُمِيتُكُمْ ثُمَّ يُحْيِيكُمْ\n(Then He will give death, then again will bring you to life (on the Day of Resurrection))(2:28). Concerning Allah's statement,\nلِيَبْلُوَكُمْ أَيُّكُمْ أَحْسَنُ عَمَلًا\n(He may test you which of you is best in deed.) it means best in deeds. This is as Muhammad bin 'Ajlan said. It should be noted that Allah did not say \"which of you does the most deeds.\" Allah then says,\nوَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الْغَفُورُ\n(And He is the Almighty, the Oft-Forgiving.) This means that He is the Almighty, the Most Great, the Most Powerful and the Most Honorable. However, along with this He is Most Forgiving to whoever turns to Him in repentance and seeks His pardon after having disobeyed Him and opposed His commandment. Even though Allah is Almighty, He also forgives, shows mercy, pardons and excuses. Then Allah says,\nالَّذِي خَلَقَ سَبْعَ سَمَاوَاتٍ طِبَاقًا ۖ\n(Who has created the seven heavens one above the other;) meaning stacked one on top of the other. Are they connected to each other, meaning that they are in elevated ascension, some of them being stacked above others, or separated with space between them? There are two views concerning this, and the most correct opinion seems to be the latter as is proven in the Hadith of Isra' (the Prophet's Night Journey) and other narrations. Concerning Allah's statement,\nمَا تَرَىٰ فِي خَلْقِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ مِنْ تَفَاوُتٍ ۖ\n(you can see no fault in the creation of the Most Gracious.) means, it (the creation) is done in a flawless manner, and these are connected with each other so as to forms a straight level, having no disunion, conflict, inconsistency, deficiency, flaw or defect. This is the reason that Allah says,\nفَارْجِعِ الْبَصَرَ هَلْ تَرَىٰ مِنْ فُطُورٍ\n(Then look again. Can you see any rifts) meaning, look at the sky and pay close attention to it. Do you see any flaw, deficiency, defect or rifts in it? Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, Ad-Dahhak, Ath-Thawri and others said concerning Allah's statement,\nفَارْجِعِ الْبَصَرَ هَلْ تَرَىٰ مِنْ فُطُورٍ\n(Then look again. Can you see any rifts) that it means cracks. As-Suddi said that,\nهَلْ تَرَىٰ مِنْ فُطُورٍ\n(Can you see any rifts?) means any tears. Qatadah said,\nهَلْ تَرَىٰ مِنْ فُطُورٍ\n(Can you see any rifts?) means, 'do you see any defects O Son of Adam (mankind)?'\nIn reference to Allah's statement,\nثُمَّ ارْجِعِ الْبَصَرَ كَرَّتَيْنِ\n(Then look again and yet again,) Qatadah said, \"It means (look) twice.\"\nيَنْقَلِبْ إِلَيْكَ الْبَصَرُ خَاسِئًا\n(your sight will return to you Khasi',) Ibn 'Abbas said that Khasi' means humiliated. Mujahid and Qatadah both said that it means despised.\nوَهُوَ حَسِيرٌ\n(and worn out.) Ibn 'Abbas said that this means it will be exhausted. Mujahid, Qatadah and As-Suddi all said that it means broken down fatigue that comes from weakness. Thus, the Ayah means that if you continuously looked, no matter how much you look, your sight will return to you.\nخَاسِئًا\n(Khasi') due to the inability to see any flaw or defect (in Allah's creation).\nوَهُوَ حَسِيرٌ\n(and worn out.) meaning, exhausted and broken down feebleness due to the great amount of repeated looking without being able to detect any deficiency. Then, after Allah negated any deficiency in the creation of the heavens, He explains their perfection and beauty. He says,\nوَلَقَدْ زَيَّنَّا السَّمَاءَ الدُّنْيَا بِمَصَابِيحَ\n(And indeed We have adorned the nearest heaven with lamps,) This refers to the stars which have been placed in the heavens, some moving and some stationary. In Allah's statement,\nوَجَعَلْنَاهَا رُجُومًا لِلشَّيَاطِينِ\n(and We have made them (as) missiles to drive away the Shayatin,) The pronoun 'them' in His statement, \"and We have made them\" is the same type of statement as the stars being referred to as lamps. This does not mean that they are actually missiles, because the stars in the sky are not thrown. Rather, it is the meteors beneath them that are thrown and they are taken from the stars. And Allah knows best. Concerning Allah's statement,\nوَأَعْتَدْنَا لَهُمْ عَذَابَ السَّعِيرِ\n(and We have prepared for them the torment of the blazing Fire.) means, 'We have made this disgrace for the devils in this life and We have prepared for them the torment of the blazing Fire in the Hereafter.' This is as Allah said in the beginning of Surat As-Saffat,\nإِنَّا زَيَّنَّا السَّمَاءَ الدُّنْيَا بِزِينَةٍ الْكَوَاكِبِ - وَحِفْظًا مِنْ كُلِّ شَيْطَانٍ مَارِدٍ - لَا يَسَّمَّعُونَ إِلَى الْمَلَإِ الْأَعْلَىٰ وَيُقْذَفُونَ مِنْ كُلِّ جَانِبٍ - دُحُورًا ۖ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ وَاصِبٌ - إِلَّا مَنْ خَطِفَ الْخَطْفَةَ فَأَتْبَعَهُ شِهَابٌ ثَاقِبٌ\n(Verily, We have adorned the near heaven with the stars (for beauty). And to guard against every rebellious devil. They cannot listen to the higher group (angels) for they are pelted from every side. Outcast, and theirs is a constant (or painful) torment. Except such as snatch away something by stealing, and they are pursued by a flaming fire of piercing brightness.)(37:6-10)\nQatadah said, \"These stars were only created for three purposes: Allah created them as adornment for the heaven (sky), as missiles for the devils and as signs for navigation. Therefore, whoever seeks to interpret any other meanings for them other than these, then verily he has spoken with his own opinion, he has lost his portion and burdened himself with that which he has no knowledge of.\" Ibn Jarir and Ibn Abi Hatim both recorded this statement.","href":"/tafsir/67?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:67:6","title":"Ibn Kathir · 67:6–11","text":"And for those who disbelieve in their Lord is the torment of Hell, and worst indeed is that destination (6)When they are cast therein, they will hear its Shahiq while it is simmering (7)It almost bursts up with fury. Every time a group is cast therein, its keepers will ask: \"Did no warner come to you? (8)They will say: \"Yes, indeed a warner did come to us, but we rejected him and said: 'Allah never sent down anything; you are only in great error.' (9)And they will say: \"Had we but listened or used our intelligence, we would not have been among the dwellers of the blazing Fire! (10)Then they will confess their sin. So, away with the dwellers of the blazing Fire (11)\nThe Description of Hell and Those Who will enter into it\nAllah the Exalted says,\nوَ\n(and) meaning, 'and We have prepared,'\nلِلَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِرَبِّهِمْ عَذَابُ جَهَنَّمَ ۖ وَبِئْسَ الْمَصِيرُ\n(for those who disbelieve in their Lord is the torment of Hell, and worst indeed is that destination.) This means that this will be the worst end and a terrible destiny.\nإِذَا أُلْقُوا فِيهَا سَمِعُوا لَهَا شَهِيقًا\n(When they are cast therein, they will hear its Shahiq) Ibn Jarir said, \"This means the sound of shouting.\"\nوَهِيَ تَفُورُ\n(while it is simmering.) Ath-Thawri said, \"It will boil them just as a small number of seeds are boiled in a lot of water.\" Then Allah says,\nتَكَادُ تَمَيَّزُ مِنَ الْغَيْظِ ۖ\n(It almost bursts up with fury.) meaning, some parts of it almost break apart from other parts due to the severity of its rage and anger with them.\nكُلَّمَا أُلْقِيَ فِيهَا فَوْجٌ سَأَلَهُمْ خَزَنَتُهَا أَلَمْ يَأْتِكُمْ نَذِيرٌ - قَالُوا بَلَىٰ قَدْ جَاءَنَا نَذِيرٌ فَكَذَّبْنَا وَقُلْنَا مَا نَزَّلَ اللَّهُ مِنْ شَيْءٍ إِنْ أَنْتُمْ إِلَّا فِي ضَلَالٍ كَبِيرٍ\n(Every time a group is cast therein, its keepers will ask: \"Did no warner come to you\" They will say: \"Yes, indeed a warner did come to us, but we rejected him and said: 'Allah never sent down anything; you are only in great error.'\")\nIn these Ayat Allah reminds of His justice in dealing with His creatures and that He does not punish anyone until the proof has been established against them and a Messenger has been sent to them. This is similar to Allah's statement,\nوَمَا كُنَّا مُعَذِّبِينَ حَتَّىٰ نَبْعَثَ رَسُولًا\n(And We never punish until We have sent a Messenger.)[17:15] Allah also says,\nحَتَّىٰ إِذَا جَاءُوهَا فُتِحَتْ أَبْوَابُهَا وَقَالَ لَهُمْ خَزَنَتُهَا أَلَمْ يَأْتِكُمْ رُسُلٌ مِنْكُمْ يَتْلُونَ عَلَيْكُمْ آيَاتِ رَبِّكُمْ وَيُنْذِرُونَكُمْ لِقَاءَ يَوْمِكُمْ هَٰذَا ۚ قَالُوا بَلَىٰ وَلَٰكِنْ حَقَّتْ كَلِمَةُ الْعَذَابِ عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ\n(till when they reach it, the gates thereof will be opened. And its keepers will say, \"Did not the Messengers come to you from yourselves, reciting to you the Ayat of your Lord, and warning you of the meeting of this Day of yours?\" They will say: \"Yes,\" but the Word of torment has been justified against the disbelievers!\")[39:71]\nThus, they have no recourse but to blame themselves and they will feel remorseful when such remorse will be of no benefit to them. They will say,\nوَقَالُوا لَوْ كُنَّا نَسْمَعُ أَوْ نَعْقِلُ مَا كُنَّا فِي أَصْحَابِ السَّعِيرِ\n(Had we but listened or used our intelligence, we would not have been among the dwellers of the blazing Fire!) meaning, 'if we would have benefited from our intellects or listened to the truth that Allah revealed, we would not have been disbelieving in Allah and misguided about Him. But we did not have understanding to comprehend what the Messengers came with, and we did not have the intelligence to guide us to following them.' Allah then says,\nفَاعْتَرَفُوا بِذَنْبِهِمْ فَسُحْقًا لِأَصْحَابِ السَّعِيرِ\n(Then they will confess their sin. So, away with the dwellers of the blazing Fire!)\nImam Ahmad recorded from Abu Al-Bakhtari At-Ta'i that he heard from one of the Companions that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nلَنْ يَهْلِكَ النَّاسُ حَتّٰى يُعْذِرُوا مِنْ أَنْفُسِهِمْ\n(The people will not be destroyed until they themselves confess their guilt.)","href":"/tafsir/67?verse=6","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:67:12","title":"Ibn Kathir · 67:12–15","text":"Verily, those who fear their Lord unseen, theirs will be forgiveness and a great reward (12)And whether you keep your talk secret or disclose it, verily, He is the All-Knower of what is in the breasts (13)Should not He Who has created know? And He is the Most Kind and Courteous, All-Aware (14)He it is Who has made the earth subservient to you; so walk in the paths thereof and eat of His provision. And to Him will be the resurrection (15)\nThe Reward of those Who fear their Lord unseen\nAllah informs of he who fears standing before his Lord, being frightened about matters between himself and Allah when he is not in the presence of other people. So he refrains from disobedience and he performs acts of obedience when no one sees him except Allah. Allah mentions that this person will have forgiveness and a great reward. This means that his sins will be remitted and he will be rewarded abundantly. This is similar to what has been confirmed in the Two Sahihs,\nسَبْعَةٌ يُظِلُّهُمُ اللهُ تَعَالىٰ فِي ظِلِّ عَرْشِهِ يَوْمَ لَا ظِلَّ إِلَّا ظِلُّهُ\n(There are seven people whom Allah the Exalted will shade in the shade of His Throne on the Day when there will be no shade except its shade.) Then he mentioned that among those people are:\nدَعَتْهُ امْرَأَةٌ ذَاتُ مَنْصِبٍ وَجَمَالٍ فَقَالَ: إِنِّي أَخَافُ اللهَ، وَرَجُلًا تَصَدَّقَ بِصَدَقَةٍ فَأَخْفَاهَا حَتّٰى لَا تَعْلَمَ شِمَالُهُ مَا تُنْفِقُ يَمِينُهُ\n(A man who is tempted by a beautiful woman of high social status, but he says: 'Verily, I fear Allah.' Another person from among them is a man who gives charity and he conceals it so that his left hand does not know what his right hand spent.) Then He says, while informing that He is aware of the innermost conscience and secrets,\nوَأَسِرُّوا قَوْلَكُمْ أَوِ اجْهَرُوا بِهِ ۖ إِنَّهُ عَلِيمٌ بِذَاتِ الصُّدُورِ\n(And whether you keep your talk secret or disclose it, verily, He is the All-Knower of what is in the breasts.) meaning, that which occurs in the hearts (ideas, thoughts, etc.).\nأَلَا يَعْلَمُ مَنْ خَلَقَ\n(Should not He Who has created know?) This means, 'doesn't the Creator know?'\nوَهُوَ اللَّطِيفُ الْخَبِيرُ\n(And He is the Most Kind and Courteous, All-Aware (of everything).)\nAllah's Favor of subjugating the Earth to His Servants\nThen Allah mentions His favor to His creation in subjugating the earth to them, and making it subservient to them. This is by His making it a stable abode and dwelling place. He placed in it mountains and caused water springs to gush forth from it. He fashioned pathways, and placed useful things in it and places fertile for the growth of fruit and vegetation. Allah says,\nهُوَ الَّذِي جَعَلَ لَكُمُ الْأَرْضَ ذَلُولًا فَامْشُوا فِي مَنَاكِبِهَا\n(He it is Who has made the earth subservient to you; so walk in the paths thereof) meaning, travel wherever you wish throughout its regions and frequent its countrysides and all the areas of its domain in your various journeys to seek earnings and trade. And know that your efforts will not benefit you anything unless Allah makes matters easy for you. Allah continues to say,\nوَكُلُوا مِنْ رِزْقِهِ\n(and eat of His provision.) Thus, striving by using the means (to attain something) does not negate the necessity of depending upon Allah (At-Tawakkul). This is similar to what Imam Ahmad recorded from 'Umar bin Al-Khattab, that he heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ say,\nلَوْأَنَّكُمْ تَتَوَكَّلُونَ عَلَى اللهِ حَقَّ تَوَكُّلِهِ، لَرَزَقَكُمْ كَمَا يَرْزُقُ الطَّيْرَ، تَغْدُو خِمَاصًا وَتَرُوحُ بِطَانًا\n(If you would trust in Allah as He truly should be trusted in, He would surely provide for you as He provides for the birds. They set out in the morning with empty stomachs and return in the evening with full stomachs.)\nAt-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa'i and Ibn Majah all recorded this Hadith. At-Tirmidhi said, \"Hasan Sahih.\" So this confirms that the bird searches morning and evening for its sustenance while depending upon Allah. For He is the Subduer, the Controller and the One Who causes everything.\nوَإِلَيْهِ النُّشُورُ\n(And to Him will be the resurrection.) meaning, the place of return on the Day of Judgement. Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, As-Suddi and Qatadah all said that Manakibiha (its paths) means its outermost borders, its roads and its regions.","href":"/tafsir/67?verse=12","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:67:16","title":"Ibn Kathir · 67:16–19","text":"Do you feel secure that He, Who is over the heaven, will not cause the earth to sink with you, and then it should quake (16)Or do you feel secure that He, Who is over the heaven, will not send against you a Hasib? Then you shall know how has been My warning (17)And indeed those before them rejected, then how terrible was My reproach (18)Do they not see the birds above them, spreading out their wings and folding them in? None upholds them except the Most Gracious. Verily, He is the All-Seer of everything (19)\nHow can You feel Secure against the Punishment of Allah while He is Able to seize You however He wills?\nThis is another indication of His gentleness and His mercy with His creatures. He is able to punish them because some of them disbelieve in Him and worship others besides Him, yet He is forbearing, He pardons, and He gives respite for an appointed time without hastening. This is as He says,\nوَلَوْ يُؤَاخِذُ اللَّهُ النَّاسَ بِمَا كَسَبُوا مَا تَرَكَ عَلَىٰ ظَهْرِهَا مِنْ دَابَّةٍ وَلَٰكِنْ يُؤَخِّرُهُمْ إِلَىٰ أَجَلٍ مُسَمًّى ۖ فَإِذَا جَاءَ أَجَلُهُمْ فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ كَانَ بِعِبَادِهِ بَصِيرًا\n(And if Allah were to punish men for that which they earned, He would not leave a moving creature on the surface of the earth; but He gives them respite to an appointed term: and when their term comes, then verily, Allah is Ever All-Seer of His servants.)[35:45] Here Allah says,\nأَأَمِنْتُمْ مَنْ فِي السَّمَاءِ أَنْ يَخْسِفَ بِكُمُ الْأَرْضَ فَإِذَا هِيَ تَمُورُ\n(Do you feel secure that He, Who is over the heaven, will not cause the earth to sink with you, and then it should quake?) meaning, that it would move back and forth, and be disrupted.\nأَمْ أَمِنْتُمْ مَنْ فِي السَّمَاءِ أَنْ يُرْسِلَ عَلَيْكُمْ حَاصِبًا ۖ\n(Or do you feel secure that He, Who is over the heaven, will not send against you a Hasib?) meaning, a wind containing gravel that will strike you, as Allah says in another Ayah,\nأَفَأَمِنْتُمْ أَنْ يَخْسِفَ بِكُمْ جَانِبَ الْبَرِّ أَوْ يُرْسِلَ عَلَيْكُمْ حَاصِبًا ثُمَّ لَا تَجِدُوا لَكُمْ وَكِيلًا\n(Do you then feel secure that He will not cause a side of the land to swallow you up, or that He will not send against you a violent sandstorm? Then, you shall find no trustee.)[17:68] And similarly, here Allah threatens them with His statement,\nفَسَتَعْلَمُونَ كَيْفَ نَذِيرِ\n(Then you shall know how has been My warning.) meaning, 'how is My admonition and what will happen to those who disregard and reject it.' Then Allah says,\nوَلَقَدْ كَذَّبَ الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ\n(And indeed those before them rejected,) meaning, from the previous nations and the old generations that have passed. Then Allah says,\nفَكَيْفَ كَانَ نَكِيرِ\n(then how terrible was My reproach?) meaning, 'how was My rebuke of them and my punishment of them.' Meaning, it was great, severe and painful.\nThe flight of Birds is by the Power of Allah and it is a Proof that He sees everything small and large\nAllah says,\nأَوَلَمْ يَرَوْا إِلَى الطَّيْرِ فَوْقَهُمْ صَافَّاتٍ وَيَقْبِضْنَ ۚ\n(Do they not see the birds above them, spreading out their wings and folding them in?) meaning, sometimes they spread their wings out in the wind (gliding) and other times they gather and spread (flapping) the wings in flight.\nمَا يُمْسِكُهُنَّ\n(None upholds them) meaning, in the air,\nإِلَّا الرَّحْمَٰنُ\n(except the Most Gracious.) meaning, Allah holds them up in the air by subjecting the air to them out of His mercy and His gentleness.\nإِنَّهُ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ بَصِيرٌ\n(Verily, He is the All-Seer of everything.) means, with what is beneficial and suitable for all of His creatures. This is similar to His statement,\nأَلَمْ يَرَوْا إِلَى الطَّيْرِ مُسَخَّرَاتٍ فِي جَوِّ السَّمَاءِ مَا يُمْسِكُهُنَّ إِلَّا اللَّهُ ۗ إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِقَوْمٍ يُؤْمِنُونَ\n(Do they not see the birds held in the midst of the sky? None upholds them but Allah. Verily, in this are clear Ayat for people who believe.)(16:79)","href":"/tafsir/67?verse=16","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:67:20","title":"Ibn Kathir · 67:20–27","text":"Who is it besides the Most Gracious that can be an army to you to help you? The disbelievers are in nothing but delusion (20)Who is it that can provide for you if He should withhold His provision? Nay, but they continue to be in pride, and flee (21)Is he who walks prone on his face, more rightly guided, or he who walks upright on a straight path (22)Say: \"It is He Who has created you, and endowed you with hearing and seeing, and hearts. Little thanks you give. (23)Say: \"It is He Who has created you on the earth, and to Him shall you be gathered. (24)They say: \"When will this promise come to pass, if you are telling the truth? (25)Say: \"The knowledge is with Allah only, and I am only a plain warner. (26)But when they will see it approaching, the faces of those who disbelieve will be sad and grievous, and it will be said: \"This is what you were calling for! (27)\nNo One will help You and No One can grant Sustenance except for Allah\nAllah addresses the idolators who worship others besides Him, seeking help and sustenance from them. Allah rebukes them for what they believe, and He informs them that they will not attain that which they hope for. Allah says,\nأَمَّنْ هَٰذَا الَّذِي هُوَ جُنْدٌ لَكُمْ يَنْصُرُكُمْ مِنْ دُونِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ ۚ\n(Who is it besides the Most Gracious that can be an army to you to help?) imeaning, there is no protector or helper for you besides Him. This is the reason that Allah says,\nإِنِ الْكَافِرُونَ إِلَّا فِي غُرُورٍ\n(The disbelievers are in nothing but delusion.) Then Allah says,\nأَمَّنْ هَٰذَا الَّذِي يَرْزُقُكُمْ إِنْ أَمْسَكَ رِزْقَهُ ۚ\n(Who is it that can provide for you if He should withhold His provision?) meaning, who is it that can provide for you if Allah cuts off your sustenance? There is no one who gives, withholds, creates, provides and helps other than Allah alone, Who has no partner. This proves that they know this, yet they still worship others besides Him. Thus, Allah says,\nبَلْ لَجُّوا\n(Nay, but they continue) meaning, they persist in their transgression, lying and misguidance.\nفِي عُتُوٍّ وَنُفُورٍ\n(to be in pride, and flee.) meaning, they continue in obstinance, arrogance and fleeing away from the truth. They do not listen to it nor do they follow it.\nThe Parable of the Disbeliever and the Believer\nThen Allah says,\nأَفَمَنْ يَمْشِي مُكِبًّا عَلَىٰ وَجْهِهِ أَهْدَىٰ أَمَّنْ يَمْشِي سَوِيًّا عَلَىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ\n(Is he who walks prone on his face, more rightly guided, or he who walks upright on a straight path?)\nThis is a parable which Allah made of the believer and the disbeliever. So the condition of the disbeliever is like one who walks prone on his face. This is like a person walking bent over on his face (with his head down) instead of walking upright. This person does not know where he is going or how. Rather, he is lost, astray and confused. Is this person more guided,\nأَمَّنْ يَمْشِي سَوِيًّا\n(or he who walks upright) meaning, he who stands erect.\nعَلَىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ\n(on a straight path?) meaning, this person who walks upright is on a clear path, and he is straight within himself while his path is straight as well. This is their likeness in this world, and their likeness will be the same in the Hereafter. So the believer will be gathered (on the Day of Judgement) walking upright upon the straight path and the vast and spacious Paradise will be opened up for him. However, the disbeliever will be gathered walking down on his face to the Hellfire.\nاحْشُرُوا الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا وَأَزْوَاجَهُمْ وَمَا كَانُوا يَعْبُدُونَ - مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ فَاهْدُوهُمْ إِلَىٰ صِرَاطِ الْجَحِيمِ\n(Assemble those who did wrong, together with their companions and what they used to worship instead of Allah, and lead them on to the way of flaming Fire.)(37:22,23)\n\"Companions\" here means those like them. Imam Ahmad recorded from Anas bin Malik that it was said, \"O Messenger of Allah! How will the people be gathered on their faces?\" So the Prophet ﷺ replied,\nأَلَيْسَ الَّذِي أَمْشَاهُمْ عَلَى أَرْجُلِهِمْ قَادِرًا عَلَى أَنْ يُمْشِيَهُمْ عَلَى وُجُوهِهِمْ\n(Is not He who made them to walk on their legs able to make them walk on their faces?\") This Hadith is also recorded in the Two Sahihs.\nAllah's Power to create and It being an Evidence of the Final Abode\nAllah says,\nقُلْ هُوَ الَّذِي أَنْشَأَكُمْ\n(Say it is He Who has created you,) meaning, He initiated your creation after you were not even a thing worth mentioning (i.e., nothing). Then He says,\nوَجَعَلَ لَكُمُ السَّمْعَ وَالْأَبْصَارَ وَالْأَفْئِدَةَ\n(and endowed you with hearing and seeing, and hearts.) meaning, intellects and powers of reasoning.\nقَلِيلًا مَا تَشْكُرُونَ\n(Little thanks you give.) meaning, how little you use these abilities that Allah has blessed you with to obey Him, to act according to His commandments, and avoid His prohibitions.\nقُلْ هُوَ الَّذِي ذَرَأَكُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ\n(Say: \"It is He Who has created you on the earth...\") meaning, He has spread and distributed you all througout the various regions and areas of the earth with your differing languages, colors, shapes, appearances and forms.\nوَإِلَيْهِ تُحْشَرُونَ\n(and to Him shall you be gathered.) meaning, you all will come together after this separation and division. He will gather you all just as He separated you and He will bring you back again just as He originated you. Then while informing of the disbelievers who reject the final return, and doubt concerning its real occurrence, Allah said;\nوَيَقُولُونَ مَتَىٰ هَٰذَا الْوَعْدُ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ صَادِقِينَ\n(They say: \"When will this promise come to pass if you are telling the truth?\") meaning, 'when will this gathering after separation that you are informing us of, occur?'\nقُلْ إِنَّمَا الْعِلْمُ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ\n(Say: \"The knowledge is with Allah only...\") meaning, 'no one knows the time of the Day of Judgement exactly except Allah, but He has commanded me to inform you that it is real and it will definitely occur, so beware of it.'\nوَإِنَّمَا أَنَا نَذِيرٌ مُبِينٌ\n(and I am only a plain warner.) meaning, 'I am only obligated to convey, and verily I have performed my duty (of conveying) towards you.' Then Allah says,\nفَلَمَّا رَأَوْهُ زُلْفَةً سِيئَتْ وُجُوهُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا\n(But when they will see it approaching, the faces of those who disbelieve will be sad and grievous.) means, when the Day of Judgement begins, and the disbelievers witness it, and they see that the matter has drawn close, because everything that is to occur will occur, even if it takes a long time. So, when what they denied occurs, it will grieve them because they will know what is awaiting them there (in Hell) of the worst evil. This means that it will surround them and Allah will command what they were not able to reckon or fully comprehend to come to them.\nوَبَدَا لَهُمْ مِنَ اللَّهِ مَا لَمْ يَكُونُوا يَحْتَسِبُونَ - وَبَدَا لَهُمْ سَيِّئَاتُ مَا كَسَبُوا وَحَاقَ بِهِمْ مَا كَانُوا بِهِ يَسْتَهْزِئُونَ\n(And if those who did wrong had all that is in the earth entirely and the like of it with it, they would [attempt to] ransom themselves thereby from the worst of the punishment on the Day of Resurrection. And there will appear to them from Allah that which they had not taken into account.)(39:47-48)\nThis is why it will be said to them in order to scold and reprimand them,\nهَٰذَا الَّذِي كُنْتُمْ بِهِ تَدَّعُونَ\n(This is what you were calling for!) meaning, that you were seeking to hasten.","href":"/tafsir/67?verse=20","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:67:28","title":"Ibn Kathir · 67:28–30","text":"Say: \"Tell me! If Allah destroys me, and those with me, or He bestows His mercy on us - who can save the disbelievers from a painful torment? (28)Say: \"He is the Most Gracious, in Him we believe, and upon Him we rely. So, you will come to know who it is that is in manifest error. (29)Say: \"Tell me! If (all) your water were to sink away, who then can supply you with flowing water? (30)\nThe Death of the Believer will not save the Disbeliever, so let Him reflect upon His Deliverance\nAllah says,\nقُلْ\n(say) 'O Muhammad to these idolators who are associating partners with Allah and denying His favors,'\nأَرَأَيْتُمْ إِنْ أَهْلَكَنِيَ اللَّهُ وَمَنْ مَعِيَ أَوْ رَحِمَنَا فَمَنْ يُجِيرُ الْكَافِرِينَ مِنْ عَذَابٍ أَلِيمٍ\n(Tell me! If Allah destroys me, and those with me, or He bestows His mercy on us - who can save the disbelievers from a painful torment?) meaning, 'save yourselves, for verily, there is nothing that can rescue you from Allah except repentance, turning to Him for forgiveness and returning to His religion. Your hopes that torment and exemplary punishment will strike us, will not benefit you. Whether Allah punishes us or has mercy on us, there is no escaping from Allah's punishment and painful torment that you will suffer.' Then Allah says,\nقُلْ هُوَ الرَّحْمَٰنُ آمَنَّا بِهِ وَعَلَيْهِ تَوَكَّلْنَا ۖ\n(Say: \"He is the Most Gracious, in Him we believe, and upon Him we rely.) meaning, 'we believe in the Lord of all that exists, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful, and upon Him we rely in all of our affairs.' This is as Allah says,\nفَاعْبُدْهُ وَتَوَكَّلْ عَلَيْهِ\n(So worship Him and rely upon Him.)(11:123) Thus, Allah continues saying,\nفَسَتَعْلَمُونَ مَنْ هُوَ فِي ضَلَالٍ مُبِينٍ\n(So, you will come to know who it is that is in manifest error.) meaning, 'between Us and you, and to whom the final end (ultimate victory) will be for in this life and in the Hereafter.'\nReminding of Allah's Blessing by the springing of Water and the Threat of It being taken away\nAllah says;\nقُلْ أَرَأَيْتُمْ إِنْ أَصْبَحَ مَاؤُكُمْ غَوْرًا\n(Say: \"Tell me! If your water were to sink away...\") meaning, if it were to go away, disappearing into the lowest depths of the earth, then it would not be reachable with iron axes nor strong arms. 'Gha'ir' (sinking) as used here in the Ayah, is the opposite of springing forth. This is why Allah says,\nفَمَنْ يَأْتِيكُمْ بِمَاءٍ مَعِينٍ\n(who then can supply you with flowing water?) meaning, springing forth, flowing, running upon the face of the earth. This means that no one is able to do this except Allah. So, it is merely out of His favor and His grace that He causes water to spring forth for you, and He makes it run to the various regions of the earth in an amount that is suitable for the needs of servants, be it little or abundant. So Allah's is all the praise and thanks.\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Al-Mulk and all praise and thanks are due to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/67?verse=28","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:68:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 68:1–7","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nن ۚ وَالْقَلَمِ وَمَا يَسْطُرُونَ - مَا أَنْتَ بِنِعْمَةِ رَبِّكَ بِمَجْنُونٍ - وَإِنَّ لَكَ لَأَجْرًا غَيْرَ مَمْنُونٍ - وَإِنَّكَ لَعَلَىٰ خُلُقٍ عَظِيمٍ - فَسَتُبْصِرُ وَيُبْصِرُونَ - بِأَيْيِكُمُ الْمَفْتُونُ - إِنَّ رَبَّكَ هُوَ أَعْلَمُ بِمَنْ ضَلَّ عَنْ سَبِيلِهِ وَهُوَ أَعْلَمُ بِالْمُهْتَدِينَ\n(1. Nun. By the pen and by what they Yastur.)(2. You, by the grace of your Lord, are not insane.)(3. And verily, for you will be reward that is not Mamnun.)(4. And verily, you are on an exalted character.)(5. You will see, and they will see,)(6. Which of you is afflicted with madness.)(7. Verily, your Lord is the best Knower of him who has gone astray from His path, and He is the best Knower of those who are guided.)\nWe have already discussed the special letters of the Arabic alphabet at the beginning of Surat Al-Baqarah. Thus, Allah's saying,\nن ۚ\n(Nun), is like Allah's saying,\nص ۚ\n(Sad), and Allah's saying,(38:1)\nق ۚ\n(Qaf), and similar to them from the individual letters that appear at the beginning of Qur'anic chapters. This has been discussed at length previously and there is no need to repeat it here.\nThe Explanation of the Pen\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nوَالْقَلَمِ\n(By the pen) The apparent meaning is that this refers to the actual pen that is used to write. This is like Allah's saying,\nاقْرَأْ وَرَبُّكَ الْأَكْرَمُ - الَّذِي عَلَّمَ بِالْقَلَمِ - عَلَّمَ الْإِنْسَانَ مَا لَمْ يَعْلَمْ\n(Read! And your Lord is the Most Generous. Who has taught by the pen. He has taught man that which he knew not.)(96:3-5)\nTherefore, this statement is Allah's swearing and alerting His creatures to what He has favored them with by teaching them the skill of writing, through which knowledge is attained. Thus, Allah continues by saying,\nوَمَا يَسْطُرُونَ\n(and by what they Yastur.) Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid and Qatadah all said that this means, \"what they write.\" As-Suddi said, \"The angels and the deeds of the servants they record.\"\nOthers said, \"Rather, what is meant here is the pen which Allah caused to write the decree when He wrote the decrees of all creation, and this took place fifty-thousand years before He created the heavens and the earth.\" For this, they present Hadiths that have been reported about the Pen.\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded from Al-Walid bin 'Ubadah bin As-Samit that he said, \"My father called for me when he was dying and he said to me: 'Verily, I heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ say,\nإِنَّ أَوَّلَ مَا خَلَقَ اللهُ الْقَلَمُ فَقَالَ لَهُ: اكْتُبْ، قَالَ: يَا رَبِّ وَمَا أَكْتُبُ؟ قَالَ: اكْتُبِ الْقَدَرَ وَمَا هُوَ كَائِنٌ إِلَى الْأَبَدِ\n(Verily, the first of what Allah created was the Pen, and He said to it: \"Write.\" The Pen said: \"O my Lord, what shall I write?\" He said: \"Write the decree and whatever will throughout eternity.\")\"\nThis Hadith has been recorded by Imam Ahmad through various routes of transmission. At-Tirmidhi also recorded it from a Hadith of Abu Dawud At-Tayalisi and he (At-Tirmidhi) said about it, \"Hasan Sahih, Gharib.\"\nSwearing by the Pen refers to the Greatness of the Prophet (ﷺ)\nAllah says,\nمَا أَنْتَ بِنِعْمَةِ رَبِّكَ بِمَجْنُونٍ\n(You, by the grace of your Lord, are not insane.) meaning – and all praise is due to Allah – 'you are not crazy as the ignorant among your people claim. They are those who deny the guidance and the clear truth that you have come with. Therefore, they attribute madness to you because of it.'\nوَإِنَّ لَكَ لَأَجْرًا غَيْرَ مَمْنُونٍ\n(And verily, for you will be reward that is not Mamnun.) meaning, 'for you is the great reward, and abundant blessings which will never be cut off or perish, because you conveyed the Message of your Lord to creation, and you were patient with their abuse.' The meaning of:\nغَيْرَ مَمْنُونٍ\n(not Mamnūn) is that it will not be cut off. This is similar to Allah's statement,\nعَطَاءً غَيْرَ مَجْذُوذٍ\n(a gift without an end.)(11:108) and His statement,\nفَلَهُمْ أَجْرٌ غَيْرُ مَمْنُونٍ\n(Then they shall have a reward without end.)(95:6) Mujahid said,\nغَيْرَ مَمْنُونٍ\n(Without Mamnūn) means \"Without reckoning.\" And this refers back to what we have said before.\nThe Explanation of the Statement: \"Verily, You are on an Exalted Character.\"\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nوَإِنَّكَ لَعَلَىٰ خُلُقٍ عَظِيمٍ\n(And verily, you are on an exalted (standard of) character.) Al-'Awfi reported from Ibn 'Abbas, \"Verily, you are on a great religion, and it is Islam.\" Likewise said Mujahid, Abu Malik, As-Suddi and Ar-Rabi' bin Anas. Ad-Dahhak and Ibn Zayd also said this. Sa'id bin Abi 'Arubah reported from Qatadah that he said concerning Allah's statement,\nوَإِنَّكَ لَعَلَىٰ خُلُقٍ عَظِيمٍ\n(And verily, you are on an exalted (standard of) character.)\n\"It has been mentioned to us that Sa'd bin Hisham asked 'A'ishah about the character of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, so she replied: 'Have you not read the Qur'an?' Sa'd said: 'Of course.' Then she said: 'Verily, the character of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ was the Qur'an.'\" 'Abdur-Razzaq recorded similar to this and Imam Muslim recorded it in his Sahih on the authority of Qatadah in its full length.\nThis means that he would act according to the commands and the prohibition in the Qur'an. His nature and character were patterned according to the Qur'an, and he abandoned his natural disposition (i.e., the carnal nature). So whatever the Qur'an commanded, he did it, and whatever it forbade, he avoided it. Along with this, Allah gave him the exalted character, which included the qualities of modesty, kindness, bravery, pardoning, gentleness and every other good characteristic.\nThis is like that which has been confirmed in the Two Sahihs that Anas said, \"I served the Messenger of Allah ﷺ for ten years, and he never said a word of displeasure to me (Uff), nor did he ever say to me concerning something I had done: 'Why did you do that' And he never said to me concerning something I had not done: 'Why didn't you do this?' He had the best character, and I never touched any silk or anything else that was softer than the palm of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ. And I never smelled any musk or perfume that had a better fragrance than the sweat of the Messenger of Allah.\"\nImam Al-Bukhari recorded that Al-Bara' said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ had the most handsome face of all the people, and he had the best behavior of all of the people. And he was not tall, nor was he short.\"\nThe Hadiths concerning this matter are numerous. Abu 'Isa At-Tirmidhi has a complete book on this subject called Kitab Ash-Shama'il.\nImam Ahmad recorded that 'A'ishah said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ never struck a servant of his with his hand, nor did he ever hit a woman. He never hit anything with his hand, except for when he was fighting Jihad in the cause of Allah. And he was never given the option between two things except that the most beloved of the two to him was the easiest of them, as long as it did not involve sin. If it did involve sin, then he stayed farther away from sin than any of the people. He would not avenge himself concerning anything that was done to him, except if the limits of Allah were transgressed. Then, in that case he would avenge for the sake of Allah.\"\nImam Ahmad also recorded from Abu Hurayrah that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nإِنَّمَا بُعِثْتُ لِأُتَمِّمَ صَالِحَ الْأَخْلَاقِ\n(I have only been sent to perfect righteous behavior.) Ahmad was alone in recording this Hadith. In reference to Allah's statement,\nفَسَتُبْصِرُ وَيُبْصِرُونَ - بِأَيْيِكُمُ الْمَفْتُونُ\n(You will see, and they will see, which of you is afflicted with madness.) then it means, 'you will know, O Muhammad – and those who oppose you and reject you, will know – who is insane and misguided among you.' This is like Allah's statement,\nسَيَعْلَمُونَ غَدًا مَنِ الْكَذَّابُ الْأَشِرُ\n(Tomorrow they will come to know who is the liar, the insolent one!)(54:26) Allah also says,\nوَإِنَّا أَوْ إِيَّاكُمْ لَعَلَىٰ هُدًى أَوْ فِي ضَلَالٍ مُبِينٍ\n(And verily (either) we or you are rightly guided or in plain error.)(34:24) Ibn Jurayj reported from Ibn 'Abbas, it means \"You will know and they will know on the Day of Judgement.\" Al-'Awfi reported from Ibn 'Abbas;\nبِأَيْيِكُمُ الْمَفْتُونُ\n(Which of you is Maftun (afflicted with madness) means which of you is crazy. This was also said by Mujahid and others as well. The literal meaning of Maftun is one who has been charmed or lured away from the truth and has strayed from it.\nThus, the entire statement means, 'so you will know and they will know,' or 'you will be informed and they will be informed, as to which of you is afflicted with madness.' And Allah knows best. Then Allah says,\nإِنَّ رَبَّكَ هُوَ أَعْلَمُ بِمَنْ ضَلَّ عَنْ سَبِيلِهِ وَهُوَ أَعْلَمُ بِالْمُهْتَدِينَ\n(Verily, your Lord is the best Knower of him who has gone astray from His path, and He is the best Knower of those who are guided.) meaning, 'He knows which of the two groups are truly guided among you, and He knows the party that is astray from the truth.'","href":"/tafsir/68?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:68:8","title":"Ibn Kathir · 68:8–16","text":"So, do not obey the deniers (8)They wish that you should compromise with them, so they (too) would compromise with you (9)And do not obey every Hallaf Mahin (10)A Hammaz, going about with Namim (11)Hinderer of the good, transgressor, sinful (12)'Utul, and moreover Zanim (13)(He was so) because he had wealth and children (14)When Our Ayat are recited to him, he says: \"Tales of the men of old! (15)We shall brand him on the snout (nose)(16)\nProhibition of giving in to the Pressure of the Disbelievers and Their Suggestions, and that They like to meet in the Middle of the Path\nAllah says, 'just as We have favored you and given you the upright legislation and great (standard of) character,'\nفَلَا تُطِعِ الْمُكَذِّبِينَ - وَدُّوا لَوْ تُدْهِنُ فَيُدْهِنُونَ\n(So, do not obey the deniers. They wish that you should compromise with them, so they (too) would compromise with you.) Ibn 'Abbas said, \"That you would permit them (their idolatry) and they also would permit you (to practice your religion).\" Mujahid said,\nوَدُّوا لَوْ تُدْهِنُ فَيُدْهِنُونَ\n(They wish that you should compromise with them, so they (too) would compromise with you.) \"This means that you should be quiet about their gods and abandon the truth that you are upon.\" Then Allah says,\nوَلَا تُطِعْ كُلَّ حَلَّافٍ مَهِينٍ\n(And do not obey every Hallaf (one who swears much) Mahin (liar or worthless person).) This is because the liar, due to his weakness and his disgracefulness, only seeks protection in his false oaths which he boldly swears to while using Allah's Names, and he uses them (false oaths) all the time and out of place (i.e., unnecessarily). Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Al-Mahin means the liar.\" Then Allah says,\nهَمَّازٍ\n(A Hammaz,) Ibn 'Abbas and Qatadah both said, \"This is slander.\"\nمَشَّاءٍ بِنَمِيمٍ\n(going about with Namim,) This refers to the one who goes around among people instigating discord between them and carrying tales in order to corrupt relations between people when they are good and pleasant. It is confirmed in the Two Sahihs that Mujahid reported from Tawus that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ once passed by two graves and he said,\nإِنَّهُمَا لَيُعَذَّبَانِ وَمَا يُعَذَّبَانِ فِي كَبِيرٍ، أَمَّا أَحَدُهُمَا فَكَانَ لَا يَسْتَتِرُ مِنَ الْبَوْلِ، وَأَمَّا الْآخَرُ فَكَانَ يَمْشِي بِالنَّمِيمَةِ\n(Verily, these two are being punished, and they are not being punished for something major. One of them was not careful about protecting himself from urine (when relieving himself). The other one used to spread Namimah.)\"\nThis Hadith has been recorded by the Group in their books through routes of transmission that are all on the authority of Mujahid.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Hudhayfah said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ saying,\nلَا يَدْخُلُ الْجَنَّةَ قَتَّاتٌ\n(The slanderer will not enter into Paradise.)\" This Hadith has been reported by the Group except for Ibn Majah. Concerning Allah's statement,\nمَنَّاعٍ لِلْخَيْرِ مُعْتَدٍ أَثِيمٍ\n(Hinderer of good, transgressor, sinful,) it means, he refuses to give and withholds that which he has of good.\nمُعْتَدٍ\n(transgressor,) this means, in attaining that which Allah has made permissible for him, he exceeds the legislated bounds.\nأَثِيمٍ\n(sinful,) meaning, he delves into the forbidden things. Concerning Allah's statement,\nعُتُلٍّ بَعْدَ ذَٰلِكَ زَنِيمٍ\n('Utul, and moreover Zanim.) 'Utul means one who is cruel, harsh, strong, greedy and stingy. Imam Ahmad recorded from Al-Harithah bin Wahb that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nأَلَا أُنَبِّئُكُمْ بِأَهْلِ الْجَنَّةِ؟ كُلُّ ضَعِيفٍ مُتَضَعِّفٍ لَوْ أَقْسَمَ عَلَى اللهِ لَأَبَرَّهُ. أَلَا أُنَبِّئُكُمْ بِأَهْلِ النَّارِ؟ كُلُّ عُتُلٍّ جَوَّاظٍ مُسْتَكْبِرٍ\n(Shall I inform you of the people of Paradise? (They will be) every weak and oppressed person. When he swears by Allah, he fulfills his oath. Shall I inform you of the people of the Fire? Every 'Utul (cruel person), Jawwaz and arrogant person.)\nAl-Waki' said, \"It ('Utul) is every Jawwaz, Ja'zari and arrogant person.\" Both Al-Bukhari and Muslim recorded this in their Two Sahihs, as well as the rest of the Group, except for Abu Dawud. All of its routes of transmission are by way of Sufyan Ath-Thawri and Shu'bah who both reported it from Sa'id bin Khalid.\nThe scholars of Arabic language have said that Ja'zari means rude and harsh, while Jawwaz means greedy and stingy.\nConcerning the word Zanim, Al-Bukhari recorded from Ibn 'Abbas that he said concerning the Ayah,\nعُتُلٍّ بَعْدَ ذَٰلِكَ زَنِيمٍ\n('Utul (cruel), and moreover Zanim.) \"A man from the Quraysh who stands out among them like the sheep that has had a piece of its ear cut off.\" The meaning of this is that he is famous for his evil just as a sheep that has a piece of its ear cut off stands out among its sister sheep. In the Arabic language the Zanim is a person who is adopted among a group of people (i.e., he is not truly of them). Ibn Jarir and others among the Imams have said this. Concerning Allah's statement,\nأَنْ كَانَ ذَا مَالٍ وَبَنِينَ - إِذَا تُتْلَىٰ عَلَيْهِ آيَاتُنَا قَالَ أَسَاطِيرُ الْأَوَّلِينَ\n((He was so) because he had wealth and children. When Our Ayat are recited to him, he says: \"Tales of the men of old!\") Allah is saying, 'this is how he responds to the favors that Allah has bestowed upon him of wealth and children, by disbelieving in Allah's Ayat and turning away from them while claiming that they are a lie that has been taken from the tales of the ancients.' This is similar to Allah's statement,\nذَرْنِي وَمَنْ خَلَقْتُ وَحِيدًا - وَجَعَلْتُ لَهُ مَالًا مَمْدُودًا - وَبَنِينَ شُهُودًا - وَمَهَّدْتُ لَهُ تَمْهِيدًا - ثُمَّ يَطْمَعُ أَنْ أَزِيدَ - كَلَّا ۖ إِنَّهُ كَانَ لِآيَاتِنَا عَنِيدًا - سَأُرْهِقُهُ صَعُودًا - إِنَّهُ فَكَّرَ وَقَدَّرَ - فَقُتِلَ كَيْفَ قَدَّرَ - ثُمَّ قُتِلَ كَيْفَ قَدَّرَ - ثُمَّ نَظَرَ - ثُمَّ عَبَسَ وَبَسَرَ - ثُمَّ أَدْبَرَ وَاسْتَكْبَرَ - فَقَالَ إِنْ هَٰذَا إِلَّا سِحْرٌ يُؤْثَرُ - إِنْ هَٰذَا إِلَّا قَوْلُ الْبَشَرِ - سَأُصْلِيهِ سَقَرَ - وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا سَقَرُ - لَا تُبْقِي وَلَا تَذَرُ - لَوَّاحَةٌ لِلْبَشَرِ - عَلَيْهَا تِسْعَةَ عَشَرَ\n(Leave Me alone (to deal) with whom I created lonely (without any wealth and children etc.). And then granted him resources in abundance. And children to be by his side. And made life smooth and comfortable for him. After all that he desires that I should give more. Nay! Verily, he has been opposing Our Ayat. I shall oblige him to face a severe torment! Verily, he thought and plotted. So let him be cursed, how he plotted! And once more let him be cursed, how he plotted! Then he thought. Then he frowned and he looked in a bad tempered way. Then he turned back, and was proud. Then he said: \"This is nothing but magic from that of old, this is nothing but the word of a human being!\" I will cast him into Hellfire. And what will make you know what Hellfire is? It spares not (any sinner), nor does it leave (anything unburned)! Burning and blackening the skins! Over it are nineteen (angels as keepers of Hell).)[74:11-30] Then Allah said here,\nسَنَسِمُهُ عَلَى الْخُرْطُومِ\n(We shall brand him on the snout!) Ibn Jarir said, \"We will make his matter clear and evident so that they will know him and he will not be hidden from them, just as the branding mark on the snouts (of animals).\" Others have said,\nسَنَسِمُهُ\n(We shall brand him) This is the mark of the people of the Hell-fire; meaning, 'We will blacken his face on the Day of Judgement,' and the face has been referred to here as snout.","href":"/tafsir/68?verse=8","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:68:17","title":"Ibn Kathir · 68:17–33","text":"Verily, We have tried them as We tried the People of the Garden, when they swore to pluck the fruits in the morning (17)Without (saying: \"If Allah wills.\" (18)Then there passed over it a Ta'if from your Lord while they were asleep (19)So by the morning, it became like As-Sarim (20)Then they called out (one to another as soon) as the morning broke (21)Saying: \"Go to your tilth in the morning, if you would pluck (the fruits). (22)So they departed, and they were whispering (23)\"No poor person shall enter upon you into it today. (24)And they went in the morning with Hard Qadirin (25)But when they saw it, they said: \"Verily, we have gone astray. (26)\"Nay! Indeed we are deprived! (27)The Awsat among them said; \"Did I not tell you, 'Why do you not Tusabbihun.' (28)They said: \"Glory to Our Lord! Verily, we have been wrongdoers. (29)Then they turned one against another, blaming (30)They said: \"Woe to us! Verily, we were Taghin. (31)\"We hope that our Lord will give us in exchange better than it. Truly, we hope in our Lord. (32)Such is the punishment, but truly, the punishment of the Hereafter is greater if they but knew (33)\nA Parable of the Removal of the Earnings of the Disbelievers\nThis is a parable that Allah made of the behavior of the Quraysh disbelievers with the great mercy, and tremendous favors He granted them. The mercy and favor of sending of Muhammad ﷺ to them. But they met him with denial, rejection and opposition. Therefore Allah says,\nإِنَّا بَلَوْنَاهُمْ\n(Verily, We have tried them) meaning, 'We have tested them.'\nكَمَا بَلَوْنَا أَصْحَابَ الْجَنَّةِ\n(as We tried the People of the Garden,) This refers to a garden containing different types of fruits and vegetation.\nإِذْ أَقْسَمُوا لَيَصْرِمُنَّهَا مُصْبِحِينَ\n(when they swore to pluck the fruits of the (garden) in the morning,) meaning, they vowed between themselves during the night that they would pluck the fruit of the garden in the morning so that poor and the beggars would not know what they were doing. In this way they would be able to keep its fruit for themselves and not give any of it in charity.\nوَلَا يَسْتَثْنُونَ\n(Without (saying: \"If Allah wills.\")) meaning their vow that they made. Therefore, Allah broke their vow. He then said,\nفَطَافَ عَلَيْهَا طَائِفٌ مِنْ رَبِّكَ وَهُمْ نَائِمُونَ\n(Then there passed over it a Ta'if from your Lord while they were asleep.) meaning, it was afflicted with some heavenly destruction.\nفَأَصْبَحَتْ كَالصَّرِيمِ\n(So by the morning it became like As-Sarim.) Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Like the dark night.\" Ath-Thawri and As-Suddi both said, \"Like the crop when it is harvested withered and dry.\"\nفَتَنَادَوْا مُصْبِحِينَ\n(Then they called out (one to another as soon) as the morning broke.) meaning, when it was (early) morning time they called each other so that they could go together to pick the harvest or cut it (its fruits). Then Allah said,\nأَنِ اغْدُوا عَلَىٰ حَرْثِكُمْ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ صَارِمِينَ\n((Saying:) \"Go to your tilth in the morning, if you would pluck (the fruits).\") meaning, 'if you want to pluck your harvest fruit.'\nفَانْطَلَقُوا وَهُمْ يَتَخَافَتُونَ\n(So they departed, and they were whispering:) meaning, they spoke privately about what they were doing so that no one could hear what they were saying. Then Allah, the All-Knower of secrets and private discussions, explained what they were saying in private. He said,\nفَانْطَلَقُوا وَهُمْ يَتَخَافَتُونَ - أَنْ لَا يَدْخُلَنَّهَا الْيَوْمَ عَلَيْكُمْ مِسْكِينٌ\n(So they departed, and they were whispering: \"No poor person shall enter upon you into it today.\") meaning, some of them said to others, \"Do not allow any poor person to enter upon you in it (the garden) today.\" Allah then said,\nوَغَدَوْا عَلَىٰ حَرْدٍ\n(And they went in the morning with Hard) meaning, with strength and power.\nقَادِرِينَ\n(Qadirin) meaning, they thought they had power to do what they claimed and what they were desiring.\nفَلَمَّا رَأَوْهَا قَالُوا إِنَّا لَضَالُّونَ\n(But when they saw it, they said: \"Verily, we have gone astray.\") meaning, when they arrived at it and came upon it, and it was in the condition which Allah changed from that luster, brilliance and abundance of fruit, to being black, gloomy and void of any benefit. They believed that they had been mistaken in the path they took in walking to it. This is why they said,\nإِنَّا لَضَالُّونَ\n(Verily, we have gone astray.) meaning, 'we have walked down a path other than the one we were seeking to reach it.' This was said by Ibn 'Abbas and others. Then they changed their minds and realized with certainty that it was actually the correct path. Then they said,\nبَلْ نَحْنُ مَحْرُومُونَ\n(Nay! Indeed we are deprived (of the fruits)!) meaning, 'nay, this is it, but we have no portion and no share (of harvest).'\nقَالَ أَوْسَطُهُمْ\n(The Awsat among them said,) Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, Sa'id bin Jubayr, 'Ikrimah, Muhammad bin Ka'b, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, Ad-Dahhak and Qatadah all said, \"This means the most just of them and the best of them.\"\nأَلَمْ أَقُلْ لَكُمْ لَوْلَا تُسَبِّحُونَ\n(Did I not tell you, 'Why do you not Tusabbihun?') Mujahid, As-Suddi and Ibn Jurayj all said that,\nلَوْلَا تُسَبِّحُونَ\n(Why do you not Tusabbihun?) this means \"why do you not say, 'If Allah wills?'\" As-Suddi said, \"Their making exception due to the will of Allah in that time was by glorifying Allah (Tasbih).\" Ibn Jarir said, \"It is a person's saying, 'If Allah wills.'\" It has also been said that it means that the best of them said to them, \"Did I not tell you, why don't you glorify Allah and thank Him for what He has given you and favored you with?\"\nقَالُوا سُبْحَانَ رَبِّنَا إِنَّا كُنَّا ظَالِمِينَ\n(They said: \"Glory to Our Lord! Verily, we have been wrongdoers.\") They became obedient when it was of no benefit to them, and they were remorseful and confessed when it was not of any use. Then they said,\nإِنَّا كُنَّا ظَالِمِينَ - فَأَقْبَلَ بَعْضُهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ يَتَلَاوَمُونَ\n(\"...Verily, we have been wrongdoers.\" Then they turned one against another, blaming.) meaning, they started blaming each other for what they had resolved to do, preventing the poor people from receiving their right of the harvested fruit. Thus, their response to each other was only to confess their error and sin.\nقَالُوا يَا وَيْلَنَا إِنَّا كُنَّا طَاغِينَ\n(They said: \"Woe to us! Verily, we were Taghin.\") meaning, 'we have transgressed, trespassed, violated and exceeded the bounds until what this happened to us.'\nعَسَىٰ رَبُّنَا أَنْ يُبْدِلَنَا خَيْرًا مِنْهَا إِنَّا إِلَىٰ رَبِّنَا رَاغِبُونَ\n(We hope that our Lord will give us in exchange better than it. Truly, we hope in our Lord.)\nIt has been said, \"They were hoping for something better in exchange in this life.\" It has also been said, \"They were hoping for its reward in the abode of the Hereafter.\" And Allah knows best. Some of the Salaf mentioned that these people were from Yemen. Sa'id bin Jubayr said, \"They were from a village that was called Darawan which was six miles from San'a' (in Yemen). \" It has also been said, \"They were from the people of Ethiopia whose father had left them this garden, and they were from the People of the Book. Their father used to handle the garden in a good way. Whatever he reaped from it he would put it back into the garden as it needed, and he would save some of it as food for his dependants for the year, and he would give away the excess in charity. Then, when he died, and his children inherited the garden they said, 'Verily, our father was foolish for giving some of this garden's harvest to the poor. If we prevent them from it, then we will have more.' So when they made up their minds to do this they were punished with what was contrary to their plan. Allah took away all of what they possessed of wealth, gain and charity. Nothing remained for them.\" Allah then says,\nكَذَٰلِكَ الْعَذَابُ ۖ\n(Such is the punishment,) meaning, such is the punishment of whoever opposes the command of Allah, is stingy with what Allah has given him and favored him with, withholds the right of the poor and needy, and responds to Allah's blessings upon him with ungratefulness (or disbelief).\nوَلَعَذَابُ الْآخِرَةِ أَكْبَرُ ۚ لَوْ كَانُوا يَعْلَمُونَ\n(but truly, the punishment of the Hereafter is greater if they but knew.) meaning, this is the punishment in this life, as you have heard, and the punishment of the Hereafter is even harder.","href":"/tafsir/68?verse=17","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:68:34","title":"Ibn Kathir · 68:34–41","text":"Verily, for those who have Taqwa are Gardens of Delight with their Lord (34)Shall We then treat the Muslims like the criminals (35)What is the matter with you? How judge you (36)Or have you a Book wherein you learn (37)That you shall therein have all that you choose (38)Or have you oaths from Us, lasting until the Day of Judgement, that yours will be what you judge (39)Ask them, which of them will stand as surety for that (40)Or have they \"partners\"? Then let them bring their \"partners\" if they are truthful (41)\nThe Reward of those Who have Taqwa and that They will not be treated like the Criminals\nAfter Allah mentions the situation of the people of the worldly garden and the wrath they suffered when they disobeyed Allah and opposed his commands, He then explains that whoever has Taqwa of Him, then they will have Gardens of Delight in the Hereafter that will never end. These Gardens will last forever and their pleasures will never cease. Allah says,\nأَفَنَجْعَلُ الْمُسْلِمِينَ كَالْمُجْرِمِينَ\n(Shall We then treat the Muslims like the criminals?)\nMeaning, ‘should we deal equally between them in terms of recompense?’ Nay, by the Lord of the heaven and the earth, surely not! Thus, Allah says,\nمَا لَكُمْ كَيْفَ تَحْكُمُونَ\n(What is the matter with you? How do judge you?) meaning, ‘how can you think that?' Then he says,\nأَمْ لَكُمْ كِتَابٌ فِيهِ تَدْرُسُونَ - إِنَّ لَكُمْ فِيهِ لَمَا تَخَيَّرُونَ\n(Or have you a Book wherein you learn, That you shall therein have all that you choose?)\nAllah is saying in this, ‘is there in your hands a Book that has been sent down from heaven that you study, memorize and pass on to each other, the latter generations conveying it from the generations of old? Do you have such a Book, containing definite laws, as you claim?'\nإِنَّ لَكُمْ فِيهِ لَمَا تَخَيَّرُونَ - أَمْ لَكُمْ أَيْمَانٌ عَلَيْنَا بَالِغَةٌ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ ۙ إِنَّ لَكُمْ لَمَا تَحْكُمُونَ\n(That you shall therein have all that you choose? Or have you oaths from Us, lasting until the Day of Judgement, that yours will be what you judge?) meaning, ‘do you have covenants and confirmed agreements with Us?’\nإِنَّ لَكُمْ لَمَا تَحْكُمُونَ\n(that yours will be what you judge?) meaning, ‘that you will attain all that you want and desire.’\nسَلْهُمْ أَيُّهُم بِذَٰلِكَ زَعِيمٌ\n(Ask them, which of them will stand as surety for that!) meaning, say to them, “Who is the sponsor of guarantee this?” Ibn ‘Abbas said that it means, “Which of them will be guarantor for that?”\nأَمْ لَهُمْ شُرَكَاءُ\n(Or have they \"partners\"?) meaning, ‘do they have idols and rivals gods (besides Allah)?’\nفَلْيَأْتُوا بِشُرَكَائِهِمْ إِن كَانُوا صَادِقِينَ\n(Then let them bring their \"partners\" if they are truthful!)","href":"/tafsir/68?verse=34","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:68:42","title":"Ibn Kathir · 68:42–47","text":"The Day when the Shin shall be laid bare and they shall be called to prostrate themselves, but they shall not be able to do so (42)Their eyes will be cast down and ignominy will cover them; they used to be called to prostrate themselves, while they were (43)Then leave Me alone with whoever denies this narration. We shall punish them gradually from directions they perceive not (44)And I will grant them a respite. Verily, My plan is strong (45)Or is it that you ask them a wage, so that they are heavily burdened with debt (46)Or that the Unseen is in their hands, so that they can write it down (47)\nThe Terror of the Day of Judgement\nAfter Allah mentions that those who have Taqwa, will have Gardens of Delight with their Lord, He explains when this will be, and its actual occurrence. He says,\nيَوْمَ يُكْشَفُ عَنْ سَاقٍ وَيُدْعَوْنَ إِلَى السُّجُودِ فَلَا يَسْتَطِيعُونَ\n(The Day when the Shin shall be laid bare and they shall be called to prostrate themselves, but they shall not be able to do so.) meaning, the Day of Judgement and the horrors, earthquakes, trials, tests and great matters that will occur during it.\nAl-Bukhari recorded that Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri said that he heard the Prophet ﷺ saying,\nيَكْشِفُ رَبُّنَا عَنْ سَاقِهِ، فَيَسْجُدُ لَهُ كُلُّ مُؤْمِنٍ وَمُؤْمِنَةٍ، وَيَبْقَىٰ مَنْ كَانَ يَسْجُدُ فِي الدُّنْيَا رِيَاءً وَسُمْعَةً، فَيَذْهَبُ لِيَسْجُدَ، فَيَعُودُ ظَهْرُهُ طَبَقًا وَاحِدًا\n(Our Lord will reveal His Shin, and every believing male and female will prostrate to Him. The only people who will remain standing are those who prostrated in the worldly life only to be seen and heard (showing off). This type of person will try to prostrate at that time, but his back will made to be one stiff plate (the bone will not bend or flex).)\"\nThis Hadith was recorded in the Two Sahihs and other books from different routes of transmission with various wordings. It is a long Hadith that is very popular. Concerning Allah's statement,\nخَاشِعَةً أَبْصَارُهُمْ تَرْهَقُهُمْ ذِلَّةٌ ۖ\n(Their eyes will be cast down and ignominy will cover them;) means, in the final abode, due to their crimes and arrogance in the worldly life. Thus they will be punished with the opposite of what they did. When they were called to prostrate in the worldly life, they refused to do so even though they were healthy and secure. Therefore, they will be punished with the lack of ability to do so in the Hereafter. When the Almighty Lord makes Himself visible (before the believers), then the believers will fall down in prostration to Him, but no one of the disbelievers and hypocrites will be able to prostrate. rather, their backs will become one plate. Everytime one of them attempts to prostrate, he will bow his neck but will not be able to prostrate. This is just like in the life of this world, when these people were in opposition to what the believers were doing.\nFor Whoever denies the Qur'an\nThen Allah says,\nفَذَرْنِي وَمَنْ يُكَذِّبُ بِهَٰذَا الْحَدِيثِ ۖ\n(Then leave Me alone with such as belie this narration.) meaning, the Qur'an. This is a sever threat which means, 'leave Me alone with this person; I know about him and how I will gradually punish him and increase him in his falsehood. I am giving him respite for a while, then I will seize him with a mighty and powerful punishment.' Thus, Allah says,\nسَنَسْتَدْرِجُهُمْ مِنْ حَيْثُ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ\n(We shall punish them gradually from directions they perceive not.) meaning, and they will not even be aware of it. Rather, they will believe that it is a noble blessing from Allah, but really the same matter is actually a form of humiliation (for them). This is similar to Allah's statement,\nأَيَحْسَبُونَ أَنَّمَا نُمِدُّهُمْ بِهِ مِنْ مَالٍ وَبَنِينَ - نُسَارِعُ لَهُمْ فِي الْخَيْرَاتِ ۚ بَلْ لَا يَشْعُرُونَ\n(Do they think that in wealth and children with which We expand them, We hasten unto them with good things. Nay, but they perceive not.)(23:55,56) Allah also said,\nفَلَمَّا نَسُوا مَا ذُكِّرُوا بِهِ فَتَحْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ أَبْوَابَ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ حَتَّىٰ إِذَا فَرِحُوا بِمَا أُوتُوا أَخَذْنَاهُمْ بَغْتَةً فَإِذَا هُمْ مُبْلِسُونَ\n(So, when they forgot that which they had been reminded, We opened for them the gates of everything, until in the midst of their enjoyment in that which they were given, all of a sudden, We punished them, and lo! They were plunged into destruction with deep regrets and sorrows.)(6:44) Therefore, Allah says here,\nوَأُمْلِي لَهُمْ ۚ إِنَّ كَيْدِي مَتِينٌ\n(And I will grant them a respite. Verily, My plan is strong.) meaning, 'I will delay them, give them respite and extend their time. Yet, this is My plan, and My plot against them.' Thus, Allah says,\nإِنَّ كَيْدِي مَتِينٌ\n(Verily, My plan is strong.) meaning, 'great against whoever opposes My command, rejects My Messengers and dares to disobey Me.'\nIn the Two Sahihs it is recorded from the Messenger of Allah ﷺ that he said,\nإِنَّ اللهَ تَعَالىٰ لَيُمْلِي لِلظَّالِمِ حَتّٰى إِذَا أَخَذَهُ لَمْ يُفْلِتْهُ\n(Verily Allah the Exalted gives respite to the wrongdoer until He seizes him and he will not be able to escape Him.) Then he recited,\nوَكَذَٰلِكَ أَخْذُ رَبِّكَ إِذَا أَخَذَ الْقُرَىٰ وَهِيَ ظَالِمَةٌ ۚ إِنَّ أَخْذَهُ أَلِيمٌ شَدِيدٌ\n(Such is the punishment of your Lord when He seizes the towns while they are doing wrong. Verily, His punishment is painful (and) severe.)(11:102) In reference to Allah's statement,\nأَمْ تَسْأَلُهُمْ أَجْرًا فَهُمْ مِنْ مَغْرَمٍ مُثْقَلُونَ - أَمْ عِنْدَهُمُ الْغَيْبُ فَهُمْ يَكْتُبُونَ\n(Or is it that you ask them for a wage, so that they are heavily burdened with debt? Or that the Unseen is in their hands, so that they can write it down) the explanation of these two Ayat preceded in Surat At-Tur. The meaning of it is, 'you, O Muhammad, call them to Allah without taking any wages from them. rather, you hope for the reward with Allah. Yet, they reject that which you have brought to them simply due to ignorance, disbelief and obstinacy.'","href":"/tafsir/68?verse=42","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:68:48","title":"Ibn Kathir · 68:48–52","text":"So, wait with patience for the decision of your Lord, and be not like the Companion of the Fish when he cried out (to Us) while he was Makzum (48)Had not a grace from his Lord reached him, he would indeed have been (left in the stomach of the fish, but We forgave him), so he was cast off on the naked shore, while he was to be blamed (49)Then his Lord chose him and made him of the righteous (50)And verily, those who disbelieve would almost make you slip with their eyes (through hatred) when they hear the Reminder (the Qur'an), and they say: \"Verily, he is a madman! (51)But it is nothing else than a Reminder to all the creatures ('Alamin)(52)\nThe Command to be Patient and to refrain from being Hasty like Yunus was :\nAllah says,\nفَاصْبِرْ\n(So wait with patience) 'O Muhammad, persevere against the harm your people cause you and their rejection. For verily, Allah will give you authority over them, and make the final victory for you and your followers in this life and the Hereafter.'\nوَلَا تَكُنْ كَصَاحِبِ الْحُوتِ\n(and be not like the Companion of the Fish) meaning, Dhun-Nun, who was Yunus bin Matta, when he went off angry with his people. Various things happened to him, such as riding on a ship at sea, being swallowed by a (large) fish, the fish carrying him off into the ocean, being in the darkness and depth of the sea and hearing the sea's and its dwellers glorification of the Most High, the Most Able (Allah). For He (Allah) is the One Whose execution of divine decree cannot be resisted. After all of this, he (Yunus) called out from the layers of darkness,\nأَنْ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا أَنْتَ سُبْحَانَكَ إِنِّي كُنْتُ مِنَ الظَّالِمِينَ\n(\"That none has the right to be worshipped but You (O Allah), Glorified (and Exalted) are You! Truly, I have been of the wrongdoers.\")(21:87) Then Allah said concerning him,\nفَاسْتَجَبْنَا لَهُ وَنَجَّيْنَاهُ مِنَ الْغَمِّ ۚ وَكَذَٰلِكَ نُنْجِي الْمُؤْمِنِينَ\n(So We answered his call, and delivered him from the distress. And thus We do deliver the believers.)(21:88) Allah also says,\nفَلَوْلَا أَنَّهُ كَانَ مِنَ الْمُسَبِّحِينَ - لَلَبِثَ فِي بَطْنِهِ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ يُبْعَثُونَ\n(Had he not been of them who glorify Allah, he would have indeed remained inside its belly (the fish) till the Day when they are resurrected.)(37:143-144)\nSo here (in this Surah), Allah says,\nإِذْ نَادَىٰ وَهُوَ مَكْظُومٌ\n(when he cried out (to Us) while he was Makzum.) Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid and As-Suddi, all said, \"while he was distressed.\" Then Allah goes on to say,\nفَاجْتَبَاهُ رَبُّهُ فَجَعَلَهُ مِنَ الصَّالِحِينَ\n(Then his Lord chose him and made him of the righteous.) Imam Ahmad recorded from 'Abdullah that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nلَا يَنْبَغِي لِأَحَدٍ أَنْ يَقُولَ: أَنَا خَيْرٌ مِنْ يُونُسَ بْنِ مَتَّى\n(It is not befitting for anyone to say that I am better than Yunus bin Matta.) Al-Bukhari recorded this Hadith and it is in the Two Sahihs reported from Abu Hurayrah. Concerning Allah's statement,\nوَإِنْ يَكَادُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَيُزْلِقُونَكَ بِأَبْصَارِهِمْ\n(And verily, those who disbelieve would almost make you slip with their eyes) Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid and others have said,\nلَيُزْلِقُونَكَ\n(would make you slip) \"In order to have some effect on you.\"\nبِأَبْصَارِهِمْ\n(with their eyes) meaning, 'they will affect you by looking at you with their eyes (i.e., the evil eye).' This means 'they are jealous of you due to their hatred of you, and were it not for Allah's protection of you, defending you against them (then their evil eye would harm you).'\nThe Effect of the Evil Eye is Real\nIn this Ayah is a proof that the effect of the evil eye and its affliction by the command of Allah is real. Many Hadiths have been reported concerning this through numerous routes of transmission.\nThe Hadith of Buraydah bin Al-Husayb\nAbu 'Abdullah bin Majah recorded from Buraydah bin Al-Husayb that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nلَا رُقْيَةَ إِلَّا مِنْ عَيْنٍ أَوْ حُمَةٍ\n(There is no Ruqyah except to cure the evil eye and the sting.)\nThis is how Ibn Majah recorded this Hadith. Imam Muslim also recorded this Hadith in his Sahih on the authority of Buraydah himself, but he did not attribute it to the Prophet ﷺ. There is a story concerning this incident (as reported by Buraydah in Sahih Muslim), and At-Tirmidhi recorded the Hadith in this manner (like Muslim's version). This Hadith has also been recorded by Imam Al-Bukhari, Abu Dawud and At-Tirmidhi on the authority of 'Imran bin Husayn, however, he did not attribute it to the Prophet ﷺ. 'Imran's wording is,\nلَا رُقْيَةَ إِلَّا مِنْ عَيْنٍ أَوْ حُمَةٍ\n(There is no Ruqyah except to cure the evil eye and the sting.)\" Muslim recorded in his Sahih from Ibn 'Abbas that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nالْعَيْنُ حَقٌّ وَلَوْ كَانَ شَيْءٌ سَابَقَ الْقَدَرَ سَبَقَتِ الْعَيْنُ وَإِذَا اسْتُغْسِلْتُمْ فَاغْسِلُوا\n(The evil eye is real. If anything were to overtake the divine decree (and change it), then it would be the evil eye. And if you perform Ghusl (to remove the evil eye) then wash well.)\nMuslim was alone in recording this Hadith, as Al-Bukhari did not mention it. It is reported from Ibn 'Abbas that he said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to invoke Allah's protection for Al-Hasan and Al-Husayn (his grandsons) by saying,\nأُعِيذُكُمَا بِكَلِمَاتِ اللهِ التَّامَّةِ مِنْ كُلِّ شَيْطَانٍ وَهَامَّةٍ، وَمِنْ كُلِّ عَيْنٍ لَامَّةٍ\n(I seek protection for you two by the perfect Words of Allah from every Shaytan, and dangerous creature, and from every eye that is evil.) Then he would say:\nهَكَذَا كَانَ إِبْرَاهِيمُ يُعَوِّذُ إِسْحَاقَ وَإِسْمَاعِيلَ عَلَيْهِمَا السَّلَامُ\n(Thus, did Ibrahim used to seek protection for Ishaq and Isma'il (his sons).)\" This Hadith was recorded by Al-Bukhari and the Sunan compilers.\nThe Hadith of Abu Umamah As'ad bin Sahl bin Hunayf\nIbn Majah recorded from Abu Umamah As'ad bin Sahl bin Hunayf that 'Amir bin Rabi'ah passed by Sahl bin Hunayf while he was bathing and he said, \"I haven't seen the skin of a beautiful virgin girl nicer than this that I see today (i.e., commenting on how nice Sahl's skin was).\" So he did not leave before he (Sahl) fell down on the ground. So he was brought to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and it was said to him (the Prophet ﷺ) that Sahl had been afflicted by a seizure. The Prophet ﷺ then said,\nمَنْ تَتَّهِمُونَ بِهِ؟\n(Who do you blame (or hold responsible) for this?) The people replied, \"\"Amir bin Rabi'ah.\" Then the Prophet ﷺ said,\nعَلَامَ يَقْتُلُ أَحَدُكُمْ أَخَاهُ؟ إِذَا رَأَىٰ أَحَدُكُمْ مِنْ أَخِيهِ مَا يُعْجِبُهُ فَلْيَدْعُ لَهُ بِالْبَرَكَةِ\n(Would one of you knowingly kill his brother? If one of you sees something of his brother that he likes, then let him supplicate for blessings for him.)\nThen the Prophet ﷺ called for some water and he commanded 'Amir to perform Wudu' with the water. So he washed his face, his hands up to his two elbows, his two knees, and the inside of his Izar. Then the Prophet ﷺ commanded him to pour the water over Sahl. Sufyan said that Ma'mar related from Az-Zuhri that he said, \"The Prophet ﷺ ordered him to turn the water pot over (empty its contents over) him (Sahl) from behind him.\" An-Nasa'i recorded this Hadith through different routes from Abu Umamah with the wording, \"And he turned the pot over pouring its contents over him (Sahl) from behind him.\"\nThe Hadith of Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri\nIbn Majah recorded that Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to seek refuge from the evil eye of the Jinns and the evil eye of humans. Then when the Mu'awwidhatan were revealed, he used them (for seeking protection) and abandoned everything else. This was recorded by At-Tirmidhi, and An-Nasa'i. At-Tirmidhi said, \"Hasan.\"\nAnother Hadith from Abu Sa'id\nImam Ahmad recorded from Abu Sa'id that Jibril came to the Prophet ﷺ and said, \"O Muhammad, are you suffering from any ailment?\" The Prophet ﷺ said,\nنَعَمْ\n(Yes).\" Then Jibril said,\nبِاسْمِ اللهِ أَرْقِيكَ مِنْ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ يُؤْذِيكَ، وَمِنْ شَرِّ كُلِّ نَفْسٍ وَعَيْنٍ تَشْنِيكَ، وَاللهُ يَشْفِيكَ، بِاسْمِ اللهِ أَرْقِيكَ\n(\"In the Name of Allah I pray over you for healing (Ruqyah), from everything that bothers you, from the evil of every soul and every evil eye that hates you, may Allah cure you, in the Name of Allah I pray over you for healing.\")\nThis Hadith has been recorded by Muslim and the Sunan compilers except for Abu Dawud.\nImam Ahmad also recorded from Abu Sa'id or Jabir bin 'Abdullah that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ was bothered by some illness, and Jibril came to him and said,\nبِاسْمِ اللهِ أَرْقِيكَ مِنْ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ يُؤْذِيكَ، مِنْ كُلِّ حَاسِدٍ وَعَيْنٍ، اللهُ يَشْفِيكَ\n(In the Name of Allah I pray over you for healing (Ruqyah), from everything that bothers you, from every envious person and evil eye, may Allah cure you.)\nThe Hadith of Abu Hurayrah\nImam Ahmad recorded from Abu Hurayrah that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ الْعَيْنَ حَقٌّ\n(Verily, the evil eye is real.)\nBoth Al-Bukhari and Muslim recorded this Hadith as well. Ibn Majah recorded from Abu Hurayrah that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nالْعَيْنُ حَقٌّ\n(The evil eye is real.)\nIbn Majah was alone in recording this Hadith.\nThe Hadith of Asma' bint 'Umays\nImam Ahmad recorded from 'Ubayd bin Rifa'ah Az-Zuraqi that Asma' said, \"O Messenger of Allah! Verily, Bani Ja'far are afflicted with the evil eye; should I seek to have Ruqyah?\" The Prophet ﷺ replied,\nنَعَمْ فَلَوْ كَانَ شَيْءٌ يَسْبِقُ الْقَدَرَ لَسَبَقَتْهُ الْعَيْنُ\n(Yes, for if anything could overcome the divine decree, it would be the evil eye.) This Hadith has been recorded like this by At-Tirmidhi, Ibn Majah, and An-Nasa'i. At-Tirmidhi said concerning it, \"Hasan Sahih.\"\nThe Hadith of 'A'ishah\nIbn Majah recorded from 'A'ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ ordered her to have Ruqyah performed as a cure against the evil eye. This was reported by Al-Bukhari and Muslim.\nThe Hadith of Sahl bin Hunayf\nImam Ahmad recorded from Abu Umamah bin Sahl bin Hunayf that his father informed him that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ went out on a journey in the direction of Makkah and they (the Companions) accompanied him until they came to the valley of Kharrar from Al-Juhfah. They stopped there and Sahl took a bath. He (Sahl) was a white man, with a handsome body and nice skin. So the brother of Bani 'Adi bin Ka'b, 'Amir bin Rabi'ah looked at Sahl while he bathed and he said, \"I haven't seen the skin of a beautiful virgin girl nicer than this that I see today.\" Then Sahl suddenly had a seizure and fell to the ground. So he (Sahl) was brought to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and it was said to him, \"O Messenger of Allah! Can you do anything for Sahl? By Allah, he has not lifted his head nor has he regained consciousness.\" The Prophet ﷺ then said,\nهَلْ تَتَّهِمُونَ فِيهِ مِنْ أَحَدٍ؟\n(Do you all blame (or hold responsible) anyone for what has happened to him?) They said, \"'Amir bin Rabi'ah looked at him.\" So the Prophet ﷺ called 'Amir and he was very angry with him. He said,\nعَلَامَ يَقْتُلُ أَحَدُكُمْ أَخَاهُ، هَلَّا إِذَا رَأَيْتَ مَا يُعْجِبُكَ بَرَّكْتَ؟\n(Would one of you knowingly kill his brother? Why don't you ask Allah to bless your brother when you see something (of him) that you like?) Then the Prophet ﷺ said,\nاغْتَسِلْ لَهُ\n(Bathe for him.) So he ('Amir) washed his face, his hands, his elbows, his knees, his feet and the inside of his Izar (waist wrapper) in a drinking vessel. Then that water was poured over him (Sahl). A man poured it over Sahl's head and his back from behind him, then the container was turned upside down and emptied behind him. This was done, and afterwards Sahl recovered and left with the people having nothing wrong with him.\"\nThe Hadith of 'Amir bin Rabi'ah\nImam Ahmad recorded in his Musnad that 'Ubaydullah bin 'Amir said, \"'Amir bin Rabi'ah and Sahl bin Hanayf went off together intending to bathe. So they went about their business using coverings (to cover their nakedness). So 'Amir removed a cloak of wool that he (Sahl) was using to conceal himself. He ('Amir) said, 'I looked at him and my eye fell upon him while he was pouring water on himself bathing. Then I heard a loud splash in the water coming from where he was. So I went to him, and I called him three times, but he did not answer me. So I went to the Prophet ﷺ and informed him. Then, the Prophet ﷺ came walking, and he was wading in the water. I can still picture the whiteness of his shins. When he came to Sahl (who was unconscious), he hit him on his chest with his hand and said,\nاللّٰهُمَّ اصْرِفْ عَنْهُ حَرَّهَا وَبَرْدَهَا وَوَصَبَهَا\n(O Allah! Remove from him its heat, its cold and its pain.) He (Sahl) then stood up, and Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nإِذَا رَأَى أَحَدُكُمْ مِنْ أَخِيهِ، أَوْ مِنْ نَفْسِهِ، أَوْ مِنْ مَالِهِ مَا يُعْجِبُهُ، فَلْيُبَرِّكْ فَإِنَّ الْعَيْنَ حَقٌّ\n(If one of you sees in his brother, or himself, or his wealth that which pleases him, then he should ask Allah to bless it, for verily, the evil eye is real.)\nThe Accusation of the Disbelievers and the Reply to Them\nAllah says,\nوَيَقُولُونَ إِنَّهُ لَمَجْنُونٌ\n(and they say: \"Verily, he is a madman!\") meaning, they cut at him with their eyes and attack him with their tongues saying, \"Verily, he is a madman.\" They say this because he came with the Qur'an. Allah then says,\nوَمَا هُوَ إِلَّا ذِكْرٌ لِلْعَالَمِينَ\n(But it is nothing else but a Reminder to all the creatures ('Alamin).)\nThis is the end of the explanation (Tafsir) of Surah Nun (or Al-Qalam), and all praise and blessing belong to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/68?verse=48","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:69:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 69:1–12","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nالْحَاقَّةُ - مَا الْحَاقَّةُ - وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا الْحَاقَّةُ - كَذَّبَتْ ثَمُودُ وَعَادٌ بِالْقَارِعَةِ - فَأَمَّا ثَمُودُ فَأُهْلِكُوا بِالطَّاغِيَةِ - وَأَمَّا عَادٌ فَأُهْلِكُوا بِرِيحٍ صَرْصَرٍ عَاتِيَةٍ - سَخَّرَهَا عَلَيْهِمْ سَبْعَ لَيَالٍ وَثَمَانِيَةَ أَيَّامٍ حُسُومًا فَتَرَى الْقَوْمَ فِيهَا صَرْعَىٰ كَأَنَّهُمْ أَعْجَازُ نَخْلٍ خَاوِيَةٍ - فَهَلْ تَرَىٰ لَهُمْ مِنْ بَاقِيَةٍ - وَجَاءَ فِرْعَوْنُ وَمَنْ قَبْلَهُ وَالْمُؤْتَفِكَاتُ بِالْخَاطِئَةِ - فَعَصَوْا رَسُولَ رَبِّهِمْ فَأَخَذَهُمْ أَخْذَةً رَابِيَةً - إِنَّا لَمَّا طَغَى الْمَاءُ حَمَلْنَاكُمْ فِي الْجَارِيَةِ - لِنَجْعَلَهَا لَكُمْ تَذْكِرَةً وَتَعِيَهَا أُذُنٌ وَاعِيَةٌ\n(1. Al-Haqqah!)(2. What is Al-Haqqah?)(3. And what will make you know what Al-Haqqah is?)(4. Thamud and 'Ad denied the Qari'ah!)(5. As for Thamud, they were destroyed by the Taghiyah!)(6. And as for 'Ad, they were destroyed by a wind, Sarsar 'Atiyah!)(7. Which Allah imposed on them for seven nights and eight days Husum, so that you could see men lying toppled, as if they were trunks of date palms, Khawiyah!)(8. Do you see any remnants of them?)(9. And Fir'awn, and those before him, and the cities overthrown committed Al-Khati'ah.)(10. And they disobeyed their Lord's Messenger, so He seized them with a punishment that was Rabiyah.)(11. Verily, when the water rose beyond its limits, We carried you in the ship.)(12. That We might make it an admonition for you and that it might be retained by the retaining ears.)\nWarning concerning the Greatness of the Day of Judgement\nAl-Haqqah is one of the names of the Day of Judgement, because during it the promise and the threat will inevitably occur. Due to this, Allah has declared the greatness of this matter. So He says,\nوَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا الْحَاقَّةُ\n(And what will make you know what Al-Haqqah is?)\nMention of the Destruction of the Nations\nThen Allah mentions the destruction of the nations that denied the Resurrection. He says,\nفَأَمَّا ثَمُودُ فَأُهْلِكُوا بِالطَّاغِيَةِ\n(As for Thamud, they were destroyed by the Taghiyah!)\nIt is the cry which will silence them, and the quake that will silence them. Qatadah said similar to this when he said, \"At-Taghiyah is the shout.\" Mujahid said, \"At-Taghiyah means the sins.\" This was also said by Ar-Rabi' bin Anas and bin Zayd. They said that it means transgression. After mentioning this, Ibn Zayd recited the following Ayat as proof for his statement,\nكَذَّبَتْ ثَمُودُ بِطَغْوَاهَا\n(Thamud denied through their transgression.)(91:11) Then Allah says,\nوَأَمَّا عَادٌ فَأُهْلِكُوا بِرِيحٍ صَرْصَرٍ\n(And as for 'Ad, they were destroyed by a wind Sarsar) meaning, a cold wind. Qatadah, As-Suddi, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas and Ath-Thawri all said about,\nعَاتِيَةٍ\n('Atiyah) \"This means severe blowing of the wind.\" Qatadah said, \"It blew fiercely upon them until it pierced their hearts.\" Ad-Dahhak said,\nصَرْصَرٍ\n(Sarsar) \"This means cold, and\nعَاتِيَةٍ\n('Atiyah) means, it blew fiercely upon them without any mercy or blessing.\" 'Ali and others said, \"It blew fiercely upon their stored harvest until it was brought out worthless.\"\nسَخَّرَهَا عَلَيْهِمْ\n(Which Allah imposed on them) meaning, He made it overpower them.\nسَبْعَ لَيَالٍ وَثَمَانِيَةَ أَيَّامٍ حُسُومًا\n(for seven nights and eight days Husum,) Husum means, complete, successive and unfortunately evil. Ibn Mas'ud, Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Ath-Thawri and others all said, \"Husum means in succession.\" It has been reported that 'Ikrimah and Ar-Rabi' bin Khuthaym both said, \"It means it was unfortunately evil upon them.\" This is similar to Allah's statement,\nفِي أَيَّامٍ نَحِسَاتٍ\n(in days of calamity)(41: 16) It has been said that it is that which people now call A'jaz (apparently used to mean evil devastation). It seems as though the people took this term from Allah's statement,\nفَتَرَى الْقَوْمَ فِيهَا صَرْعَىٰ كَأَنَّهُمْ أَعْجَازُ نَخْلٍ خَاوِيَةٍ\n(so that you could see the people lying toppled, as if they were A'jaz (trunks) of date palms, Khawiyah!) Ibn 'Abbas said about,\nخَاوِيَةٍ\n(Khawiyah) \"It means ruined.\" Others besides him said, \"It means dilapidated.\" This means that the wind would cause one of them (palm tree) to hit the ground, and it will fall down dead on his head. Then his head would shatter and it would remain a lifeless corpse as if it were without branches, motionless. It has been confirmed in the Two Sahihs that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nنُصِرْتُ بِالصَّبَا وَأُهْلِكَتْ عَادٌ بِالدَّبُورِ\n(I was helped by an easterly wind and the people of 'Ad were destroyed by a westerly wind.)\nفَهَلْ تَرَىٰ لَهُمْ مِنْ بَاقِيَةٍ\n(Do you see any remnants of them?) meaning, 'do you find any one of them left or anyone who even attributes himself to being from them?' Rather they are all gone, right down to the last of them, and Allah did not make for them any successors. Then Allah says,\nوَجَاءَ فِرْعَوْنُ وَمَنْ قَبْلَهُ\n(And Fir'awn and those before him committed (sin)) This has been recited with a Kasrah under the letter Qaf (in the word Qabalahu, as Qiblahu), which changes the meaning to those who were with him in his time, and they were his followers who were disbelieving Coptic people. Others recited it with a Fathah over the letter Qaf (as the word Qablahu), which means those nations before him who were similar to him. Concerning Allah's statement,\nوَالْمُؤْتَفِكَاتُ\n(the overthrown cities) those nations that rejected their Messengers.\nبِالْخَاطِئَةِ\n(committed Al-Khati'ah.) Al-Khati'ah means their rejection of what Allah revealed. Ar-Rabi' said,\nبِالْخَاطِئَةِ\n(committed Al-Khati'ah.) \"This means disobedience.\" Mujahid said, \"They committed errors.\" Thus, Allah says,\nفَعَصَوْا رَسُولَ رَبِّهِمْ\n(And they disobeyed their Lord's Messenger,) meaning they were all of the same type, they all denied the Messenger of Allah who was sent to them. As Allah says,\nكُلٌّ كَذَّبَ الرُّسُلَ فَحَقَّ وَعِيدِ\n(Everyone of them denied the Messengers, so My threat took effect.) So whoever denies a Messenger, then verily, he denies all of the Messengers. This is as Allah says,\nكَذَّبَتْ قَوْمُ نُوحٍ الْمُرْسَلِينَ\n(The people of Nuh belied the Messengers)(26:105)\nكَذَّبَتْ عَادٌ الْمُرْسَلِينَ\n('Ad belied the Messengers.)(26:123)\nكَذَّبَتْ ثَمُودُ الْمُرْسَلِينَ\n(Thamud belied the Messengers.) However, only one Messenger came to every nation. Thus, Allah says here,(26:141)\nفَعَصَوْا رَسُولَ رَبِّهِمْ فَأَخَذَهُمْ أَخْذَةً رَابِيَةً\n(And they disobeyed their Lord's Messenger, so He seized them with a punishment that was Rabiyah.) Rabiyah means, great, severe and painful. Mujahid said, \"Rabiyah means severe.\" As-Suddi said, \"It means destructive.\"\nA Reminder about the Blessing of the Ship\nThen, Allah says,\nإِنَّا لَمَّا طَغَى الْمَاءُ\n(Verily, when the water rose beyond its limits,) meaning, it rose up over its shores by the leave of Allah and it overcame all that existed. Ibn 'Abbas and others said, \"The water rising beyond its boundary means it increased abundantly.\" This happened due to the supplication of Nuh against his people when they denied him, opposed him and worshipped other than Allah.\nTherefore, Allah answered his supplication and the people of the earth were covered with the flood except for those who were with Nuh in the ship. Thus, are humans all from the loins of Nuh and his progeny. For this reason Allah reminds humanity of His blessing,\nإِنَّا لَمَّا طَغَى الْمَاءُ حَمَلْنَاكُمْ فِي الْجَارِيَةِ\n(Verily, when the water rose beyond its limits, We carried you in the ship.) meaning, a ship running along upon the surface of the water.\nلِنَجْعَلَهَا لَكُمْ تَذْكِرَةً\n(That We might make it an admonition for you) The pronoun \"it\" here refers to the species of the object (ships) due to the general meaning alluding to this. Thus, the meaning is, 'We caused its type of creation (ships) to remain (in the earth) for you, so that you ride upon the currents of the water in the seas. ' This is as Allah says,\nوَجَعَلَ لَكُمْ مِنَ الْفُلْكِ وَالْأَنْعَامِ مَا تَرْكَبُونَ - لِتَسْتَوُوا عَلَىٰ ظُهُورِهِ ثُمَّ تَذْكُرُوا نِعْمَةَ رَبِّكُمْ إِذَا اسْتَوَيْتُمْ عَلَيْهِ\n(and has appointed for you ships and cattle on which you ride; In order that you may mount on their backs, and then may remember the favor of your Lord when you mount thereon)(43:12-13) And Allah said,\nوَآيَةٌ لَّهُمْ أَنَّا حَمَلْنَا ذُرِّيَّتَهُمْ فِي الْفُلْكِ الْمَشْحُونِ - وَخَلَقْنَا لَهُم مِّن مِّثْلِهِ مَا يَرْكَبُونَ\n(And an Ayah for them is that We bore their offspring in the laden ship. And We have created for them of the like thereunto, on which they ride.)(36:41,42)\nQatadah said, \"Allah caused this ship to remain until the first people of this Ummah saw it.\" However, the first view (that it refers to all ships in general) is the most apparent. Allah continues saying,\nوَتَعِيَهَا أُذُنٌ وَاعِيَةٌ\n(and that it might be retained by the retaining ears.) meaning, that a receptive ear may understand and reflect upon this bounty. Ibn 'Abbas said, \"This means an ear that is retentive and hearing.\" Qatadah said,\nأُذُنٌ وَاعِيَةٌ\n(by the retaining ears.) means, \"An ear that Allah gives intelligence, so it benefits by what it hears from Allah's Book.\" Ad-Dahhak said,\nوَتَعِيَهَا أُذُنٌ وَاعِيَةٌ\n(and that it might be retained by the retaining ears.)(69:12) means, \"An ear that hears it and retains it, meaning the person who has sound hearing, and correct intellect.\" And this is general concerning everyone who understands and retains.","href":"/tafsir/69?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:69:13","title":"Ibn Kathir · 69:13–18","text":"Then when the Trumpet will be blown with one blowing (13)And the earth and the mountains shall be removed from their places, and crushed with a single crushing (14)Then on that Day shall the Event occur (15)And the heaven will be rent asunder, for that Day it will be frail and torn up (16)And the angels will be on its sides, and eight angels will, that Day, bear the Throne of your Lord above them (17)That Day shall you be brought to Judgement, not a secret of you will be hidden (18)\nA Mention of the Horrors of the Day of Judgement\nAllah informs of the horrors that will take place on the Day of Judgement. The first of these events is the blowing of fright (into the Trumpet), which will be followed by the blowing of destruction when everyone in the heavens and the earth will be struck down except whoever Allah wills. Then, after this will be the blowing of standing before the Lord of all that exists, and the resurrection, and the gathering. And this is that blowing. It is emphasized here that it is one blowing, because the command of Allah cannot be opposed or prevented, and it does not need to be repeated or stressed. Thus, Allah goes on to say,\nوَحُمِلَتِ الْأَرْضُ وَالْجِبَالُ فَدُكَّتَا دَكَّةً وَاحِدَةً\n(And the earth and the mountains shall be removed from their places, and crushed with a single crushing.) meaning, they will be stretched out to the extent of the surface (of the earth) and the earth will change into something else other than the earth.\nفَيَوْمَئِذٍ وَقَعَتِ الْوَاقِعَةُ\n(Then on that Day shall the Event occur.) meaning, the Day of Judgement.\nوَانْشَقَّتِ السَّمَاءُ فَهِيَ يَوْمَئِذٍ وَاهِيَةٌ\n(And the heaven will be rent asunder, for that Day it will be frail and torn up.) Ibn Jurayj said, \"This is like Allah's statement,\nوَفُتِحَتِ السَّمَاءُ فَكَانَتْ أَبْوَابًا\n(And the heaven shall be opened, it will become as gates.)(78:19) Ibn 'Abbas said, \"It (the sky) will be torn apart and the Throne will be near it.\"\nوَالْمَلَكُ عَلَىٰ أَرْجَائِهَا ۚ\n(And the angels will be on its sides,) The word Malak here is referring to the species of angels (all of them); meaning the angels collectively will be standing on the sides of the heavens. Ar-Rabi' bin Anas said concerning Allah's statement,\nوَالْمَلَكُ عَلَىٰ أَرْجَائِهَا ۚ\n(And the angels will be on its sides,) \"This means that they will be standing on what has been ground to powder of the heavens looking at the people of the earth.' Concerning the statement of Allah,\nوَيَحْمِلُ عَرْشَ رَبِّكَ فَوْقَهُمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ ثَمَانِيَةٌ\n(and eight angels will, that Day, bear the Throne of your Lord above them.) means on the Day of Judgement eight angels will carry the Throne. Abu Dawud recorded from Jabir bin 'Abdullah that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\n(I was permitted to speak about one of the angels among those angels who carry the Throne of Allah. Between the lobe of his ear to his shoulder is the distance of seven hundred years (of travelling).) This is the wording recorded in Abu Dawud.\nThe Children of Adam being presented before Allah\nConcerning the statement of Allah,\nيَوْمَئِذٍ تُعْرَضُونَ لَا تَخْفَىٰ مِنْكُمْ خَافِيَةٌ\n(That Day shall you be brought to Judgement, not a secret of you will be hidden.) meaning, 'you will all be presented to the Knower of the secrets and private counsels. He is the One from Whom none of your affairs are hidden. He is the Knower of all things apparent, secret and hidden.' This is the reason that Allah says,\nلَا تَخْفَىٰ مِنْكُمْ خَافِيَةٌ\n(not a secret of you will be hidden.)\nImam Ahmad recorded from Abu Musa that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nيُعْرَضُ النَّاسُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ ثَلَاثَ عَرْضَاتٍ، فَأَمَّا عَرْضَتَانِ فَجِدَالٌ وَمَعَاذِيرُ، وَأَمَّا الثَّالِثَةُ فَعِنْدَ ذَلِكَ تَطِيرُ الصُّحُفُ فِي الْأَيْدِي فَآخِذٌ بِيَمِينِهِ وَآخِذٌ بِشِمالِهِ\n(The people will be exhibited three times on the Day of Judgement. The first two presentations will be (their) arguing and offering excuses. During the third presentation the pages (records) will fly into their hands. Some of them will receive the records in their right hands and some will receive them in their left hands.) Ibn Majah and At-Tirmidhi both recorded this Hadith.","href":"/tafsir/69?verse=13","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:69:19","title":"Ibn Kathir · 69:19–24","text":"Then as for him who will be given his Record in his right hand will say: \"Here! read my Record! (19)\"Surely, I did believe that I shall meet my account! (20)So, he shall be in a life, well-pleasing (21)In a lofty Paradise (22)The fruits in bunches whereof will be low and near at hand (23)Eat and drink at ease for that which you have sent on before you in days past (24)\nThe Happiness of the Person Who will receive His Book in His Right Hand and His Good Situation\nAllah informs of the happiness of those who receive their Book in the right hand on the Day of Judgement and being pleased with this. Out of his extreme pleasure is his saying to everyone that he meets,\nهَاؤُمُ اقْرَءُوا كِتَابِيَهْ\n(Here! read my Record!) meaning, 'take my Book and read it.' He will say this because he knows that what is in it is good and purely virtuous deeds. He will be of those whom Allah replaced their bad deeds (evils) with good deeds. 'Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd said, \"The meaning of\nهَاؤُمُ اقْرَءُوا كِتَابِيَهْ\n(Here! read my Record!) is 'Here, read my Book.'... The suffix 'Um' is a grammatical addition.\" This is what he ('Abdur-Rahman) said. It seems apparent that the suffix 'Um' means here 'you all.'\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that 'Abdullah bin 'Abdullah bin Hanzalah - and he (Hanzalah) was the Companion who was washed by the angels for his funeral - said, \"Verily, Allah will stop His servant on the Day of Judgement and He will make his sins appear on the outside of his Book of Records. Then He will say to him, 'Did you do this?' The servant will respond, 'Yes my Lord.' Then Allah will say to him, 'I will not expose you (or dishonor you) for it, for verily, I have forgiven you. ' The person will then say, 'Here (you all) read my Book!'\"\nإِنِّي ظَنَنْتُ أَنِّي مُلَاقٍ حِسَابِيَهْ\n(Surely, I did believe that I shall meet my account!) This will be when he (the servant of Allah) will be saved from being disgraced and exposed on the Day of Judgement.\nIn the Sahih, it is recorded from Ibn 'Umar that he was asked about the private counsel. He responded by saying that he heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ saying,\nيُدْنِي اللهُ الْعَبْدَ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ فَيُقَرِّرُهُ بِذُنُوبِهِ كُلِّهَا، حَتّٰى إِذَا رَأَى أَنَّهُ قَدْ هَلَكَ قَالَ اللهُ تَعَالىٰ: إِنِّي سَتَرْتُهَا عَلَيْكَ فِي الدُّنْيَا وَأَنَا أَغْفِرُهَا لَكَ الْيَوْمَ، ثُمَّ يُعْطَىٰ كِتَابَ حَسَنَاتِهِ بِيَمِينِهِ. وَأَمَّا الْكَافِرُ وَالْمُنَافِقُ فَيَقُولُ الْأَشْهَادُ\nهَٰؤُلَاءِ الَّذِينَ كَذَبُوا عَلَىٰ رَبِّهِمْ ۚ أَلَا لَعْنَةُ اللَّهِ عَلَى الظَّالِمِينَ\n(Allah will bring the servant close (to Him) on the Day of Judgement and make him confess all of his sins. This will continue until the servant thinks that he is about to be destroyed. Then Allah will say, \"Verily, I have concealed these sins for you in the worldly life and I have forgiven you for them today.\" Then he will be given his Book of good deeds in his right hand. However, about the disbeliever and the hypocrite, the witnesses will say, (\"These are those who lied on their Lord, and verily, the curse of Allah is on the wrongdoers.\")) Allah's statement,\nإِنِّي ظَنَنْتُ أَنِّي مُلَاقٍ حِسَابِيَهْ\n(Surely, I did believe that I shall meet my account!) means, 'I used to be certain in the worldly life that this day would definitely come.' This is as Allah says,\nالَّذِينَ يَظُنُّونَ أَنَّهُمْ مُلَاقُو رَبِّهِمْ\n((They are those) who are certain that they are going to meet their Lord.)(2:46) Allah then says,\nفَهُوَ فِي عِيشَةٍ رَاضِيَةٍ\n(So he shall be in a life, well-pleasing.)(69:21) meaning, pleasant.\nفِي جَنَّةٍ عَالِيَةٍ\n(In a lofty Paradise,) meaning, having elevated castles, beautiful wide-eyed maidens, pleasant stations and eternal joy. It has been confirmed in the Sahih that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ الْجَنَّةَ مِائَةُ دَرَجَةٍ مَا بَيْنَ كُلِّ دَرَجَتَيْنِ كَمَا بَيْنَ السَّمَاءِ وَالْأَرْضِ\n(Verily, Paradise has one hundred levels and between each level is a distance like the distance between the earth and the sky.) Then Allah says,\nقُطُوفُهَا دَانِيَةٌ\n(The fruits in bunches whereof will be low and near at hand.) Al-Bara' bin 'Azib said, \"This means close enough for one of them (the people of Paradise) to reach them while he is lying on his bed.\" More than one person has said this. Then Allah says,\nكُلُوا وَاشْرَبُوا هَنِيئًا بِمَا أَسْلَفْتُمْ فِي الْأَيَّامِ الْخَالِيَةِ\n(Eat and drink at ease for that which you have sent on before you in days past!) meaning, this will be said to them as an invitation to them of blessing, favor and goodness. For verily, it has been confirmed in the Sahih that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nاعْمَلُوا وَسَدِّدُوا وَقَارِبُوا، وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّ أَحَدًا مِنْكُمْ لَنْ يُدْخِلَهُ عَمَلُهُ الْجَنَّةَ\n(Work deeds, strive, seek to draw near (to Allah) and know that none of you will be admited into Paradise because of his deeds.)\nThey (the Companions) said, \"Not even you O Messenger of Allah?\" He replied,\nوَلَا أَنَا إِلَّا أَنْ يَتَغَمَّدَنِيَ اللهُ بِرَحْمَةٍ مِنْهُ وَفَضْلٍ\n(Not even me, except if Allah covers me with mercy from Himself and grace.)","href":"/tafsir/69?verse=19","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:69:25","title":"Ibn Kathir · 69:25–37","text":"But as for him who will be given his Record in his left hand, will say: \"I wish that I had not been given my Record!\") (25)\"And that I had never known how my account is! (26)\"Would that it had been my end! (27)\"My wealth has not availed me; (28)\"My power has gone from me! (29)(It will be said): \"Seize him and fetter him; (30)\"Then throw him in the blazing Fire. (31)\"Then fasten him on a chain whereof the length is seventy cubits! (32)Verily, he used not to believe in Allah, the Most Great (33)And urged not the feeding of the poor (34)So, no friend has he here this Day (35)Nor any food except filth from Ghislin (36)None will eat it except the Khati'un (37)\nThe Bad Condition of Whoever is given His Record in His Left Hand\nThese Ayat inform about the condition of the wretched people when one of them is given his Record (of deeds) in his left hand when the people are brought before Allah. At this time he will be very remorseful.\nفَيَقُولُ يَا لَيْتَنِي لَمْ أُوتَ كِتَابِيَهْ - وَلَمْ أَدْرِ مَا حِسَابِيَهْ - يَا لَيْتَهَا كَانَتِ الْقَاضِيَةَ\n((He) will say: \"I wish that I had not been given my Record! And that I had never known how my account is! Would that it had been my end!...\")\nAd-Dahhak said, \"Meaning a death which is not followed by any life.\" Likewise said Muhammad bin Ka'b, Ar-Rabi' and As-Suddi. Qatadah said, \"He will hope for death even though in the worldly life it was the most hated thing to him.\"\nمَا أَغْنَىٰ عَنِّي مَالِيَهْ ۜ - هَلَكَ عَنِّي سُلْطَانِيَهْ\n(My wealth has not availed me; my power has gone from me.) means, 'my wealth and my honor did not protect me from the punishment of Allah and His torment. Now the matter has ended with me alone and I have no helper nor anyone to save me.' At this Allah says,\nخُذُوهُ فَغُلُّوهُ - ثُمَّ الْجَحِيمَ صَلُّوهُ\n(Seize him and fetter him; then throw him in the blazing Fire.) meaning, He will command the guardians of Hell to forcibly remove him from the gathering place, fetter him - meaning put iron collars on his neck - then carry him off to Hell and cast him into it, meaning they will submerge him in it. Allah said,\nثُمَّ فِي سِلْسِلَةٍ ذَرْعُهَا سَبْعُونَ ذِرَاعًا فَاسْلُكُوهُ\n(Then fasten him on a chain whereof the length is seventy cubits!) Ka'b Al-Ahbar said, \"Every ring of it will be equal to the entire amount of iron found in this world.\" Al-'Awfi reported that Ibn 'Abbas and Ibn Jurayj both said, \"Each cubit will be the forearm's length of an angel.\" Ibn Jurayj reported that Ibn 'Abbas said,\nفَاسْلُكُوهُ\n(Then fasten him) \"It will be entered into his buttocks and pulled out of his mouth. Then they will be arranged on this (chain) just like locusts are arranged on a stick that is being roasted.\" Al-'Awfi reported from Ibn 'Abbas that he said, \"It will be ran into his behind until it is brought out of his two nostrils so he will not be able to stand on his two feet.\" Imam Ahmad recorded from 'Abdullah bin 'Amr that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nلَوْ أَنَّ رَصَاصَةً مِثْلَ هٰذِهِ - وأشار إلى جُمْجُمَةٍ - أُرْسِلَتْ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ إِلَى الْأَرْضِ، وَهِيَ مَسِيرَةُ خَمْسِمِائَةِ سَنَةٍ، لَبَلَغَتِ الْأَرْضَ قَبْلَ اللَّيْلِ وَلَوْ أَنَّهَا أُرْسِلَتْ مِنْ رَأْسِ السِّلْسِلَةِ لَسَارَتْ أَرْبَعِينَ خَرِيفًا اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ قَبْلَ أَنْ تَبْلُغَ قَعْرَهَا أَوْ أَصْلَهَا\n(If a drop of lead like this - and he pointed to a skull bone - were sent from the heaven to the earth, and it is a distance of five hundred years travel, it would reach the earth before night. And if it (the same drop of lead) were sent from the head of the chain (of Hell), it would travel forty fall seasons, night and day, before it would reach its (Hell's) cavity or base.) At-Tirmidhi also recorded this Hadith and he said, \"This Hadith is Hasan.\" Concerning Allah's statement,\nإِنَّهُ كَانَ لَا يُؤْمِنُ بِاللَّهِ الْعَظِيمِ - وَلَا يَحُضُّ عَلَىٰ طَعَامِ الْمِسْكِينِ\n(Verily, he used not to believe in Allah, the Most Great, and urged not on the feeding of the poor.) meaning, he did not establish the right of Allah upon him, of obedience to Him and performing His worship. He also did not benefit Allah's creation nor did he give them their rights. For verily, Allah has a right upon the servants that they worship Him alone and not associate anything with Him. The servants of Allah also have a right upon each other to good treatment and assistance in righteousness and piety. For this reason, Allah commanded performance of the prayer and the payment of Zakah. When the Prophet ﷺ was (in his last moments) near death he said,\nالصَّلَاةَ وَمَا مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَانُكُمْ\n(The prayer (As-Salah) and your right hand possessions (i.e., slaves).) Allah says,\nفَلَيْسَ لَهُ الْيَوْمَ هَاهُنَا حَمِيمٌ - وَلَا طَعَامٌ إِلَّا مِنْ غِسْلِينٍ - لَا يَأْكُلُهُ إِلَّا الْخَاطِئُونَ\n(So no friend has he here this Day. Nor any food except filth from the washing of wounds. None will eat it except the Khati'un.) meaning, there is no one today who can save him from the punishment of Allah, nor any close friend or intercessor whose request would be honored. He will have no food here except for the filthy washing of wounds. Qatadah said, \"It will be the worst food of the people of the Hellfire.\" Ar-Rabi' and Ad-Dahhak both said, \"It (Ghislin) is a tree in Hell.\" Shabib bin Bishr reported from 'Ikrimah that Ibn 'Abbas said, 'Ghislin will be the blood and fluid that will flow from their flesh.\" 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported from Ibn 'Abbas that he said, 'Ghislin is the pus of the people of the Hellfire.\"","href":"/tafsir/69?verse=25","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:69:38","title":"Ibn Kathir · 69:38–43","text":"So, I swear by whatsoever you see (38)And by whatsoever you see not (39)That this is verily the word of an honored Messenger (40)It is not the word of a poet, little is that you believe (41)Nor is it the word of a soothsayer, little is that you remember (42)This is the revelation sent down from the Lord of all that exists (43)\nThe Qur'an is the Speech of Allah\nAllah swears by His creation, in which some of His signs can be seen in His creatures. These also indicate the perfection of His Names and Attributes. He then swears by the hidden things that they cannot see. This is an oath swearing that the Qur'an is His Speech, His inspiration and His revelation to His servant and Messenger, whom He chose to convey His Message, and the Messenger carried out this trust faithfully. So Allah says,\nفَلَا أُقْسِمُ بِمَا تُبْصِرُونَ - وَمَا لَا تُبْصِرُونَ - إِنَّهُ لَقَوْلُ رَسُولٍ كَرِيمٍ\n(So I swear by whatsoever you see, and by whatsoever you see not, that this is verily the word of an honored Messenger.) meaning, Muhammad ﷺ. Allah gave this description to him, a description which carries the meaning of conveying, because the duty of a messenger is to convey from the sender. Therefore, Allah gave this description to the angelic Messenger in Surat At-Takwir, where he said,\nإِنَّهُ لَقَوْلُ رَسُولٍ كَرِيمٍ - ذِي قُوَّةٍ عِنْدَ ذِي الْعَرْشِ مَكِينٍ - مُطَاعٍ ثَمَّ أَمِينٍ\n(Verily, this is the Word of (this Qur'an brought by) a most honorable messenger. Owner of power (and high rank) with Allah, the Lord of the Throne. Obeyed and trustworthy.)(81:19-21) And here, it refers to Jibril. Then Allah says,\nوَمَا صَاحِبُكُمْ بِمَجْنُونٍ\n(and your companion is not a madman.)(81:22) meaning, Muhammad ﷺ.\nوَلَقَدْ رَآهُ بِالْأُفُقِ الْمُبِينِ\n(And indeed he saw him in the clear horizon.)(81:23) meaning, Muhammad ﷺ saw Jibril in his true form in which Allah created him.\nوَمَا هُوَ عَلَى الْغَيْبِ بِضَنِينٍ\n(And he is not Danin with the Unseen.)(81:24) meaning, suspicious.\nوَمَا هُوَ بِقَوْلِ شَيْطَانٍ رَجِيمٍ\n(And it (the Qur'an) is not he word of the outcast Shaytan.)(81:25) This is similar to what is being said here.\nوَمَا هُوَ بِقَوْلِ شَاعِرٍ ۚ قَلِيلًا مَا تُؤْمِنُونَ - وَلَا بِقَوْلِ كَاهِنٍ ۚ قَلِيلًا مَا تَذَكَّرُونَ\n(It is not the word of a poet, little is that you believe! Nor is it the word of soothsayer, little is that you remember!) So in one instance Allah applies the term messenger to the angelic Messenger and in another instance He applies it to the human Messenger (Muhammad ﷺ). This is because both of them are conveying from Allah that which has been entrusted to them of Allah's revelation and Speech. Thus, Allah says,\nتَنْزِيلٌ مِنْ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(This is the revelation sent down from the Lord of all that exists.)","href":"/tafsir/69?verse=38","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:69:44","title":"Ibn Kathir · 69:44–52","text":"And if he had forged a false saying concerning Us (44)We surely would have seized him by his right hand (45)And then We certainly would have cut off Al-Watin from him (46)And none of you could have prevented it from him (47)And verily, this is a Reminder for those who have Taqwa (48)And verily, We know that there are some among you that deny (49)And indeed it will be an anguish for the disbeliever (50)And verily, it (this Qur'an) is an absolute truth with certainty (51)So, glorify the Name of your Lord, the Most Great (52)\nIf the Prophet (ﷺ) forged anything against Allah, then Allah would punish Him\nAllah says,\nوَلَوْ تَقَوَّلَ عَلَيْنَا\n(And if he had forged a false saying concerning Us,) meaning, 'if Muhammad forged something against Us, as they claim, and added or removed anything from the Message, or said anything from himself while attributing it to Us, then We would surely be swift in punishing him. And of course, Muhammad did not do any of this (as the disbelievers claimed).' Thus, Allah says,\nلَأَخَذْنَا مِنْهُ بِالْيَمِينِ\n(We surely would have seized him by his right hand,) It has been said that this means, 'We would seize him by the right hand because it is more stronger in grabbing.'\nثُمَّ لَقَطَعْنَا مِنْهُ الْوَتِينَ\n(And then We certainly would have cut off Al-Watin from him,) Ibn 'Abbas said, \"It (Al-Watin) refers to the artery of the heart, and it is the vein that is attached to the heart.\" This has also been said by 'Ikrimah, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Al-Hakim, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak, Muslim Al-Batin and Abu Sakhr Humayd bin Ziyad. Muhammad bin Ka'b said, \"It (Al-Watin) is the heart, its blood, and whatever is near it.\" Concerning Allah's statement,\nفَمَا مِنْكُمْ مِنْ أَحَدٍ عَنْهُ حَاجِزِينَ\n(And none of you could have prevented it from him.) means, 'none of you would be able to come between Us and him if We wanted to do any of this to him.' The meaning behind all of this is to say that he (Muhammad ﷺ) is truthful, righteous and guided because Allah determined what he is to convey from Him, and Allah helps him with fantastic miracles and definite proofs. Then Allah says,\nوَإِنَّهُ لَتَذْكِرَةٌ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ\n(And verily, this (Qur'an) is a Reminder for those who have Taqwa.) meaning, the Qur'an. This is just as Allah says,\nقُلْ هُوَ لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا هُدًى وَشِفَاءٌ ۖ وَالَّذِينَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ فِي آذَانِهِمْ وَقْرٌ وَهُوَ عَلَيْهِمْ عَمًى ۚ\n(Say: \"It is for those who believe, a guide and a healing. And as for those who disbelieve, there is heaviness (deafness) in their ears, and it (the Qur'an) is blindness for them.\")(41:44) Then Allah says,\nوَإِنَّا لَنَعْلَمُ أَنَّ مِنْكُمْ مُكَذِّبِينَ\n(And verily, We know that there are some among you that deny (this Qur'an).) meaning, with this explanation and clarification, there will still be among you those who reject the Qur'an. Then Allah says,\nوَإِنَّهُ لَحَسْرَةٌ عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ\n(And indeed it (this Qur'an) will be an anguish for the disbelievers (on the Day of Resurrection).) Ibn Jarir said, \"And verily this rejection will be anguish for the disbelievers on the Day of Judgement.\" He (Ibn Jarir) also mentioned a similar statement from Qatadah. It is possible that the meaning of the pronoun (it) may also refer to the Qur'an, in which case the verse would mean that the Qur'an and belief in it are a cause of anguish for the disbelievers. This is as Allah says,\nكَذَٰلِكَ سَلَكْنَاهُ فِي قُلُوبِ الْمُجْرِمِينَ - لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِهِ\n(Thus have We caused it (the denial of the Qur'an) to enter the hearts of the criminals. They will not believe in it.)(26:200,201) And Allah said,\nوَحِيلَ بَيْنَهُمْ وَبَيْنَ مَا يَشْتَهُونَ\n(And a barrier will be set between them and that which they desire)(34:54). Therefore, Allah says here,\nوَإِنَّهُ لَحَقُّ الْيَقِينِ\n(And verily, it (this Qur'an) is an absolute truth with certainty.) meaning, the right and truthful news in which there is no doubt, suspicion or confusion. Then Allah says,\nفَسَبِّحْ بِاسْمِ رَبِّكَ الْعَظِيمِ\n(So glorify the Name of your Lord, the Most Great.) meaning, He Who sent down this magnificent Qur'an.\nThis is the end of the explanation (Tafsir) of Surat Al-Haqqah. And to Allah belong all praise and blessings.","href":"/tafsir/69?verse=44","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:70:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 70:1–7","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nسَأَلَ سَائِلٌ بِعَذَابٍ وَاقِعٍ - لِلْكَافِرِينَ لَيْسَ لَهُ دَافِعٌ - مِنَ اللَّهِ ذِي الْمَعَارِجِ - تَعْرُجُ الْمَلَائِكَةُ وَالرُّوحُ إِلَيْهِ فِي يَوْمٍ كَانَ مِقْدَارُهُ خَمْسِينَ أَلْفَ سَنَةٍ - فَاصْبِرْ صَبْرًا جَمِيلًا - إِنَّهُمْ يَرَوْنَهُ بَعِيدًا - وَنَرَاهُ قَرِيبًا\n(1. A questioner asked concerning a torment about to befall)(2. Upon the disbelievers, which none can avert,)(3. From Allah, the Lord of the ways of ascent.)(4. The angels and the Ruh ascend to Him in a Day the measure whereof is fifty thousand years.)(5. So be patient, with a good patience.)(6. Verily, they see it (the torment) afar off.)(7. But We see it near.)\nA Request to hasten the Day of Judgement\nسَأَلَ سَائِلٌ بِعَذَابٍ وَاقِعٍ\n(A questioner asked concerning a torment about to befall) This Ayah contains an assumed meaning that is alluded to by the letter \"Ba\". It is as though it is saying, a questioner requested to hasten on the torment that is about to fall. It is similar to Allah's statement,\nوَيَسْتَعْجِلُونَكَ بِالْعَذَابِ وَلَنْ يُخْلِفَ اللَّهُ وَعْدَهُ ۚ\n(And they ask you to hasten on the torment! And Allah fails not His promise.)(22:47) meaning, that its torment will occur and there is no avoiding it. Al-'Awfi reported from Ibn 'Abbas concerning the Ayah,\nسَأَلَ سَائِلٌ بِعَذَابٍ وَاقِعٍ\n(A questioner asked concerning a torment about to befall) \"That is the questioning of the disbelievers about the torment of Allah and it will occur to them.\" Ibn Abi Najih reported from Mujahid that he said concerning Allah's statement\nسَأَلَ سَائِلٌ\n(A questioner asked), \"A person called out (requesting) for the torment that will occur in the Hereafter to happen.\" Then he said, \"This is their saying,\nاللَّهُمَّ إِنْ كَانَ هَٰذَا هُوَ الْحَقَّ مِنْ عِنْدِكَ فَأَمْطِرْ عَلَيْنَا حِجَارَةً مِنَ السَّمَاءِ أَوِ ائْتِنَا بِعَذَابٍ أَلِيمٍ\n(O Allah! If this is indeed the truth from you, then rain down stones on us from the sky or bring on us a painful torment.)\" (8:32) Allah's statement,\nوَاقِعٍ - لِلْكَافِرِينَ\n(about to befall (Waqi') upon the disbelievers,) means, it is waiting in preparation for the disbelievers. Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Waqi' means coming.\"\nلَيْسَ لَهُ دَافِعٌ\n(which non can avert) meaning, there is no one who can repel it if Allah wants it to happen. Thus, Allah says,\nمِنَ اللَّهِ ذِي الْمَعَارِجِ\n(From Allah, the Lord of the ways of ascent (Al-Ma'arij).)\nThe Tafsir of \"Lord of the ways of ascent\"\nAli bin Abi Talhah reported from Ibn 'Abbas, \"Lord of the ways of ascent means loftiness and abundance.\" Mujahid said, \"Lord of the ways of ascent means the ways of ascension into the heavens.\" Concerning Allah's statement,\nتَعْرُجُ الْمَلَائِكَةُ وَالرُّوحُ إِلَيْهِ\n(The angels and the Ruh Ta'ruju to Him) 'Abdur-Razzaq reported from Ma'mar from Qatadah that Ta'ruju means to ascend. In reference to the Ruh, Abu Salih said, \"They are creatures from the creation of Allah that resemble humans but they are not humans.\"\nIt could be that here it means Jibril, and this is a way of connecting the specific to the general (other angels). It could also be referring to the name of the souls (Arwah) of the Children of Adam (humans). For verily, when they (the human souls) are taken at death, they are lifted up to the heavens just as the Hadith of Al-Bara' proves.\nThe Meaning of \"a Day the measure whereof is fifty thousand years\"\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nفِي يَوْمٍ كَانَ مِقْدَارُهُ خَمْسِينَ أَلْفَ سَنَةٍ\n(in a Day the measure whereof is fifty thousand years.) This refers to the Day of Judgement. Ibn Abi Hatim recorded from Ibn 'Abbas that he said concerning the Ayah,\nفِي يَوْمٍ كَانَ مِقْدَارُهُ خَمْسِينَ أَلْفَ سَنَةٍ\n(in a Day the measure whereof is fifty thousand years.) \"It is the Day of Judgement.\" The chain of narration of this report (to Ibn 'Abbas) is authentic. Ath-Thawri reported from Simak bin Harb from 'Ikrimah that he said concerning this verse, \"It is the Day of Judgement.\" Ad-Dahhak and Ibn Zayd both said the same. 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported from Ibn 'Abbas concerning the Ayah,\nتَعْرُجُ الْمَلَائِكَةُ وَالرُّوحُ إِلَيْهِ فِي يَوْمٍ كَانَ مِقْدَارُهُ خَمْسِينَ أَلْفَ سَنَةٍ\n(The angels and the Ruh ascend to Him in a Day the measure whereof is fifty thousand years.)\n\"It is the Day of Judgement that Allah has made to be the measure of fifty thousand years for the disbelievers. \" Many Hadiths have been reported with this same meaning.\nImam Ahmad recorded from Abu 'Umar Al-Ghudani that he said, \"I was with Abu Hurayrah when a man from Bani 'Amir bin Sa'sa'ah passed and it was said: 'This man is the wealthiest man of Bani 'Amir.' So Abu Hurayrah said, 'Bring him back to me.' So they brought the man back to Abu Hurayrah. Then Abu Hurayrah said, 'I have been informed that you are a man of great wealth.' The man from Bani 'Amir replied, 'Yes, by Allah. I have one hundred red-colored camels, one hundred brown-colored camels...' and so on he counted numerous colored camels, the races of the slaves and the types of fetters for his horses that he owned.\nSo Abu Hurayrah said, 'Beware of the hooves of the camels and the cloven hooves of the cattle.' He continued repeating that to him until the color of the man began to change. Then the man said, 'O Abu Hurayrah what is this?' Abu Hurayrah replied, 'I heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ say,\nمَنْ كَانَتْ لَهُ إِبِلٌ لَا يُعْطِي حَقَّهَا فِي نَجْدَتِهَا وَرِسْلِهَا\n(Whoever has camels and does not give their due (Zakah) in their Najdah and their Risl...) We interrupted saying, 'O Messenger of Allah! What is their Najdah and Risl?' He said,\nفِي عُسْرِهَا وَيُسْرِهَا، فَإِنَّهَا تَأْتِي يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ كَأَغَذِّ مَا كَانَتْ وَأَكْثَرِهِ وَأَسْمَنِهِ وَآشَرِهِ، ثُمَّ يُبْطَحُ لَهَا بِقَاعٍ قَرْقَرٍ فَتَطَؤُهُ بِأَخْفَافِهَا، فَإِذَا جَاوَزَتْهُ أُخْرَاهَا أُعِيدَتْ عَلَيْهِ أُولَاهَا فِي يَوْمٍ كَانَ مِقْدَارُهُ خَمْسِينَ أَلْفَ سَنَةٍ، حَتّٰى يُقْضَىٰ بَيْنَ النَّاسِ فَيَرَىٰ سَبِيلَهُ. وَإِذَا كَانَتْ لَهُ بَقَرٌ لَا يُعْطِي حَقَّهَا فِي نَجْدَتِهَا وَرِسْلِهَا، فَإِنَّهَا تَأْتِي يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ كَأَغَذِّ مَا كَانَتْ وَأَكْثَرِهِ وَأَسْمَنِهِ وَآشَرِهِ،ثُمَّ يُبْطَحُ لَهَا بِقَاعٍ قَرْقَرٍ، فَتَطَؤُهُ كُلُّ ذَاتِ ظِلْفٍ بِظِلْفِهَا وَتَنْطَحُهُ كُلُّ ذَاتِ قَرْنٍ بِقَرْنِهَا، لَيْسَ فِيهَا عَقْصَاءُ وَلَا عَضْبَاءُ، إِذَا جَاوَزَتْهُ أُخْرَاهَا أُعِيدَتْ عَلَيْهِ أُولَاهَا، فِي يَوْمٍ كَانَ مِقْدَارُهُ خَمْسِينَ أَلْفَ سَنَةٍ حَتّٰى يُقْضَىٰ بَيْنَ النَّاسِ فَيَرَى سَبِيلَهُ. وَإِذَا كَانَتْ لَهُ غَنَمٌ لَا يُعْطِي حَقَّهَا فِي نَجْدَتِهَا وَرِسْلِهَا فَإِنَّهَا تَأْتِي يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ كَأَغَذِّ مَا كَانَتْ وَأَسْمَنِهِ وَآشَرِهِ حَتّٰى يُبْطَحَ لَهَا بِقَاعٍ قَرْقَرٍ فَتَطَؤُهُ كُلُّ ذَاتِ ظِلْفٍ بِظِلْفِهَا وَتَنْطَحُهُ كُلُّ ذَاتِ قَرْنٍ بِقَرْنِهَا، لَيْسَ فِيهَا عَقْصَاءُ وَلَا عَضْبَاءُ إِذَا جَاوَزَتْهُ أُخْرَاهَا أُعِيدَتْ عَلَيْهِ أُولَاهَا، فِي يَوْمٍ كَانَ مِقْدَارُهُ خَمْسِينَ أَلْفَ سَنَةٍ، حَتّٰى يُقْضَىٰ بَيْنَ النَّاسِ فَيَرَىٰ سَبِيلَهُ\n(It is their difficulty and their ease, for verily, they will come on the Day of Resurrection healthier than before. They will be more in number, fatter and more lively and unruly. Then a soft, level plain will be spread out for them and they will trample him with their hooves. When the last of them has passed over him, the first of them will return to trample him again during a day whose measure will be fifty thousand years. This will continue until the case of all the people is decided between them. Then he (the withholder of Zakah) will see his path (i.e., either to Paradise or Hell). If he had cows that he did not pay the Zakah in their ease and their difficult times, then they will come on the Day of Judgement healthier than they were before. They will be more in number, fatter and more lively and unruly. Then a soft, level plain will be spread out for them and they will trample him. Every one of them that has cloven hooves will trample him with its hooves, and every one of them that has a horn will butt him with its horn. There will not be any hornless or bent horned animals among them. When the last of them has passed over him, the first of them will return to trample him again during a day whose measure will be fifty thousand years. This will continue until the case of all the people is decided between them. Then he (the withholder of Zakah) will see his path (i.e., either to Paradise or Hell). If he has any sheep that he does not pay the due Zakah in their difficulty and their ease, then they will come on the Day of Judgement healthier than they were before. They will be more (in number) fatter and more lively and unruly. Then a soft, level plain will be spread out for them and they will trample him. Every one of them that has a cloven hoof will trample him with its hooves, and every one of them that has a horn will butt him with its horn. There will not be any hornless or bent horned animals among them. When the last of them has passed over him, the first of them will return to trample him again during a day whose measure will be fifty thousand years. This will continue until the case of all the people is decided between them. Then he (the withholder of Zakah) will see his path (i.e., either to Paradise or Hell).)\nThen, the man from Bani 'Amir said, 'What is the due of the camel, O Abu Hurayrah' Abu Hurayrah said, 'It is that you give (in your Zakah payment) from your most valuable camels, that you lend a milking she-camel, that you lend your mount for riding, that you give the milk (to the people) for drinking, and you lend the male camel for breeding.'\" This Hadith was also recorded by Abu Dawud and An-Nasa'i.\nA Different Version of this Hadith\nImam Ahmad recorded from Abu Hurayrah that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَا مِنْ صَاحِبِ كَنْزٍ لَا يُؤَدِّي حَقَّهُ إِلَّا جُعِلَ صَفَائِحَ، يُحْمَىٰ عَلَيْهَا فِي نَارِ جَهَنَّمَ، فَتُكْوَىٰ بِهَا جَبْهَتُهُ وَجَنْبُهُ وَظَهْرُهُ، حَتّٰى يَحْكُمَ اللهُ بَيْنَ عِبَادِهِ فِي يَوْمٍ كَانَ مِقْدَارُهُ خَمْسِينَ أَلْفَ سَنَةٍ مِمَّا تَعُدُّونَ، ثُمَّ يَرَىٰ سَبِيلَهُ إِمَّا إِلَى الْجَنَّةِ وَإِمَّا إِلَى النَّارِ\n(There is not any owner of treasure who does not pay its due except that it will be made into heated metal plates and branded upon him in the fire of Hell. His forehead, side and back will be scorched with these metal plates. This will continue until Allah judges between His servants on a Day whose measure is fifty thousand years of what you count. Then he will see his path, either to Paradise or to the Fire.)\nThen he (Abu Hurayrah) mentions the rest of the Hadith about the sheep and camels just as mentioned before. In this narration (of Ahmad) the Prophet ﷺ also added,\nالْخَيْلُ لِثَلَاثَةٍ: لِرَجُلٍ أَجْرٌ، وَلِرَجُلٍ سِتْرٌ، وَعَلَى رَجُلٍ وِزْرٌ\n(The horse is for three (on the Day of Judgement): for one man it is a reward, for another man it is a shield (protection), and upon another man it is a burden.) And the Hadith continues. Muslim also recorded this Hadith in its entirety even though Al-Bukhari did not mention it. The intent behind mentioning this here is the Prophet's statement,\nحَتّٰى يَحْكُمَ اللهُ بَيْنَ عِبَادِهِ فِي يَوْمٍ كَانَ مِقْدَارُهُ خَمْسِينَ أَلْفَ سَنَةٍ\n(Until Allah judges between His servants on a day whose measurement is fifty thousand years.)\nInstructing the Prophet (ﷺ) to have Patience\nAllah says,\nفَاصْبِرْ صَبْرًا جَمِيلًا\n(So be patient, with a good patience.) meaning, 'be patient, O Muhammad, with your people's rejection and their seeking to hasten the torment since they think it will not occur.' Allah says in another Ayah,\nيَسْتَعْجِلُ بِهَا الَّذِينَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِهَا ۖ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مُشْفِقُونَ مِنْهَا وَيَعْلَمُونَ أَنَّهَا الْحَقُّ ۗ\n(Those who believe not therein seek to hasten it, while those believe are fearful of it, and know that it is the very truth.)(42:18) Thus, Allah says,\nإِنَّهُمْ يَرَوْنَهُ بَعِيدًا\n(Verily, they see it (the torment) afar off.) meaning, the happening of the torment and the establishment of the Hour (Day of Judgement). The disbelievers see this as something that is farfetched. The word \"Ba'id\" here means that which is impossible to occur.\nوَنَرَاهُ قَرِيبًا\n(But We see it (quite) near.) meaning, the believers believe that its occurrence is near, even though its time of occurrence is unknown and no one knows when it will be except Allah. All of what is approaching then it is near and it will definitely happen.","href":"/tafsir/70?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:70:8","title":"Ibn Kathir · 70:8–18","text":"The Day that the sky will be like the Al-Muhl (8)And the mountains will be like 'Ihn (9)And no friend will ask a friend (10)Though they shall be made to see one another, the criminal would desire to ransom himself from the punishment of that Day by his children (11)And his wife and his brother (12)And his Fasilah who sheltered him (13)And all that are in the earth, so that it might save him (14)By no means! Verily, it will be the fire of Hell (15)Naza'ah the Shawa (16)Calling (all) such as turn their backs and turn away their faces (17)And collect (wealth) and hide it (from spending it in the cause of Allah)(18)\nTerrors of the Day of Judgement\nAllah says that the torment will befall the disbelievers.\nيَوْمَ تَكُونُ السَّمَاءُ كَالْمُهْلِ\n(The Day that the sky will be like the Al-Muhl.) Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, 'Ata, Sa'id bin Jubayr, 'Ikrimah, As-Suddi and others have all said, \"Like the residue of oil.\"\nوَتَكُونُ الْجِبَالُ كَالْعِهْنِ\n(And the mountains will be like 'Ihn.) meaning, like fluffed wool. This was said by Mujahid, Qatadah and As-Suddi. This Ayah is similar to Allah's statement,\nوَتَكُونُ الْجِبَالُ كَالْعِهْنِ الْمَنْفُوشِ\n(And the mountains will be like carded wool.)(101:5) Concerning Allah's statement,\nوَلَا يَسْأَلُ حَمِيمٌ حَمِيمًا - يُبَصَّرُونَهُمْ ۚ\n(And no friend will ask a friend, though they shall be made to see one another.) Meaning, no close friend will ask his close friend about his condition while he sees him in the worst of conditions. He will be worried about himself and will not be able to think of others.\nAl-'Awfi reported from Ibn 'Abbas, \"Some of them will know others and they will be acquainted with each other. Then, they will flee from each other after that, as Allah says,\nلِكُلِّ امْرِئٍ مِنْهُمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ شَأْنٌ يُغْنِيهِ\n(Every man that Day will have enough to make him careless of others.)\" (80:37) This honorable Ayah is similar to Allah's statement,\nيَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ اتَّقُوا رَبَّكُمْ وَاخْشَوْا يَوْمًا لَا يَجْزِي وَالِدٌ عَنْ وَلَدِهِ وَلَا مَوْلُودٌ هُوَ جَازٍ عَنْ وَالِدِهِ شَيْئًا ۚ إِنَّ وَعْدَ اللَّهِ حَقٌّ ۖ\n(O mankind! Have Taqwa of your Lord, and fear a Day when no father can avail aught for his son, and nor a son avail aught for his father. Verily the promise of Allah is true.)(31:33) and He also says,\nوَإِنْ تَدْعُ مُثْقَلَةٌ إِلَىٰ حِمْلِهَا لَا يُحْمَلْ مِنْهُ شَيْءٌ وَلَوْ كَانَ ذَا قُرْبَىٰ ۗ\n(And if one heavily laden calls another to (bear) his load, nothing of it will be lifted even though he be near of kin.)(35:18) and He says,\nفَإِذَا نُفِخَ فِي الصُّورِ فَلَا أَنْسَابَ بَيْنَهُمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ وَلَا يَتَسَاءَلُونَ\n(Then, when the Trumpet is blown, there will be no kinship among them that Day, nor will they ask of one another.)(23:101) and similarly He says,\nيَوْمَ يَفِرُّ الْمَرْءُ مِنْ أَخِيهِ - وَأُمِّهِ وَأَبِيهِ - وَصَاحِبَتِهِ وَبَنِيهِ - لِكُلِّ امْرِئٍ مِنْهُمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ شَأْنٌ يُغْنِيهِ\n(That day shall a man flee fom his brother, and from his mother and his father, and from his wife and his children. Every man that Day will have enough to make him careless of others.)(80:34-37) Then Allah's saying here\nيَوَدُّ الْمُجْرِمُ لَوْ يَفْتَدِي مِنْ عَذَابِ يَوْمِئِذٍ بِبَنِيهِ - وَصَاحِبَتِهِ وَأَخِيهِ - وَفَصِيلَتِهِ الَّتِي تُؤْوِيهِ - وَمَن فِي الْأَرْضِ جَمِيعًا ثُمَّ يُنجِيهِ - كَلَّا\n(the criminal would desire to ransom himself from the punishment of the Day by his children, and his wife and his brother, and his Fasilah (kindred) who sheltered him, and all that are in the earth, so that it might save him. By no means!)\nmeans, no ransom will be accepted from him even if he brought all of the people of the earth (as ransom), and the greatest wealth that he could find, even if it was enough gold to fill the entire earth. Even the child that he had who was dearer to him than the last beat of his heart in the life of this world, he would wish to use the child as a ransom for himself against the torment of Allah on the Day of Judgement when he sees the horrors. However, even this child would not be accepted from him (as a ransom). Mujahid and As-Suddi both said,\nوَفَصِيلَتِهِ\n(and his Fasilah) \"This means his tribe and his kin.\" 'Ikrimah said, \"This means the subdivision of his tribe that he is from.\" Ashhab reported from Malik that he said, \"His Fasilah is his mother.\" Allah said,\nإِنَّهَا لَظَىٰ\n(Verily, it will be the fire of Hell,) Here He is describing the Hell-fire and the severity of its heat.\nنَزَّاعَةً لِلشَّوَىٰ\n(Nazza'ah the Shawa!) Ibn 'Abbas and Mujahid both said, \"It is the skin of the head.\" Al-Hasan Al-Basri and Thabit Al-Bunani both said,\nنَزَّاعَةً لِلشَّوَىٰ\n(Nazza'ah the Shawa!) \"This means respectable parts of the face.\" Qatadah said,\nنَزَّاعَةً لِلشَّوَىٰ\n(Nazza'ah the Shawa!) \"This means removing his important organs, and the respectable parts of his face, his creation and his limbs.\"\nAd-Dahhak said, \"This means it will scrape the flesh and the skin off of the bone until it leaves nothing of it remaining.\"\nIbn Zayd said, \"The Shawa is the marrow of the bones.\" As for,\nنَزَّاعَةً\n(Nazza'ah) Ibn Zayd said, \"It is cutting their bones and transformation of their skins and their form.\" Concerning Allah's statement,\nتَدْعُو مَنْ أَدْبَرَ وَتَوَلَّىٰ - وَجَمَعَ فَأَوْعَىٰ\n(Calling (all) such as turn their backs and turn away their faces. And collect and hide it.) meaning, the Fire will call out to its children whom Allah created for it, determining that they will perform the deeds deserving of it in the worldly life. So it will call them on the Day of Judgement with an eloquent and articulate tongue. Then it will pick them out from the people of the gathering just as birds pick seeds. This is because they were, as Allah said, of those who turned their backs and turned away. This means they denied with their hearts and abandoned the performance of deeds with their limbs.\nوَجَمَعَ فَأَوْعَىٰ\n(And collect and hide it.) meaning, he gathered wealth piling it up, and he concealed it, meaning he hid it and refused to give the obligatory right of Allah that was due on it of spending and paying the Zakah. It has been recorded in a Hadith that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nلَا تُوعِي فَيُوعِيَ اللهُ عَلَيْكِ\n(Do not hold back (your wealth) or else Allah will hold back from you.)","href":"/tafsir/70?verse=8","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:70:19","title":"Ibn Kathir · 70:19–35","text":"Verily, man was created very impatient (19)Apprehensive when evil touches him (20)And suppressive when good touches him (21)Except those who are devoted to Salah (22)Those who with their Salah are Da'imun (23)And those in whose wealth there is a recognized right (24)For the one who asks, and for the deprived (25)And those who believe in the Day of Recompense (26)And those who fear the torment of their Lord (27)Verily, the torment of their Lord is that before which none can feel secure (28)And those who guard their private part (chastity)(29)Except from their wives or their right hand possessions – for (then) they are not blameworthy (30)But whosoever seeks beyond that, then it is those who are trespassers (31)And those who keep their trusts and covenants (32)And those who stand firm in their testimonies (33)And those who are with their Salah, Yuhafizun (34)Such shall dwell in the Gardens, honore (35)\nMan is Impatient\nAllah informs about man and his inclination to corrupt his behavior. Allah says,\nإِنَّ الْإِنْسَانَ خُلِقَ هَلُوعًا\n(Verily, man was created very impatient;) Then, Allah explains this statement by saying,\nإِذَا مَسَّهُ الشَّرُّ جَزُوعًا\n(Apprehensive when evil touches him;) meaning, whenever any harm touches him he is frightful, worried and completely taken back due to the severity of his terror and his despair that he will receive any good after it.\nوَإِذَا مَسَّهُ الْخَيْرُ مَنُوعًا\n(And suppressive when good touches him.) meaning, if he attains any blessing from Allah, he is stingy with it, not sharing it with others. He will withhold the right of Allah with that blessing.\nImam Ahmad said that Abu 'Abdur-Rahman informed them that Musa bin 'Ali bin Rabah told them that he heard his father narrating from 'Abdul-'Aziz bin Marwan bin Al-Hakim that he heard Abu Hurayrah saying, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nشَرُّ مَا فِي رَجُلٍ: شُحٌّ هَالِعٌ وَجُبْنٌ خَالِعٌ\n(The worst thing that can be in a man is greedy impatience and unrestrained cowardice.) Abu Dawud recorded this Hadith from 'Abdullah bin Al-Jarrah on the authority of Abu 'Abdur-Rahman Al-Muqri', and this is the only Hadith through 'Abdul-'Aziz with him.\nThe Exclusion of Those Who pray from what has preceded and an Explanation of Their Deeds and Their Prayer\nThen Allah says,\nإِلَّا الْمُصَلِّينَ\n(Except those who are devoted to Salah.) meaning, man is described with blameworthy characteristics except for He whom Allah protects, helps and guides to good, making its means easy for him – and these are those people who perform Salah.\nالَّذِينَ هُمْ عَلَىٰ صَلَاتِهِمْ دَائِمُونَ\n(Those who with their Salah are Da'imun;)\nIt has been said that this means they guard its times and the elements obligatory in it. This has been said by Ibn Mas'ud, Masruq and Ibrahim An-Nakha'i. It has also been said that it means tranquility and humble concentration (in the prayer). This is similar to Allah's statement,\nقَدْ أَفْلَحَ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ - الَّذِينَ هُمْ فِي صَلَاتِهِمْ خَاشِعُونَ\n(Successful indeed are the believers. Those who with their Salah are Khashi'un.)(23:1-2)\nThis was said by 'Uqbah bin 'Amir. From its meanings is the same terminology used to describe standing (still) water (Al-Ma' Ad-Da'im). This proves the obligation of having tranquility in the prayer. For verily, the one who does not have tranquility (stillness of posture) in his bowing and prostrating, then he is not being constant (Da'im) in his prayer. This is because he is not being still in it and he does not remain (in its positions), rather he pecks in it (quickly) like the pecking of the crow. Therefore, he is not successful in performing his prayer.\nIt has also been said that the meaning here refers to those who perform a deed and are constant in its performance and consistent in it. This is like the Hadith that has been recorded in the Sahih on the authority of 'A'ishah that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nأَحَبُّ الْأَعْمَالِ إِلَى اللهِ أَدْوَمُهَا وَإِنْ قَلَّ\n(The most beloved deeds to Allah are those that are most consistent, even if they are few.) Then Allah says,\nوَالَّذِينَ فِي أَمْوَالِهِمْ حَقٌّ مَعْلُومٌ - لِلسَّائِلِ وَالْمَحْرُومِ\n(And those in whose wealth there is a recognized right. For the one who asks, and for the deprived.) meaning, in their wealth is a determined portion for those who are in need. Concerning Allah's statement,\nوَالَّذِينَ يُصَدِّقُونَ بِيَوْمِ الدِّينِ\n(And those who believe in the Day of Recompense.) meaning, they are sure of the Final Return (to Allah), the Reckoning and the Recompense. Therefore, they perform the deeds of one who hopes for the reward and fears the punishment. For this reason Allah says,\nوَالَّذِينَ هُمْ مِنْ عَذَابِ رَبِّهِمْ مُشْفِقُونَ\n(And those who fear the torment of their Lord.) meaning, they are fearful and dreadful.\nإِنَّ عَذَابَ رَبِّهِمْ غَيْرُ مَأْمُونٍ\n(Verily, the torment of their Lord is that before which none can feel secure.) meaning, no one is safe from it (Allah's torment) of those who understand the command from Allah, except by the security of Allah Himself. Then Allah says,\nوَالَّذِينَ هُمْ لِفُرُوجِهِمْ حَافِظُونَ\n(And those who guard their private part (chastity).) meaning, they keep their private parts away from that which is forbidden and they prevent their private parts from being put into other than what Allah has allowed them to be in. This is why Allah says,\nإِلَّا عَلَىٰ أَزْوَاجِهِمْ أَوْ مَا مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَانُهُمْ\n(Except from their wives or their right hand possessions) meaning, from their female slaves.\nإِلَّا عَلَىٰ أَزْوَاجِهِمْ أَوْ مَا مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَانُهُمْ فَإِنَّهُمْ غَيْرُ مَلُومِينَ - فَمَنِ ابْتَغَىٰ وَرَاءَ ذَٰلِكَ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْعَادُونَ\n(for (then) they are not blameworthy. But whosoever seeks beyond that, then it is those who are trespassers.) The explanation of this has already preceded at the beginning of Surat Al-Mu'minun, and therefore does not need to be repeated here. Allah said,\nوَالَّذِينَ هُمْ لِأَمَانَاتِهِمْ وَعَهْدِهِمْ رَاعُونَ\n(And those who keep their trusts and covenants.) meaning, if they are given a trust they do not deceit and when they make a covenant they do not break it. These are the characteristics of the believers which are opposite of the characteristics of the hypocrites. This is like what is reported in the authentic Hadith,\nآيَةُ الْمُنَافِقِ ثَلَاثٌ: إِذَا حَدَّثَ كَذَبَ، وَإِذَا وَعَدَ أَخْلَفَ، وَإِذَا اؤْتُمِنَ خَانَ\n(The signs of the hypocrites are three. When he speaks he lies, when he promises he breaks his promise, and when he is given a trust he behaves treacherously (with it).) In another narration it states,\nإِذَا حَدَّثَ كَذَبَ، وَإِذَا عَاهَدَ غَدَرَ، وَإِذَا خَاصَمَ فَجَرَ\n(When he speaks he lies, when he makes a covenant he breaks it, and when he argues he is abusive.) Concerning Allah's statement,\nوَالَّذِينَ هُمْ بِشَهَادَاتِهِمْ قَائِمُونَ\n(And those who stand firm in their testimonies.) This means that they guard their testimonies. They do not add or decrease from what they testify to nor do they conceal their testimonies. Allah says in another Ayah,\nوَمَنْ يَكْتُمْهَا فَإِنَّهُ آثِمٌ قَلْبُهُ ۗ\n(Who hides it, surely, his heart is sinful.)(2:283) Then Allah says,\nوَالَّذِينَ هُمْ عَلَىٰ صَلَاتِهِمْ يُحَافِظُونَ\n(And those who are with their Salah, Yuhafizun.) meaning, they maintain its proper times, its pillars, its obligations and its recommended acts. So Allah begins this discussion (of the believers' attributes) with prayer and He concludes it with prayer. This proves the importance of it and the praise of its noble status, just as what preceded at the beginning of Surat Al-Mu'minun. It is exactly the same discussion. This is why Allah says there (in Al-Mu'minun),\nأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْوَارِثُونَ - الَّذِينَ يَرِثُونَ الْفِرْدَوْسَ هُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ\n(These are indeed the inheritors. Who shall inherit the Firdaws (Paradise). They shall dwell therein forever.)(23:10-11) And He says here,\nأُولَٰئِكَ فِي جَنَّاتٍ مُكْرَمُونَ\n(Such shall dwell in the Gardens, honored.) meaning, they will be honored with various types of pleasures and delights.","href":"/tafsir/70?verse=19","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:70:36","title":"Ibn Kathir · 70:36–44","text":"So, what is the matter with those disbelievers, before you Muhti'i (36)On the right and on the left, 'Izin (37)Does every man of them hope to enter the Paradise of Delight (38)But no! Verily, We have created them out of that which they know (39)But no! I swear by the Lord of the easts and the wests that surely We are Abl (40)To replace them by (others) better than them; and We are not to be outrun (41)So, leave them to plunge in vain talk and play about, until they meet their Day which they are promised (42)The Day when they will come out of the graves quickly as racing to a Nusub (43)With their eyes lowered in fear and humility, ignominy covering them (all over)! That is the Day which they were promised (44)\nThe Rebuke of the Disbelievers and the Threat against Them\nAllah rebukes the disbelievers who, in the time of the Prophet ﷺ, saw him and the guidance Allah sent him with. They witnessed the magnificent miracles Allah aided him with. Then, after all of this they fled from him and separated themselves from him. They fled right and left, group by group and party by party. This is as Allah says,\nفَمَا لَهُمْ عَنِ التَّذْكِرَةِ مُعْرِضِينَ - كَأَنَّهُمْ حُمُرٌ مُسْتَنْفِرَةٌ - فَرَّتْ مِنْ قَسْوَرَةٍ\n(Then what is wrong with them that they run away from admonition? As if they were (frightened) wild donkeys. Fleeing from a beast of prey.)(74:49-51) This is the example of disbeliever. And this Ayah is similar. As Allah says,\nفَمَالِ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا قِبَلَكَ مُهْطِعِينَ\n(So what is the matter with those disbelievers, before you Muhti'in) meaning, 'what is wrong with these disbelievers who are with you, O Muhammad? Why are they Muhti'in, meaning hastily running away from you?' This is as Al-Hasan Al-Basri said, \"Muhti'in means departing.\"\nعَنِ الْيَمِينِ وَعَنِ الشِّمَالِ عِزِينَ\n(On the right and on the left, 'Izin.) The singular of 'Izin is 'Izah, which means separating. meaning in their separating and their differing. Al-'Awfi reported from Ibn 'Abbas about the Ayah;\nفَمَالِ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا قِبَلَكَ مُهْطِعِينَ\n(So what is the matter with those disbelievers, before you Muhti'in.) \"They are looking in your direction.\" Then the Ayah;\nعَنِ الْيَمِينِ وَعَنِ الشِّمَالِ عِزِينَ\n(On the right and on the left, 'Izin.)\nHe (Ibn 'Abbas) said, \"Al-'Izin is a group among the people. On the right and on the left means they are turning away (right and left) from him (the Prophet ﷺ) and mocking him.\"\nJabir bin Samurah narrated that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ came out to them while they were sitting in circles. So the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَا لِي أَرَاكُمْ عِزِينَ؟\n(Why do I see you all 'Izin (in groups).) Ahmad, Muslim, Abu Dawud, An-Nasa'i and Ibn Jarir all recorded this Hadith. Then, concerning Allah's statement,\nأَيَطْمَعُ كُلُّ امْرِئٍ مِنْهُمْ أَنْ يُدْخَلَ جَنَّةَ نَعِيمٍ - كَلَّا ۖ\n(Does every man of them hope to enter the Paradise of Delight But no!) meaning, is this their wish, yet they flee from the Messenger ﷺ in aversion to the truth? Are they hoping that they will be admitted into the Gardens of Delight? Nay, rather their abode is Hell. Then Allah affirms the occurrence of the Final Abode and the torment that will befall them that they are denying its existence and claiming it to be something farfetched. As a proof against them, Allah mentions the initiation of creation, and that repeating the process is something easier than performing it the first time. This is something that they themselves confess to. Allah says,\nإِنَّا خَلَقْنَاهُمْ مِمَّا يَعْلَمُونَ\n(Verily, We have created them out of that which they know!) meaning, from despised semen. This is as Allah says,\nأَلَمْ نَخْلُقْكُمْ مِنْ مَاءٍ مَهِينٍ\n(Did We not create you from a despised water (semen)?)(77:20) Allah also says,\nفَلْيَنْظُرِ الْإِنْسَانُ مِمَّ خُلِقَ - خُلِقَ مِنْ مَاءٍ دَافِقٍ - يَخْرُجُ مِنْ بَيْنِ الصُّلْبِ وَالتَّرَائِبِ - إِنَّهُ عَلَىٰ رَجْعِهِ لَقَادِرٌ - يَوْمَ تُبْلَى السَّرَائِرُ - فَمَا لَهُ مِنْ قُوَّةٍ وَلَا نَاصِرٍ\n(So let man see from what he is created! He is created from a water gushing forth. Proceeding from between the backbone and the ribs. Verily He is able to bring him back! The Day when all the secrets will be examined. Then he will have no power, nor any helper.)(86:5-10) Then Allah says,\nفَلَا أُقْسِمُ بِرَبِّ الْمَشَارِقِ وَالْمَغَارِبِ\n(But no! I swear by the Lord of the easts and the wests) meaning, the One Who created the heavens and the earth and made the east and the west. He is the One Who subjected the stars causing them to appear in the eastern parts of the sky and vanish in the western parts of it. The point of this statement is that the matter is not as the disbelievers claim: that there is no final return, no reckoning, no resurrection and no gathering. Rather all of this will occur and come to pass. There is no way of avoiding it. This is the reason that Allah has stated a negation at the beginning of this oath. This shows that He is swearing by a denial of their claim. This is a refutation of their false claim of rejecting the Day of Judgement. They already witnessed the greatness of Allah's power in what is more convincing than the Day of Judgement, that is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the subjection of the creatures in them, the animals, the inanimate objects and the other types of creatures that exist. This is why Allah says,\nلَخَلْقُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ أَكْبَرُ مِنْ خَلْقِ النَّاسِ وَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ\n(The creation of the heavens and the earth is indeed greater than the creation of mankind; yet, most of mankind know not.)(40:57) Allah also says,\nأَوَلَمْ يَرَوْا أَنَّ اللَّهَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ وَلَمْ يَعْيَ بِخَلْقِهِنَّ بِقَادِرٍ عَلَىٰ أَنْ يُحْيِيَ الْمَوْتَىٰ ۚ بَلَىٰ إِنَّهُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ\n(Do they not see that Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth, and was not wearied by their creation, is able to give life to the dead? Yes, He surely is Able to do all things.)(46:33) Allah says in another Ayah,\nأَوَلَيْسَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ بِقَادِرٍ عَلَىٰ أَنْ يَخْلُقَ مِثْلَهُمْ ۚ بَلَىٰ وَهُوَ الْخَلَّاقُ الْعَلِيمُ - إِنَّمَا أَمْرُهُ إِذَا أَرَادَ شَيْئًا أَنْ يَقُولَ لَهُ كُنْ فَيَكُونُ\n(Is not He Who created the heavens and the earth, able to create the like of them? Yes, indeed! He is the All-Knowing Supreme Creator. Verily, His command, when He intends a thing, is only that He says to it, \"Be!\"– and it is!)(36:81-82) So here He says,\nفَلَا أُقْسِمُ بِرَبِّ الْمَشَارِقِ وَالْمَغَارِبِ إِنَّا لَقَادِرُونَ - عَلَىٰ أَنْ نُبَدِّلَ خَيْرًا مِنْهُمْ\n(But no! I swear by the Lord of the easts and the wests that surely We are Able –to replace them by (others) better than them..) meaning, 'on the Day of Judgement We will bring them back (to life) in bodies that are better than these bodies that they have now.' For verily, Allah's power is suitable (able) to do that.\nوَمَا نَحْنُ بِمَسْبُوقِينَ\n(and We are not to be outrun.) meaning, 'We are not unable.' This is as Allah says,\nأَيَحْسَبُ الْإِنْسَانُ أَلَّنْ نَجْمَعَ عِظَامَهُ - بَلَىٰ قَادِرِينَ عَلَىٰ أَنْ نُسَوِّيَ بَنَانَهُ\n(Does man think that We shall not assemble his bones? Yes, We are able to put together in perfect order the tips of his fingers.)(75:3,4) Allah also says,\nنَحْنُ قَدَّرْنَا بَيْنَكُمُ الْمَوْتَ وَمَا نَحْنُ بِمَسْبُوقِينَ - عَلَىٰ أَنْ نُبَدِّلَ أَمْثَالَكُمْ وَنُنْشِئَكُمْ فِي مَا لَا تَعْلَمُونَ\n(We have decreed death to you all, and We are not outstripped. To transfigure you and create you in (forms) that you know not.)(56:60-61)\nIbn Jarir preferred the meaning to be: 'a nation who will obey Us and not disobey Us.' He (Ibn Jarir) interpreted it in the same way as Allah's statements,\nعَلَىٰ أَنْ نُبَدِّلَ خَيْرًا مِنْهُمْ\n(To replace them by (others) better than them..) and:\nوَإِن تَتَوَلَّوْا يَسْتَبْدِلْ قَوْمًا غَيْرَكُمْ ثُمَّ لَا يَكُونُوا أَمْثَالَكُم\n(And if you turn away, He will exchange you for some other people and they will not be like you.)(47:38)\nHowever, the first interpretation is more obvious since the other Ayat support that, and Allah the Most High knows best. Then Allah says,\nفَذَرْهُمْ\n(So leave them) meaning, 'O Muhammad!'\nيَخُوضُوا وَيَلْعَبُوا\n(to plunge in vain talk and play about,) meaning, leave them in their denial, disbelief and obstinance.\nحَتَّىٰ يُلَاقُوا يَوْمَهُمُ الَّذِي يُوعَدُونَ\n(until they meet their Day which they are promised.) meaning, they are going to know the outcome of that and taste its evil consequences.\nيَوْمَ يَخْرُجُونَ مِنَ الْأَجْدَاثِ سِرَاعًا كَأَنَّهُمْ إِلَىٰ نُصُبٍ يُوفِضُونَ\n(The Day when they will come out of the graves quickly as racing to a Nusub.) meaning, they will stand up out of their graves when the Lord, Blessed be He the Most High, calls them to the place of the reckoning. They will rise up quickly as if they were rushing towards some monumental object. Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid and Ad-Dahhak, all said, \"As if they were rushing towards a flag.\" Abu 'Aliyah and Yahya bin Abi Kathir both said, \"As if they were rushing towards a goal.\" The majority of reciters recited this word as \"Nasb\" (instead of Nusub) with a Fathah over the letter Nun and a Sukun over the letter Sad. This (Nasb) is a verbal noun meaning something that is erected. Al-Hasan Al-Basri recited it as \"Nusub\" with a Dammah over both the letter Nun and Sad. This (Nusub) means an idol. With this recitation the Ayah means, as if their rushing to this place was like when they used to hurry in the worldly life to the idol when they saw it. They would rush hurriedly to see who would be the first of them to touch it. This has been reported from Mujahid, Yahya bin Abi Kathir, Muslim Al-Batin, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, Abu Salih, 'Asim bin Bahdalah, Ibn Zayd and others. Concerning Allah's statement,\nخَاشِعَةً أَبْصَارُهُمْ\n(With their eyes lowered in fear) meaning humbled.\nتَرْهَقُهُمْ ذِلَّةٌ\n(covering them with humility.) meaning, in return for how they behaved arrogantly in the worldly life by refusing to be obedient (to Allah).\nذَٰلِكَ الْيَوْمُ الَّذِي كَانُوا يُوعَدُونَ\n(That is the Day which they were promised!)\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surah Sa'ala Sa'il. And all praise and thanks are due to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/70?verse=36","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:71:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 71:1–4","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\n(In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nإِنَّا أَرْسَلْنَا نُوحًا إِلَىٰ قَوْمِهِ أَنْ أَنْذِرْ قَوْمَكَ مِنْ قَبْلِ أَنْ يَأْتِيَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ - قَالَ يَا قَوْمِ إِنِّي لَكُمْ نَذِيرٌ مُبِينٌ - أَنِ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ وَاتَّقُوهُ وَأَطِيعُونِ - يَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ مِنْ ذُنُوبِكُمْ وَيُؤَخِّرْكُمْ إِلَىٰ أَجَلٍ مُسَمًّى ۚ إِنَّ أَجَلَ اللَّهِ إِذَا جَاءَ لَا يُؤَخَّرُ ۖ لَوْ كُنْتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ\n(1. Verily, We sent Nuh to his people (saying): \"Warn your people before there comes to them a painful torment.\")(2. He said: \"O my people! Verily, I am a plain warner to you,\")(3. \"That you should worship Allah, and have Taqwa of Him, and obey me,\")(4. \"He will forgive you of your sins and respite you to an appointed term. Verily, the term of Allah when it comes, cannot be delayed, if you but know.\")\nNuh's Invitation to His People\nAllah says concerning Nuh that He sent him to his people commanding him to warn them of the punishment of Allah before it befell them. He was to tell them that if they would repent and turn to Allah, then the punishment would be lifted from them. Due to this Allah says,\nأَنْ أَنْذِرْ قَوْمَكَ مِنْ قَبْلِ أَنْ يَأْتِيَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ - قَالَ يَا قَوْمِ إِنِّي لَكُمْ نَذِيرٌ مُبِينٌ\n(\"Warn your people before there comes to them a painful torment.\" He said: \"O my people! Verily, I am a plain warner to you.\") meaning, clarity of the warning, making the matter apparent and clear.\nأَنِ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ وَاتَّقُوهُ\n(That you should worship Allah, and have Taqwa of Him,) meaning, 'abandon those things that He has forbidden and avoid that which He has declared to be sinful.'\nوَأَطِيعُونِ\n(and obey me,) 'In that which I command you to do and that which I forbid you from.'\nيَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ مِنْ ذُنُوبِكُمْ\n(He will forgive you of your sins) meaning, 'if you do what I command you to do and you believe in what I have been sent with to you, then Allah will forgive you for your sins.'\nوَيُؤَخِّرْكُمْ إِلَىٰ أَجَلٍ مُسَمًّى\n(and respite you to an appointed term.) meaning, 'He will extend your life span and protect you from the torment that He would have made befall you if you did not stay away from His prohibitions.' This Ayah is used as proof by those who say that obedience (to Allah), righteousness and maintaining the family ties truly increase the life span of a person. This is like that which has been reported in the Hadith,\nصِلَةُ الرَّحِمِ تَزِيدُ فِي الْعُمُرِ\n(Maintaining the family ties increases the life span.) Concerning Allah's statement,\nإِنَّ أَجَلَ اللَّهِ إِذَا جَاءَ لَا يُؤَخَّرُ ۖ لَوْ كُنْتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ\n(Verily, the term of Allah when it comes, cannot be delayed, if you but know.) means, hasten to the obedience (of Allah) before the coming of His vengeance. For verily, if He commands that to happen, it cannot be repulsed or prevented. For He is the Great One Who compels everything, and He is the Almighty Whose might all of creation succumbs to.","href":"/tafsir/71?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:71:5","title":"Ibn Kathir · 71:5–20","text":"He said: O my Lord! Verily, I have called to my people night and day (5)But all my calling added nothing but to (their) flight (6)And verily, every time I called unto them that You might forgive them, they thrust their fingers into their ears, covered themselves up with their garments, and persisted, and magnified themselves in pride (7)Then verily, I called to them openly (aloud)(8)Then verily, I proclaimed to them in public, and I have appealed to them in private (9)I said (to them): Ask forgiveness from your Lord, verily, He is Oft-Forgiving (10)He will send rain to you Midrar (11)And give you increase in wealth and children, and bestow on you gardens and bestow on you rivers (12)What is the matter with you, that you do not hope for any Waqar from Allah (13)While He has created you (in) Atwar (stages)(14)See you not how Allah has created the seven heavens in tiers (15)And has made the moon a light therein, and made the sun a lamp (16)And Allah has brought you forth from the (dust of) earth (17)Afterwards He will return you into it (the earth), and bring you forth (18)And Allah has made for you the earth a wide expanse (19)That you may go about therein in broad roads (20)\nNuh complains about his Encounter with His People\nAllah tells about His servant and Messenger, Nuh, and that he complained to his Lord about the response he received from his people, and how he was patient with them for this long period of time – which was nine hundred and fifty years. He complained due to his explaining and clarifying matters for them and his calling them to guidance and the straightest path. So he (Nuh) said,\nرَبِّ إِنِّي دَعَوْتُ قَوْمِي لَيْلًا وَنَهَارًا\n(O my Lord! Verily, I have called to my people night and day,) meaning, 'I did not abandon calling them night and day, carrying out Your command and in obediance to You.'\nفَلَمْ يَزِدْهُمْ دُعَائِي إِلَّا فِرَارًا\n(But all my calling added nothing but to (their) flight.) meaning, 'the more I called them to come to the truth, the more they fled from it and avoided it.'\nوَإِنِّي كُلَّمَا دَعَوْتُهُمْ لِتَغْفِرَ لَهُمْ جَعَلُوا أَصَابِعَهُمْ فِي آذَانِهِمْ وَاسْتَغْشَوْا ثِيَابَهُمْ\n(And verily, every time I called unto them that You might forgive them, they thrust their fingers into their ears, covered themselves up with their garments,) meaning, 'they closed up their ears so that they could not hear what I was calling them to.' This is similar to what Allah said about the disbelievers of the Quraysh.\nوَقَالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَا تَسْمَعُوا لِهَٰذَا الْقُرْآنِ وَالْغَوْا فِيهِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَغْلِبُونَ\n(And those who disbelieve say: \"Listen not to this Qur'an, and make noise in the midst of its (recitation) that you may overcome.\")(41:26)\nوَاسْتَغْشَوْا ثِيَابَهُمْ\n(covered themselves up with their garments,) Ibn Jarir recorded from Ibn 'Abbas that he said, \"They concealed themselves under false pretences from him so that he would not recognize them.\" Sa'id bin Jubayr and As-Suddi both said, \"They covered their heads so that they could not hear what he was saying.\"\nوَأَصَرُّوا\n(and persisted,) meaning, they continued in what they were upon of associating partners with Allah and great disbelief.\nوَاسْتَكْبَرُوا اسْتِكْبَارًا\n(and magnified themselves in pride.) meaning, they were turned away from following the truth and submitting to it.\nثُمَّ إِنِّي دَعَوْتُهُمْ جِهَارًا\n(Then verily, I called to them openly.) meaning, openly among the people.\nثُمَّ إِنِّي أَعْلَنْتُ لَهُمْ\n(Then verily, I proclaimed to them in public,) meaning, with open speech and a raised voice.\nوَأَسْرَرْتُ لَهُمْ إِسْرَارًا\n(and I have appealed to them in private.) meaning, in discussions with them. So he tried various types of propagation to be more effective with them.\nWhat Nuh said when He called His People to Allah\nفَقُلْتُ اسْتَغْفِرُوا رَبَّكُمْ إِنَّهُ كَانَ غَفَّارًا\n(I said: Ask forgiveness from your Lord, verily, He is Oft-Forgiving;) meaning, 'return to Him and turn away from what you are involved in. Repent to Him soon, for verily, He is Most Accepting of the repentance of those who turn to Him in repentance. He will accept repentance no matter what the sin is, even if it is disbelief and polytheism.' Thus, he said,\nفَقُلْتُ اسْتَغْفِرُوا رَبَّكُمْ إِنَّهُ كَانَ غَفَّارًا - يُرْسِلِ السَّمَاءَ عَلَيْكُمْ مِدْرَارًا\n(I said: Ask forgiveness from your Lord, verily, He is Oft-Forgiving; He will send rain to you Midrar,) meaning, continuous rain. Thus, it is recommended to recite this Surah in the prayer for rain due to this Ayah. This has been reported from the Commander of the faithful, 'Umar bin Al-Khattab. He ascended the Minbar to perform the prayer for rain, and he did not do more than seeking Allah's forgiveness and reciting the Ayat that mention seeking Allah's forgiveness. Among these Ayat:\nفَقُلْتُ اسْتَغْفِرُوا رَبَّكُمْ إِنَّهُ كَانَ غَفَّارًا - يُرْسِلِ السَّمَاءَ عَلَيْكُمْ مِدْرَارًا\n(I said: Ask forgiveness from your Lord, verily, He is Oft-Forgiving; He will send rain to you Midrar,) Then he ('Umar) said, \"Verily, I have sought rain with the keys of the sky which cause the rain to descend.\" Ibn 'Abbas and others have said, \"It (Midrar) means some of it (rain) following others.\" Concerning Allah's statement,\nوَيُمْدِدْكُمْ بِأَمْوَالٍ وَبَنِينَ وَيَجْعَلْ لَكُمْ جَنَّاتٍ وَيَجْعَلْ لَكُمْ أَنْهَارًا\n(And give you increase in wealth and children, and bestow on you gardens and bestow on you rivers.) meaning, 'if you repent to Allah, seek His forgiveness and obey Him, He will increase your provisions for you and provide you with water from the blessings of the sky. He will cause the blessings of the earth and crops to grow for you. He will increase your live stock animals for you and give you more wealth and children. This means that He will give you more wealth, more children and gardens with various types of fruits. He will cause rivers to flow among these gardens.' This is the position of the invitation with encouragement. Then He made it balanced for them by using intimidation. He said,\nمَا لَكُمْ لَا تَرْجُونَ لِلَّهِ وَقَارًا\n(What is the matter with you, that you do not hope for any Waqar from Allah) meaning, great majesty. This has been said by Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid and Ad-Dahhak. Ibn 'Abbas said, \"That you all do not magnify Allah in the proper manner that He deserves to be magnified. Meaning, you do not fear His punishment and His vengeance.\"\nوَقَدْ خَلَقَكُمْ أَطْوَارًا\n(While He has created you (in) Atwar (stages).) It has been said that this means from a drop of sperm, then from a hanging clot, then from a lump of flesh. Ibn 'Abbas, 'Ikrimah, Qatadah, Yahya bin Rafi', As-Suddi and Ibn Zayd, all said this. Concerning Allah's statement,\nأَلَمْ تَرَوْا كَيْفَ خَلَقَ اللَّهُ سَبْعَ سَمَاوَاتٍ طِبَاقًا\n(See you not how Allah has created the seven heavens in tiers?) meaning, one above another. Can this be comprehended simply by hearing it only or is it of the matters that actually can be perceived with the senses which are known about the movements (of the heavenly bodies) and the eclipses. It is known that they (the scholars) have many different opinions about these matters that we will not discuss here. The only intent here is that Allah\nخَلَقَ اللَّهُ سَبْعَ سَمَاوَاتٍ طِبَاقًا - وَجَعَلَ الْقَمَرَ فِيهِنَّ نُورًا وَجَعَلَ الشَّمْسَ سِرَاجًا\n(Allah has created the seven heavens in tiers and has made the moon a light therein, and made the sun a lamp?) meaning, He made a distinction between them (the sun and moon) in reference to their lighting. He made each one of them in a set manner with a distinct quality so that the night and day may be known. They (the night and day) are known by the rising and setting of the sun. He also determined fixed stations and positions for the moon, and He made its light vary so that sometimes it increases until it reaches a maximum, then it begins to decrease until it is completely veiled. This shows the passing of months and years. This is as Allah said,\nهُوَ الَّذِي جَعَلَ الشَّمْسَ ضِيَاءً وَالْقَمَرَ نُورًا وَقَدَّرَهُ مَنَازِلَ لِتَعْلَمُوا عَدَدَ السِّنِينَ وَالْحِسَابَ ۚ مَا خَلَقَ اللَّهُ ذَٰلِكَ إِلَّا بِالْحَقِّ ۚ يُفَصِّلُ الْآيَاتِ لِقَوْمٍ يَعْلَمُونَ\n(It is He Who made the sun a shining thing and the moon as a light and measured out for its stages that you might know the number of years and the reckoning. Allah did not create this but in truth. He explains the Ayat in detail for people who have knowledge.)(10:5) Concerning Allah's statement,\nوَاللَّهُ أَنْبَتَكُمْ مِنَ الْأَرْضِ نَبَاتًا\n(And Allah has brought you forth from the (dust of) earth?) This (Nabat) is a verbal noun (for emphasis) and its usage here is most excellent.\nثُمَّ يُعِيدُكُمْ فِيهَا\n(Afterwards He will return you into it (the earth),)(71:18) meaning, when you die.\nوَيُخْرِجُكُمْ إِخْرَاجًا\n(And bring you forth.) meaning, on the Day of Judgement He will repeat your creation just as He first originated you.\nوَاللَّهُ جَعَلَ لَكُمُ الْأَرْضَ بِسَاطًا\n(And Allah has made for you the earth a wide expanse.) meaning, He spread it out, leveled it, settled it, and stabilized it with firm and lofty mountains.\nلِتَسْلُكُوا مِنْهَا سُبُلًا فِجَاجًا\n(That you may go about therein in broad roads.) meaning, He created it so that you may settle in it and travel in it wherever you wish, from its different sides, areas and regions. All of this is from what Nuh informed them of concerning Allah's power and His greatness in creating the heavens and the earth. It demostrates the favor that He did for them by making both heavenly benefits and earthly benefits. For He is the Creator and the Sustainer Who made the heaven as a building and the earth as a bed, and He enlarged His provisions for His creatures. Therefore, He is the One Who it is obligatory to worship, and accept as One God. No one should be associated with Him as a partner, because He has no equal, peer, rival, coequal, mate, son, minister or advisor, rather He is the Most High, the Most Great.","href":"/tafsir/71?verse=5","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:71:21","title":"Ibn Kathir · 71:21–24","text":"Nuh said: \"My Lord! They have disobeyed me, and followed one whose wealth and children give him no increase but loss. (21)\"And they have plotted a mighty plot. (22)\"And they have said: 'You shall not leave your gods, nor shall you leave Wadd, nor Suwa', nor Yaghuth, and Ya'uq and Nasr.' (23)\"And indeed they have led many astray. And (O Allah): 'Grant no increase to the wrongdoers save error.' (24)\nNuh complains to His Lord about His People's Response\nAllah says that Nuh turned to Allah to inform Allah - the All Knowing from Whom nothing escapes - that he presented the clear call, as mentioned previously, and the comprehensive invitation in various ways. He called them sometimes by encouragement and sometimes by intimidating warnings. Yet, they disobeyed him, opposed him, denied him and followed the children of the world. They were those who were heedless of the command of Allah and they possessed delights of wealth and children. However, these things (worldly benefits) were also for gradual punishment and temporary respite, not for honor or blessing. Thus, Allah says,\nوَاتَّبَعُوا مَنْ لَمْ يَزِدْهُ مَالُهُ وَوَلَدُهُ إِلَّا خَسَارًا\n(and followed one whose wealth and children give him no increase but loss.) The meaning of Allah's statement,\nوَمَكَرُوا مَكْرًا كُبَّارًا\n(And they have plotted a mighty plot.) is that they plotted a deceptive plot for their followers tricking them into believing that they were following the truth and correct guidance. This is like what they will say to them on the Day of Judgement,\nبَلْ مَكْرُ اللَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ إِذْ تَأْمُرُونَنَا أَنْ نَكْفُرَ بِاللَّهِ وَنَجْعَلَ لَهُ أَنْدَادًا\n(Nay, but it was your plotting by night and day: when you orderd us to disbelieve in Allah and set up rivals to Him!)(34:33) For this reason He says here,\nThe Idols of the People of Nuh and what happened to Him\nوَمَكَرُوا مَكْرًا كُبَّارًا - وَقَالُوا لَا تَذَرُنَّ آلِهَتَكُمْ وَلَا تَذَرُنَّ وَدًّا وَلَا سُوَاعًا وَلَا يَغُوثَ وَيَعُوقَ وَنَسْرًا\n(And they have plotted a mighty plot. And they have said: 'You shall not leave your gods, nor shall you leave Wadd, nor Suwa', nor Yaghuth, and Ya'uq and Nasr.') These are the names of their idols which they used to worship besides Allah.\nAl-Bukhari recorded from Ibn 'Abbas that he said, \"The idols that were among the people of Nuh wound up among the Arabs afterwards. In reference to Wadd, it became the idol of the people of Kalb in the area of Dawmat Al-Jandal. Suwa' became the idol of the people of Hudhayl. Yaghuth became the idol of the people of Murad, then the people of Bani Ghutayf at Al-Juruf in the area of Saba' worshipped it after them. Ya'uq became the idol of the people of Hamdan. Nasr became the idol of the people of Himyar for the family of Dhu Kala'. These idols were all named after righteous men from the people of Nuh. Then when these men died, Shaytan inspired his (Nuh's) people to erect statues in honor of them at their gathering places where they used to come and sit, and to name these statues after these men (with their names). So they did this (as Shaytan suggested), but these statues were not worshipped until after those people (the ones who built them) had died and the knowledge was lost. Then, those statues were later worshipped.\"\nThis has also been similarly reported from 'Ikrimah, Ad-Dahhak, Qatadah and Ibn Ishaq. 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported from Ibn 'Abbas that he said, \"These are statues that were worshipped in the time of Nuh.\" Ibn Jarir recorded from Muhammad bin Qays that he said concerning Yaghuth, Ya'uq and Nasr, \"They were righteous people between the time of Adam and Nuh, and they had followers who used to adhere to their guidance. Then, when they died, their companions who used to follow them said, 'If we make images of them, it will increase our desire to perform worship when we remember them.' So they made images of them. Then, when those people died and other people came after them, Iblis approached them and said, 'They (your predecessors) used to worship these statues and they were granted rain by their worship of them.' Thus, they (the latter people) worshipped them.\"\nThe Supplication of Nuh against His People and for whoever believed in Him\nAllah then says,\nوَقَدْ أَضَلُّوا كَثِيرًا ۖ\n(And indeed they have led many astray.) meaning, by the idols that they took for worship, they mislead a large number of people. For verily, the worship of those idols continued throughout many generations until our times today, among the Arabs, the non-Arabs and all the groups of the Children of Adam. Al-Khalil (Prophet Ibrahim) said in his supplication,\nوَاجْنُبْنِي وَبَنِيَّ أَنْ نَعْبُدَ الْأَصْنَامَ - رَبِّ إِنَّهُنَّ أَضْلَلْنَ كَثِيرًا مِنَ النَّاسِ ۖ\n(And keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols.\"O my Lord! They have indeed led astray many among mankind...\")(14:35,36) Allah then says,\nوَلَا تَزِدِ الظَّالِمِينَ إِلَّا ضَلَالًا\n(Grant no increase to the wrongdoers save error.) This is a supplication from him (Nuh) against his people due to their rebellion, disbelief and obstinacy. This is just as Musa supplicated against Fir'awn and his chiefs in his statement,\nرَبَّنَا اطْمِسْ عَلَىٰ أَمْوَالِهِمْ وَاشْدُدْ عَلَىٰ قُلُوبِهِمْ فَلَا يُؤْمِنُوا حَتَّىٰ يَرَوُا الْعَذَابَ الْأَلِيمَ\n(Our Lord ! Destroy their wealth, and harden their hearts, so that they will not believe until they see the painful torment.)(10:88)\nVerily, Allah responded to the supplication of both of these Prophets concerning their people and He drowned their nations due to their rejection of what he (that Prophet) had come with.","href":"/tafsir/71?verse=21","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:71:25","title":"Ibn Kathir · 71:25–28","text":"Because of their sins they were drowned, then were made to enter the Fire. And they found none to help them instead of Allah (25)And Nuh said: \"My Lord! Leave not one of the disbelievers on the earth Dayyar! (26)\"If You leave them, they will mislead Your servants, and they will beget none but wicked disbelievers. (27)\"My Lord! Forgive me, and my parents, and him who enters my home as a believer, and all the believing men and women. And to the wrongdoers grant You no increase but destruction!\") Allah say (28)\nمِمَّا خَطِيئَاتِهِمْ\n(Because of their sins) It also has been recited as;\n(خَطَايَاهُمْ)\n(their errors.)\nأُغْرِقُوا\n(they were drowned,) meaning, for their numerous sins, rebellion, persistence in disbelief and opposition to their Messengers.\nأُغْرِقُوا فَأُدْخِلُوا نَارًا\n(they were drowned, then were made to enter the Fire.) meaning, they will be carried from the flood of the seas to the heat of the Fire.\nفَلَمْ يَجِدُوا لَهُمْ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ أَنْصَارًا\n(And they found none to help them instead of Allah.) meaning, they will have no helper, assistant, or savior who can rescue them from the punishment of Allah. This is similar to Allah's statement,\nلَا عَاصِمَ الْيَوْمَ مِنْ أَمْرِ اللَّهِ إِلَّا مَنْ رَحِمَ\n(This day there is no savior from the decree of Allah except him on whom He has mercy.)(11:43)\nوَقَالَ نُوحٌ رَبِّ لَا تَذَرْ عَلَى الْأَرْضِ مِنَ الْكَافِرِينَ دَيَّارًا\n(And Nuh said: \"My Lord! Leave not one of the disbelievers on the earth Dayyar!\") meaning, do not leave a single one of them on the face of the earth, not even a lone individual. This is a method of speaking that gives emphasis to the negation. Ad-Dahhak said, \"Dayyar means one.\" As-Suddi said, \"Dayyar is the one who stays in the home.\" So Allah answered his supplication and He destroyed all of those on the face of the earth who were disbelievers. He (Allah) even destroyed Nuh's (biological) son from his own loins, who separated himself from his father (Nuh). He (Nuh's son) said,\nسَآوِي إِلَىٰ جَبَلٍ يَعْصِمُنِي مِنَ الْمَاءِ ۚ قَالَ لَا عَاصِمَ الْيَوْمَ مِنْ أَمْرِ اللَّهِ إِلَّا مَنْ رَحِمَ ۚ وَحَالَ بَيْنَهُمَا الْمَوْجُ فَكَانَ مِنَ الْمُغْرَقِينَ\n(I will betake myself to some mountain, it will save me from the water. Nuh said: \"This day there is no savior from the decree of Allah except him on whom He has mercy.\" And waves came in between them, so he (the son) was among the drowned.)(11:43)\nAllah saved the people of the ship who believed with Nuh, and they were those whom Allah commanded Nuh to carry with him. Allah said,\nإِنَّكَ إِنْ تَذَرْهُمْ يُضِلُّوا عِبَادَكَ\n(If You leave them, they will mislead Your servants,) meaning, 'if You leave a single one of them they will lead your servants astray.' This refers to those whom He will create after them.\nوَلَا يَلِدُوا إِلَّا فَاجِرًا كَفَّارًا\n(and they will beget none but wicked disbelievers.) meaning, wicked in their deeds and disbelieving in their hearts. He (Nuh) said this due to what he knew about them since he remained among them for nine hundred and fifty years. Then he said,\nرَبِّ اغْفِرْ لِي وَلِوَالِدَيَّ وَلِمَنْ دَخَلَ بَيْتِيَ مُؤْمِنًا\n(My Lord! Forgive me, and my parents, and him who enters my home as a believer,)\nAd-Dahhak said, \"This means, my Masjid.\" However, there is no harm in understanding the Ayah according to its apparent meaning, which would be that he (Nuh) supplicated for every person who entered his house who was a believer. Then he said,\nوَلِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتِ\n(and all the believing men and women.) He supplicated for all of the believing men and women, and that includes those of them who were living and those of them who were dead. For this reason, it is recommended to supplicate like this, in following the example of Nuh, and that which has b