ضِعْفًا فِي النَّارِ\n(They will say: \"Our Lord! Whoever brought this upon us, add to him a double torment in the Fire!\"). This is like the Ayah,\nقَالَتْ أُخْرَاهُمْ لِأُولَاهُمْ رَبَّنَا هَٰؤُلَاءِ أَضَلُّونَا فَآتِهِمْ عَذَابًا ضِعْفًا مِنَ النَّارِ ۖ قَالَ لِكُلٍّ ضِعْفٌ وَلَٰكِنْ لَا تَعْلَمُونَ\n(The last of them will say to the first of them: \"Our Lord! These misled us, so give them a double torment of the Fire.\" He will say: \"For each one there is double (torment), but you know not.\")(7:38), which means that each of them will be punished as he deserves.\nوَقَالُوا مَا لَنَا لَا نَرَىٰ رِجَالًا كُنَّا نَعُدُّهُمْ مِنَ الْأَشْرَارِ - أَتَّخَذْنَاهُمْ سِخْرِيًّا أَمْ زَاغَتْ عَنْهُمُ الْأَبْصَارُ\n(And they will say: \"What is the matter with us that we see not men whom we used to count among the bad ones? Did we take them as an object of mockery, or have (our) eyes failed to perceive them?\")\nHere Allah tells us that when they are in Hell, the disbelievers will notice that they do not see people who they thought were misguided, while they thought of themselves as believers. They will say, 'why do we not see them with us in the Fire?' Mujahid said, \"This is what Abu Jahl will say; he will say, 'what is the matter with me that I do not see Bilal and 'Ammar and Suhayb and so-and-so...?' This is an example; all the disbelievers are like this, they think that the believers will go to Hell, so when the disbelievers enter Hell, they will wonder why they do not see them there, and they will say,\nمَا لَنَا لَا نَرَىٰ رِجَالًا كُنَّا نَعُدُّهُمْ مِنَ الْأَشْرَارِ - أَتَّخَذْنَاهُمْ سِخْرِيًّا\n(What is the matter with us that we see not men whom we used to count among the bad ones? Did we take them as an object of mockery,) means, in this world,\nأَمْ زَاغَتْ عَنْهُمُ الْأَبْصَارُ\n(or have (our) eyes failed to perceive them?) means, they will try to console themselves with this wishful thinking, so they will say, perhaps they are here in Hell with us, but we have not laid eyes on them. Then they will find out that they (the believers) are in the lofty levels of Paradise, as Allah says:\nوَنَادَىٰ أَصْحَابُ الْجَنَّةِ أَصْحَابَ النَّارِ أَنْ قَدْ وَجَدْنَا مَا وَعَدَنَا رَبُّنَا حَقًّا فَهَلْ وَجَدْتُمْ مَا وَعَدَ رَبُّكُمْ حَقًّا ۖ قَالُوا نَعَمْ ۚ فَأَذَّنَ مُؤَذِّنٌ بَيْنَهُمْ أَنْ لَعْنَةُ اللَّهِ عَلَى الظَّالِمِينَ\n(And the dwellers of Paradise will call out to the dwellers of the Fire (saying): \"We have indeed found true what our Lord had promised us; have you also found true what your Lord promised (warned)?\" They shall say: \"Yes.\" Then a crier will proclaim between them: \"The curse of Allah is on the wrongdoers.\") until:\nادْخُلُوا الْجَنَّةَ لَا خَوْفٌ عَلَيْكُمْ وَلَا أَنْتُمْ تَحْزَنُونَ\n(Enter Paradise, no fear shall be on you, nor shall you grieve.)(7:44-49)\nإِنَّ ذَٰلِكَ لَحَقٌّ تَخَاصُمُ أَهْلِ النَّارِ\n(Verily, that is the very truth – the mutual dispute of the people of the Fire!) means, 'this that We have told you, O Muhammad, about the dispute among the people of Hell and their cursing one another, is true and there is no doubt concerning it.'","href":"/tafsir/38?verse=55","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:38:65","title":"Ibn Kathir · 38:65–70","text":"Say: \"I am only a warner and there is no God (worthy of worship) except Allah the One, the Irresistible, (65)\"The Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, the Almighty, the Oft-Forgiving. (66)Say: \"That is a great news, (67)\"From which you turn away! (68)\"I had no knowledge of the chiefs (angels) on high when they were disputing and discussing. (69)\"Only this has been revealed to me, that I am a plain warner. (70)\nThe Message of the Messenger ﷺ is a Great News\nAllah tells His Messenger ﷺ to say to those who disbelieved in Allah, associated others in worship with Him and denied His Messenger: 'I am a warner, I am not as you claim.'\nوَمَا مِنْ إِلَٰهٍ إِلَّا اللَّهُ الْوَاحِدُ الْقَهَّارُ\n(and there is no God (worthy of worship) except Allah, the One, the Irresistible,) means, He Alone has subjugated and controlled everything.\nرَبُّ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا\n(The Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them,) means, He is the Sovereign of all that and is in control of it.\nالْعَزِيزُ الْغَفَّارُ\n(the Almighty, the Oft-Forgiving.) means, He is Oft-Forgiving as well as being Almighty and All-Powerful.\nقُلْ هُوَ نَبَأٌ عَظِيمٌ\n(Say: \"That (this Qur'an) is a great news,\") means, 'something very important, which is that Allah has sent me to you.\nأَنْتُمْ عَنْهُ مُعْرِضُونَ\n(From which you turn away!) means, 'you neglect it.'\nمَا كَانَ لِيَ مِنْ عِلْمٍ بِالْمَلَإِ الْأَعْلَىٰ إِذْ يَخْتَصِمُونَ\n(I had no knowledge of the chiefs (angels) on high when they were disputing and discussing.) meaning, 'were it not for the divine revelation, how could I have known about the dispute of the chiefs on high (the angels)?' This refers to their dispute concerning Adam, peace be upon him, and how Iblis refused to prostrate to him and argued with his Lord because He preferred him (Adam) over him. This is what Allah says:","href":"/tafsir/38?verse=65","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:38:71","title":"Ibn Kathir · 38:71–85","text":"(Remember) when your Lord said to the angels: \"Truly, I am going to create man from clay. (71)\"So, when I have fashioned him and breathed into him (his) soul created by Me, then you fall down prostrate to him. (72)So, the angels prostrated themselves, all of them (73)Except Iblis, he was proud and was one of the disbelievers (74)(Allah) said: \"O Iblis! What prevents you from prostrating yourself to one whom I have created with Both My Hands. Are you too proud or are you one of the high exalted? (75)[Iblis] said: \"I am better than he. You created me from fire, and You created him from clay. (76)(Allah) said: \"Then get out from here; for verily, you are outcast. (77)\"And verily, My curse is on you till the Day of Recompense. (78)[Iblis] said: \"My Lord! Give me then respite till the Day the (dead) are resurrected. (79)(Allah) said: \"Verily, you are of those allowed respite, (80)\"Till the Day of the time appointed. (81)[Iblis] said: \"By Your might, then I will surely mislead them all, (82)\"Except Your true servants amongst them. (83)(Allah) said: \"The truth is – the truth I say – (84)\"That I will fill Hell with you and those of them (mankind) that follow you, together. (85)\nThe Story of Adam and Iblis\nAllah mentions this story in Surat Al-Baqarah, at the beginning of Surat Al-A'raf, in Surat Al-Hijr, Al-Isra', Al-Kahf and here. Before creating Adam, peace be upon him, Allah told the angels that He was going to create a human being from sounding clay of altered smooth black mud. He told them that when He finished creating and forming him, they were to prostrate to him as a sign of honor and respect, and out of obedience to the command of Allah, may He be exalted. All of the angels obeyed this command except for Iblis, who was not one of them. He was one of the Jinn, and his nature betrayed him at his time of greatest need. He refused to prostrate to Adam, and he disputed with his Lord about him, claiming that he was better than Adam, because he was created from fire while Adam was created from clay, and fire was better than clay, or so he said. He made a mistake by doing this, and he went against the command of Allah, thus committing the sin of disbelief. So Allah exiled him, humiliated him, and cast him out of His mercy and His sacred Presence, and called him \"Iblis\" symbolizing that he had Ablasa min Ar-Rahmah (despaired of mercy) – that there was no hope for him of mercy. He cast him down from the heavens, disgraced and rejected, to the earth. Iblis asked Allah to give him a reprieve until the Day of Resurrection, so the Forbearing One, Who does not hasten to punish those who disobey Him, gave him a reprieve. When he knew that he was safe from destruction until the Day of Resurrection, he rebelled and transgressed (and he said:)\nلَأُغْوِيَنَّهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ - إِلَّا عِبَادَكَ مِنْهُمُ الْمُخْلَصِينَ\n(...I [Iblis] will surely mislead them all, except Your true servants amongst them.\") This is like the Ayat:\nأَرَأَيْتَكَ هَٰذَا الَّذِي كَرَّمْتَ عَلَيَّ لَئِنْ أَخَّرْتَنِ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ لَأَحْتَنِكَنَّ ذُرِّيَّتَهُ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا\n(([Iblis] said:) \"See this one whom You have honored above me, if You give me respite until the Day of Resurrection, I will surely seize and mislead his offspring all but a few!\")(17:62).\nThese few are the ones who are excepted in another Ayah, which is:\nإِنَّ عِبَادِي لَيْسَ لَكَ عَلَيْهِمْ سُلْطَانٌ ۚ وَكَفَىٰ بِرَبِّكَ وَكِيلًا\n(Verily, My servants – you have no authority over them. And All-Sufficient is your Lord as a Guardian.)(17:65)\nقَالَ فَالْحَقُّ وَالْحَقَّ أَقُولُ - لَأَمْلَأَنَّ جَهَنَّمَ مِنْكَ وَمِمَّنْ تَبِعَكَ مِنْهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ\n((Allah) said: \"The truth is – and the truth I say that I will fill Hell with you and those of them (mankind) that follow you, together.\") Some of them, including Mujahid, read this as meaning, \"I am the Truth and the truth I say.\" According to another report narrated from Mujahid, it means, \"The truth is from Me and I speak the truth.\" Others, such as As-Suddi, interpreted it as being an oath sworn by Allah. This Ayah is like the Ayat:\nوَلَٰكِنْ حَقَّ الْقَوْلُ مِنِّي لَأَمْلَأَنَّ جَهَنَّمَ مِنَ الْجِنَّةِ وَالنَّاسِ أَجْمَعِينَ\n(but the Word from Me took effect, that I will fill Hell with Jinn and mankind together.)(32:13), and\nقَالَ اذْهَبْ فَمَنْ تَبِعَكَ مِنْهُمْ فَإِنَّ جَهَنَّمَ جَزَاؤُكُمْ جَزَاءً مَوْفُورًا\n((Allah) said: \"Go, and whosoever of them follows you, surely, Hell will be the recompense of you (all) – an ample recompense.)(17:63).","href":"/tafsir/38?verse=71","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:38:86","title":"Ibn Kathir · 38:86–88","text":"Say: \"No wage do I ask of you for this, nor am I one of the Mutakallifin. (86)\"It is only a Reminder for all the creatures. (87)\"And you shall certainly know the truth of it after a while. (88)\nAllah says: 'Say, O Muhammad, to these idolators: I do not ask you to give me any reward from the goods of this world in return for the Message which I convey to you and the sincere advice I offer.'\nوَمَا أَنَا مِنَ الْمُتَكَلِّفِينَ\n(nor am I one of the Mutakallifin.) means, 'and I do not add anything to that which Allah has told me. Whatever I am commanded to do, I do it, and I do not add anything or take anything away. By doing this I am seeking the Face of Allah and the Hereafter.'\nSufyan Ath-Thawri, narrated from Al-A'mash and Mansur from Abu Ad-Duha that Masruq said, \"We went to 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud, may Allah be pleased with him. He said, 'O people! Whoever knows a thing should say it, and whoever does not know should say, 'Allah knows best.'\" It is part of knowledge, when one does not know, to say \"Allah knows best.\" For Allah said to your Prophet ﷺ:\nقُلْ مَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ أَجْرٍ وَمَا أَنَا مِنَ الْمُتَكَلِّفِينَ\n(Say: \"No wage do I ask of you for this, nor am I one of the Mutakallifin.\") This was reported by Al-Bukhari and Muslim.\nإِنْ هُوَ إِلَّا ذِكْرٌ لِلْعَالَمِينَ\n(It is only a Reminder for all the creatures.) means, the Qur'an is a reminder for all those who are held accountable, men and Jinn. This was the view of Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him. This Ayah is like the Ayat:\nلِأُنْذِرَكُمْ بِهِ وَمَنْ بَلَغَ\n(that I may therewith warn you and whomsoever it may reach)(6:19), and\nوَمَنْ يَكْفُرْ بِهِ مِنَ الْأَحْزَابِ فَالنَّارُ مَوْعِدُهُ ۚ\n(but those of the sects that reject it, the Fire will be their promised meeting place)(11:17).\nوَلَتَعْلَمُنَّ نَبَأَهُ\n(And you shall certainly know the truth of it) means, 'you will see confirmation that what he says is true.'\nبَعْدَ حِينٍ\n(after a while.) means, soon. Qatadah said, \"After death. 'Ikrimah said, \"It means, on the Day of Resurrection.\" There is no contradiction between the two views, because whoever dies comes under the rulings of the Day of Resurrection.\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surah Sad. All praise and gratitude is due to Allah, and Allah may He be glorified and exalted, knows best.","href":"/tafsir/38?verse=86","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:39:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 39:1–4","text":"The Virtues of Surat Az-Zumar\nAn-Nasa'i recorded that 'A'ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to fast until we would say, 'He does not want to break fast,' and he would not fast until we would say, 'He does not want to fast.' And he ﷺ used to recite Bani Isra'il [Al-Isra'] and Az-Zumar every night.\"\nبِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nتَنْزِيلُ الْكِتَابِ مِنَ اللَّهِ الْعَزِيزِ الْحَكِيمِ - إِنَّا أَنْزَلْنَا إِلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ بِالْحَقِّ فَاعْبُدِ اللَّهَ مُخْلِصًا لَهُ الدِّينَ - أَلَا لِلَّهِ الدِّينُ الْخَالِصُ ۚ وَالَّذِينَ اتَّخَذُوا مِنْ دُونِهِ أَوْلِيَاءَ مَا نَعْبُدُهُمْ إِلَّا لِيُقَرِّبُونَا إِلَى اللَّهِ زُلْفَىٰ إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَحْكُمُ بَيْنَهُمْ فِي مَا هُمْ فِيهِ يَخْتَلِفُونَ ۗ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَهْدِي مَنْ هُوَ كَاذِبٌ كَفَّارٌ - لَوْ أَرَادَ اللَّهُ أَنْ يَتَّخِذَ وَلَدًا لَاصْطَفَىٰ مِمَّا يَخْلُقُ مَا يَشَاءُ ۚ سُبْحَانَهُ ۖ هُوَ اللَّهُ الْوَاحِدُ الْقَهَّارُ\n(1. The revelation of this Book is from Allah, the Almighty, the All-Wise.)(2. Verily, We have sent down the Book to you in truth. So, worship Allah by doing religious deeds sincerely for Him only.)(3. Surely, the religion is for Allah only. And those who take protectors besides Him (say): \"We worship them only that they may bring us near to Allah.\" Verily, Allah will judge between them concerning that wherein they differ. Truly, Allah guides not him who is a liar, and a disbeliever.)(4. Had Allah willed to take a son, He could have chosen whom He willed out of those whom He created. But glory be to Him! He is Allah, the One, the Irresistible.)\nThe Order for Tawhid and the Refutation of Shirk\nAllah tells us that the revelation of this Book, which is the magnificent Qur'an, is from Him, and is truth in which there is no doubt whatsoever. This is like the Ayat:\nوَإِنَّهُ لَتَنْزِيلُ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ - نَزَلَ بِهِ الرُّوحُ الْأَمِينُ - عَلَىٰ قَلْبِكَ لِتَكُونَ مِنَ الْمُنْذِرِينَ - بِلِسَانٍ عَرَبِيٍّ مُبِينٍ\n(And truly, this is a revelation from the Lord of the creatures, which the trustworthy Ruh (Jibril) has brought down upon your heart that you may be (one) of the warners, in the plain Arabic language.)(26:192-195)\nوَإِنَّهُ لَكِتَابٌ عَزِيزٌ - لَا يَأْتِيهِ الْبَاطِلُ مِنْ بَيْنِ يَدَيْهِ وَلَا مِنْ خَلْفِهِ ۖ تَنْزِيلٌ مِنْ حَكِيمٍ حَمِيدٍ\n(And verily, it is a mighty Book. Falsehood cannot come to it from before it or behind it, (it is) sent down by the All-Wise, Worthy of all praise.)(41:41-42)\nAnd Allah says here:\nتَنْزِيلُ الْكِتَابِ مِنَ اللَّهِ الْعَزِيزِ\n(The revelation of this Book is from Allah, the Almighty,) meaning, the Almighty, All-Powerful.\nالْحَكِيمِ\n(the All-Wise.) meaning, in all that He says, does, legislates and decrees.\nإِنَّا أَنْزَلْنَا إِلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ بِالْحَقِّ فَاعْبُدِ اللَّهَ مُخْلِصًا لَهُ الدِّينَ\n(Verily, We have sent down the Book to you in truth. So, worship Allah by doing religious deeds sincerely for Him only.) means, so worship Allah Alone with no partner or associate, and call mankind to that, and teach them that it is not right to worship anyone or anything except Him Alone, and He has no partner, equal or rival. Allah says:\nأَلَا لِلَّهِ الدِّينُ الْخَالِصُ ۚ\n(Surely, the religion is for Allah only.) meaning, He will not accept any deed unless it is done purely and sincerely for Him Alone, with no partner or associate. Then Allah tells us that the idolators say:\nمَا نَعْبُدُهُمْ إِلَّا لِيُقَرِّبُونَا إِلَى اللَّهِ زُلْفَىٰ\n(We worship them only that they may bring us near to Allah.) meaning what motivates them to worship them is the fact that they made their idols in the image of the angels – or so they claim – and when they worship those images it is like worshipping the angels, so that they will intercede with Allah for them to help and give them provision and other worldly needs. As far as the resurrection is concerned, they denied it and did not believe in it. Qatadah, As-Suddi and Malik said, narrating from Zayd bin Aslam and Ibn Zayd:\nإِلَّا لِيُقَرِّبُونَا إِلَى اللَّهِ زُلْفَىٰ\n(only that they may bring us near to Allah.) means, \"So that they may intercede for us and bring us closer to Him.\" During Jahiliyyah, they used to recite the following for their Talbiyah when they performed Hajj; \"At Your service, You have no partner except the partner You have; he and all that he owns belong to You.\" This pretentious argument which the idolators of all times, ancient and modern, used as evidence is what the Messengers, may the blessings and peace of Allah be upon them all, came to refute and forbid, and to call people to worship Allah Alone with no partner or associate. This is something that the idolators themselves invented; Allah did not give them permission for it, nor does He approve of it; indeed, He hates it and forbids it.\nوَلَقَدْ بَعَثْنَا فِي كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ رَسُولًا أَنِ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ وَاجْتَنِبُوا الطَّاغُوتَ ۖ\n(And verily, We have sent among every Ummah a Messenger (proclaiming): \"Worship Allah, and avoid Taghut.\")(16:36)\nوَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ قَبْلِكَ مِنْ رَسُولٍ إِلَّا نُوحِي إِلَيْهِ أَنَّهُ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا أَنَا فَاعْبُدُونِ\n(And We did not send any Messenger before you but We revealed to him (saying): \"None has the right to be worshipped but I (Allah), so worship Me.\")(21:25)\nAnd Allah tells us that the angels in the heavens, those who are close to Him and others, are all servants who submit humbly to Allah. They do not intercede with Him except by His leave for the one with whom He is pleased. They are not like the princes and ministers of their (the idolators') kings who intercede with them without their permission for both those whom the kings like and those whom they hate.\nفَلَا تَضْرِبُوا لِلَّهِ الْأَمْثَالَ ۚ\n(So put not forward similitudes for Allah)(16:74). Exalted be Allah far above that.\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ يَحْكُمُ بَيْنَهُمْ\n(Verily, Allah will judge between them) means, on the Day of Resurrection,\nفِي مَا هُمْ فِيهِ يَخْتَلِفُونَ ۗ\n(concerning that wherein they differ.) means, He will judge between His creation on the Day of Resurrection and will reward or punish each person according to his deeds.\nوَيَوْمَ يَحْشُرُهُمْ جَمِيعًا ثُمَّ يَقُولُ لِلْمَلَائِكَةِ أَهَٰؤُلَاءِ إِيَّاكُمْ كَانُوا يَعْبُدُونَ - قَالُوا سُبْحَانَكَ أَنْتَ وَلِيُّنَا مِنْ دُونِهِمْ ۖ بَلْ كَانُوا يَعْبُدُونَ الْجِنَّ ۖ أَكْثَرُهُمْ بِهِمْ مُؤْمِنُونَ\n(And (remember) the Day when He will gather them all together, then He will say to the angels: \"Was it you that these people used to worship?\" They (the angels) will say: \"Glorified be You! You are our Wali (Lord) instead of them. Nay, but they used to worship the Jinn; most of them were believers in them.\")(34:40-41)\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَهْدِي مَنْ هُوَ كَاذِبٌ كَفَّارٌ\n(Truly, Allah guides not him who is a liar, and a disbeliever.) means, He will not show true guidance to one who deliberately tells lies about Allah and whose heart rejects the signs and proof of Allah. Then Allah states that He does not have any offspring, as the ignorant idolators claim the angels to be, and as the stubborn Jews and Christians claim 'Uzayr and 'Isa to be. Allah, may He be blessed and exalted, says:\nلَوْ أَرَادَ اللَّهُ أَنْ يَتَّخِذَ وَلَدًا لَاصْطَفَىٰ مِمَّا يَخْلُقُ مَا يَشَاءُ ۚ\n(Had Allah willed to take a son (or offspring), He could have chosen whom He willed out of those whom He created.) meaning, the matter would not have been as they claim. This is a conditional sentence which does not imply that this happened or that it is permitted; indeed, it is impossible. The aim is only to point out the ignorance of their claims. It is like the Ayat:\nلَوْ أَرَدْنَا أَنْ نَتَّخِذَ لَهْوًا لَاتَّخَذْنَاهُ مِنْ لَدُنَّا إِنْ كُنَّا فَاعِلِينَ\n(Had We intended to take a pastime, We could surely have taken it from Us, if We were going to do (that).)(21:17)\nقُلْ إِنْ كَانَ لِلرَّحْمَٰنِ وَلَدٌ فَأَنَا أَوَّلُ الْعَابِدِينَ\n(Say: \"If the Most Gracious had a son, then I am the first of worshippers.\")(43:81) All of these Ayat are conditional, and it is permissible to form a conditional sentence referring to something that is impossible if it serves the purposes of the speaker.\nسُبْحَانَهُ ۖ هُوَ اللَّهُ الْوَاحِدُ الْقَهَّارُ\n(But glory be to Him! He is Allah, the One, the Irresistible.) means, exalted and sanctified be He above the idea that He could have any offspring, for He is the One, the Only, the Unique, the Self-Sufficient Master to Whom everything is enslaved and is in need of. He is the One Who is independent of all else, Who has subjugated all things and they submit humbly to Him. Blessed and exalted be He far above what the wrongdoers and deniers say.","href":"/tafsir/39?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:39:5","title":"Ibn Kathir · 39:5–6","text":"He has created the heavens and the earth with truth. He makes the night to go in the day and makes the day to go in the night. And He has subjected the sun and the moon. Each running for an appointed term. Verily, He is the Almighty, the Oft-Forgiving (5)He created you (all) from a single person; then made from him his wife. And He has sent down for you of An'am eight pairs. He creates you in the wombs of your mothers, creation after creation in three veils of darkness. Such is Allah your Lord. His is the kingdom. La ilaha illa Huwa. How then are you turned away (6)\nEvidence of the Power and Oneness of Allah\nAllah tells us that He is the Creator of what is in the heavens and on earth, and what is between them. He is the Sovereign and Controller alternating the night and day.\nيُكَوِّرُ اللَّيْلَ عَلَى النَّهَارِ وَيُكَوِّرُ النَّهَارَ عَلَى اللَّيْلِ ۖ\n(He makes the night to go in the day and makes the day to go in the night.) means, He has subjugated them and He causes them to alternate without ceasing, each seeking the other rapidly, as He says:\nيُغْشِي اللَّيْلَ النَّهَارَ يَطْلُبُهُ حَثِيثًا\n(He brings the night as a cover over the day, seeking it rapidly)(7:54). This is the meaning of that which was narrated from Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, Mujahid, Qatadah, As-Suddi and others.\nوَسَخَّرَ الشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ ۖ كُلٌّ يَجْرِي لِأَجَلٍ مُسَمًّى ۗ\n(And He has subjected the sun and the moon. Each running for an appointed term.) means, for a period of time that is known to Allah, then it will come to an end on the Day of Resurrection.\nأَلَا هُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الْغَفَّارُ\n(Verily, He is the Almighty, the Oft-Forgiving.) means, beside His might, greatness and pride, He is Oft-Forgiving to those who disobey Him but then turn to Him in repentance.\nخَلَقَكُمْ مِنْ نَفْسٍ وَاحِدَةٍ\n(He created you (all) from a single person;) means, He created you, with all your varied races, types, languages and colors, from a single soul, who was Adam, peace be upon him.\nثُمَّ جَعَلَ مِنْهَا زَوْجَهَا\n(then made from him his wife.) who was Hawwa', peace be upon her. This is like the Ayah:\nيَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ اتَّقُوا رَبَّكُمُ الَّذِي خَلَقَكُمْ مِنْ نَفْسٍ وَاحِدَةٍ وَخَلَقَ مِنْهَا زَوْجَهَا وَبَثَّ مِنْهُمَا رِجَالًا كَثِيرًا وَنِسَاءً ۚ\n(O mankind! Have Taqwa of your Lord, Who created you from a single person, and from him He created his wife, and from them both He created many men and women)(4:1).\nوَأَنْزَلَ لَكُمْ مِنَ الْأَنْعَامِ ثَمَانِيَةَ أَزْوَاجٍ ۚ\n(And He has sent down for you of cattle eight pairs.) means, He has created for you from among the cattles, eight pairs. These are the ones that are mentioned in Surat Al-An'am, eight kinds – a pair of sheep, a pair of goats, a pair of camels and a pair of oxen.\nيَخْلُقُكُمْ فِي بُطُونِ أُمَّهَاتِكُمْ\n(He creates you in the wombs of your mothers,) means, He forms you in your mothers' wombs.\nخَلْقًا مِنْ بَعْدِ خَلْقٍ\n(creation after creation). Everyone of you is originally a Nutfah, then he becomes an 'Alaqah, then he becomes a Mudghah, then he is created and becomes flesh and bones and nerves and veins, and the Ruh (soul) is breathed into him, and he becomes another type of creation.\nفَتَبَارَكَ اللَّهُ أَحْسَنُ الْخَالِقِينَ\n(So Blessed is Allah, the Best of creators)(23:14).\nفِي ظُلُمَاتٍ ثَلَاثٍ\n(in three veils of darkness) means, in the darkness of the womb, the darkness of the placenta which blankets and protects the child, and the darkness of the belly. This was the view of Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Abu Malik, Ad-Dahhak, Qatadah, As-Suddi and Ibn Zayd.\nذَٰلِكُمُ اللَّهُ رَبُّكُمْ\n(Such is Allah your Lord.) means, the One Who created the heavens and the earth and everything in between, and created you and your forefathers, is the Lord. To Him belong sovereignty and control over all of that.\nلَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ ۖ\n(La ilaha illa Huwa.) means, no one else should be worshipped except Him alone with no partner or associate.\nفَأَنَّىٰ تُصْرَفُونَ\n(How then are you turned away?) means, how can you worship anything besides Him? What has happened to your minds?","href":"/tafsir/39?verse=5","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:39:7","title":"Ibn Kathir · 39:7–8","text":"If you disbelieve, then verily, Allah is not in need of you; He likes not disbelief for His servants. And if you are grateful, He is pleased therewith for you. No bearer of burdens shall bear the burden of another. Then to your Lord is your return, and He will inform you what you used to do. Verily, He is the All-Knower of that which is in breasts (7)And when some hurt touches man, he cries to his Lord, turning to Him in repentance. But when He bestows a favor upon him from Himself, he forgets that for which he cried for before, and he sets up rivals to Allah, in order to mislead others from His path. Say: \"Take pleasure in your disbelief for a while, surely, you are (one) of the dwellers of the Fire! (8)\nAllah hates Disbelief and is pleased with Gratitude\nAllah tells us that He is Independent and has no need of anything in creation. This is like the Ayah in which Musa, peace be upon him, says:\nإِنْ تَكْفُرُوا أَنْتُمْ وَمَنْ فِي الْأَرْضِ جَمِيعًا فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ لَغَنِيٌّ حَمِيدٌ\n(\"If you disbelieve, you and all on earth together, then verily, Allah is Rich, Owner of all praise.\")(14:8). In Sahih Muslim, it says:\nيَا عِبَادِي لَوْ أَنَّ أَوَّلَكُمْ وَآخِرَكُمْ وَإِنْسَكُمْ وَجِنَّكُمْ كَانُوا عَلَى أَفْجَرِ قَلْبِ رَجُلٍ مِنْكُمْ، مَا نَقَصَ ذَلِكَ مِنْ مُلْكِي شَيْئًا\n(\"O My servants, if the first and the last of you, men and Jinn alike, were all to be as evil as the most evil man among you, that would not diminish from My sovereignty in the least.\")\nوَلَا يَرْضَىٰ لِعِبَادِهِ الْكُفْرَ ۖ\n(He likes not disbelief for His servants.) means, He does not like it and He does not enjoin it.\nوَإِنْ تَشْكُرُوا يَرْضَهُ لَكُمْ ۗ\n(And if you are grateful, He is pleased therewith for you.) means: He likes this for you and He will increase His favor upon you.\nوَلَا تَزِرُ وَازِرَةٌ وِزْرَ أُخْرَىٰ ۗ\n(No bearer of burdens shall bear the burden of another.) means, no person can bear anything for another; each person will be asked about his own affairs.\nثُمَّ إِلَىٰ رَبِّكُمْ مَرْجِعُكُمْ فَيُنَبِّئُكُمْ بِمَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ ۚ إِنَّهُ عَلِيمٌ بِذَاتِ الصُّدُورِ\n(Then to your Lord is your return, and He will inform you what you used to do. Verily, He is the All-Knower of that which is in breasts.) means, nothing whatsoever is hidden from Him.\nIt is an aspect of Man's Disbelief that He remembers Allah at times of difficulty then associates others with Him after He has been relieved of His distress\nوَإِذَا مَسَّ الْإِنْسَانَ ضُرٌّ دَعَا رَبَّهُ مُنِيبًا إِلَيْهِ\n(And when some hurt touches man, he cries to his Lord, turning to Him in repentance.) means, at times of need, he prays to Allah and seeks His help alone, not associating anything with Him. This is like the Ayah:\nوَإِذَا مَسَّكُمُ الضُّرُّ فِي الْبَحْرِ ضَلَّ مَنْ تَدْعُونَ إِلَّا إِيَّاهُ ۖ فَلَمَّا نَجَّاكُمْ إِلَى الْبَرِّ أَعْرَضْتُمْ ۚ وَكَانَ الْإِنْسَانُ كَفُورًا\n(And when harm touches you upon the sea, those that you call upon vanish from you except Him. But when He brings you safe to land, you turn away. And man is ever ungrateful.)(17:67). Allah says:\nثُمَّ إِذَا خَوَّلَهُ نِعْمَةً مِنْهُ نَسِيَ مَا كَانَ يَدْعُو إِلَيْهِ مِنْ قَبْلُ\n(But when He bestows a favor upon him from Himself, he forgets that for which he cried for before,) means, at the time of ease, he forgets that supplication and prayer. This is like the Ayah:\nوَإِذَا مَسَّ الْإِنْسَانَ الضُّرُّ دَعَانَا لِجَنْبِهِ أَوْ قَاعِدًا أَوْ قَائِمًا فَلَمَّا كَشَفْنَا عَنْهُ ضُرَّهُ مَرَّ كَأَنْ لَمْ يَدْعُنَا إِلَىٰ ضُرٍّ مَسَّهُ ۚ\n(And when harm touches man, he invokes Us, lying on his side, or sitting or standing. But when We have removed his harm from him, he passes on as if he had never invoked Us for a harm that touched him!)(10:12).\nوَجَعَلَ لِلَّهِ أَنْدَادًا لِيُضِلَّ عَنْ سَبِيلِهِ\n(and he sets up rivals to Allah, in order to mislead others from His path.) means, at times of ease, he associates others in worship with Allah and sets up rivals to Him.\nقُلْ تَمَتَّعْ بِكُفْرِكَ قَلِيلًا ۖ إِنَّكَ مِنْ أَصْحَابِ النَّارِ\n(Say: \"Take pleasure in your disbelief for a while, surely, you are (one) of the dwellers of the Fire!\") means, say to those whose way this is, 'enjoy your disbelief for a while!' This is a stern threat and solemn warning, as in the Ayat:\nقُلْ تَمَتَّعُوا فَإِنَّ مَصِيرَكُمْ إِلَى النَّارِ\n(Say: \"Enjoy! But certainly, your destination is the Fire!\")(14:30).\nنُمَتِّعُهُمْ قَلِيلًا ثُمَّ نَضْطَرُّهُمْ إِلَىٰ عَذَابٍ غَلِيظٍ\n(We let them enjoy for a little while, then in the end We shall oblige them to (enter) a great torment.)(31:24)","href":"/tafsir/39?verse=7","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:39:9","title":"Ibn Kathir · 39:9","text":"Is one who is obedient to Allah, Ana'a Al-Layl prostrating and standing fearing the Hereafter and hoping for the mercy of his Lord? Say: \"Are those who know equal to those who know not?\" It is only men of understanding who will remember (9)\nThe Obedient and the Sinner are not equal\nAllah says, 'is the one who is like this equal to one who associates others in worship with Allah and sets up rivals to Him?' They are not equal before Allah, as He says:\nلَيْسُوا سَوَاءً ۗ مِنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَابِ أُمَّةٌ قَائِمَةٌ يَتْلُونَ آيَاتِ اللَّهِ آنَاءَ اللَّيْلِ وَهُمْ يَسْجُدُونَ\n(Not all of them are alike; a party of the People of the Scripture stand for the right, they recite the Ayat of Allah Ana'a Al-Layl, prostrating themselves (in prayer).)(3:113). And Allah says here:\nأَمَّنْ هُوَ قَانِتٌ آنَاءَ اللَّيْلِ سَاجِدًا وَقَائِمًا\n(Is one who is obedient to Allah, Ana'a Al-Layl prostrating and standing) meaning, one who is humble and fears Allah when he prostrates and stands (in prayer). It was reported that Ibn Mas'ud, may Allah be pleased with him, said: \"The obedient one is one who obeys Allah and His Messenger ﷺ.\" Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, Al-Hasan, As-Suddi and Ibn Zayd said, Ana'a Al-Layl means in the depths of the night.\nيَحْذَرُ الْآخِرَةَ وَيَرْجُو رَحْمَةَ رَبِّهِ\n(fearing the Hereafter and hoping for the mercy of his Lord.) means, in his worship he feels both fear and hope. Both are essential in worship, and fear should be stronger during one's lifetime. Allah says:\nيَحْذَرُ الاٌّخِرَةَ وَيَرْجُواْ رَحْمَةَ رَبِّهِ\n(fearing the Hereafter and hoping for the mercy of his Lord.) At the time of death, hope is uppermost, as Imam 'Abd bin Humayd recorded in his Musnad from Anas, may Allah be pleased with him, who said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ entered upon a man who was dying, and said to him,\nكَيْفَ تَجِدُكَ؟\n(How do you feel?) He said, 'I am both afraid and hopeful.' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nلَا يَجْتَمِعَانِ فِي قَلْبِ عَبْدٍ فِي مِثْلِ هَذَا الْمَوْطِنِ إِلَّا أَعْطَاهُ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ الَّذِي يَرْجُو، وَأَمَّنَهُ الَّذِي يَخَافُهُ\n(These do not co-exist in a person's heart at times such as this, but Allah will give him what he hopes for and protect him from that which he fears.)\"\nThis was recorded by At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa'i in Al-Yawm wal-Laylah, and Ibn Majah from the Hadith of Yasar bin Hatim from Ja'far bin Sulayman. At-Tirmidhi said, \"Gharib.\"\nImam Ahmad recorded that Tamim Ad-Dari, may Allah be pleased with him, said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nمَنْ قَرَأَ بِمِائَةِ آيَةٍ فِي لَيْلَةٍ كُتِبَ لَهُ قُنُوتُ لَيْلَةٍ\n(Whoever recites one hundred Ayat in one night, it will be recorded as if he prayed all night.) This was also recorded by An-Nasa'i in Al-Yawm wal-Laylah.\nقُلْ هَلْ يَسْتَوِي الَّذِينَ يَعْلَمُونَ وَالَّذِينَ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ ۗ\n(Say: \"Are those who know equal to those who know not?\") means, is this one equal with the one who sets up rivals to Allah to mislead (men) from His path?\nإِنَّمَا يَتَذَكَّرُ أُولُو الْأَلْبَابِ\n(It is only men of understanding who will remember.) means, the only one who will understand the difference between them is the one who has understanding. And Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/39?verse=9","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:39:10","title":"Ibn Kathir · 39:10–12","text":"Say: \"O My servants who believe, have Taqwa of your Lord. Good is for those who do good in this world, and Allah's earth is spacious! Only those who are patient shall receive their reward in full, without reckoning. (10)Say: \"Verily, I am commanded to worship Allah, making religion sincerely for Him. (11)\"And I am commanded (this) in order that I may be the first of the Musli (12)\nThe Command for Taqwa, Emigration and to worship Him alone with all Sincerity\nAllah commands His believing servants to remain steadfast in their obedience and have Taqwa of Him.\nقُلْ يَا عِبَادِ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اتَّقُوا رَبَّكُمْ ۚ لِلَّذِينَ أَحْسَنُوا فِي هَٰذِهِ الدُّنْيَا حَسَنَةٌ ۗ\n(Say: \"O My servants who believe, have Taqwa of your Lord. Good is for those who do good in this world...\") means, the one who does good deeds in this world, will have a good (reward) in this world and in the Hereafter.\nوَأَرْضُ اللَّهِ وَاسِعَةٌ ۗ\n(and Allah's earth is spacious!) Mujahid said, \"So emigrate through it and strive hard and keep away from idols.\"\nإِنَّمَا يُوَفَّى الصَّابِرُونَ أَجْرَهُمْ بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ\n(Only those who are patient shall receive their reward in full, without reckoning.) Al-'Awza'i said, \"Their reward will not be weighed or measured; they will be given an immense reward.\" As-Suddi said:\nإِنَّمَا يُوَفَّى الصَّابِرُونَ أَجْرَهُمْ بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ\n(Only those who are patient shall receive their reward in full, without reckoning.) means, \"In Paradise.\"\nقُلْ إِنِّي أُمِرْتُ أَنْ أَعْبُدَ اللَّهَ مُخْلِصًا لَهُ الدِّينَ\n(Say: \"Verily, I am commanded to worship Allah, making religion sincerely for Him...\") means, 'I am commanded to worship Allah alone in all sincerity, with no partner or associate.'\nوَأُمِرْتُ لِأَنْ أَكُونَ أَوَّلَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ\n(And I am commanded (this) in order that I may be the first of the Muslims.)","href":"/tafsir/39?verse=10","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:39:13","title":"Ibn Kathir · 39:13–16","text":"Say: \"Verily, if I disobey my Lord, I am afraid of the torment of a great Day. (13)Say: \"Allah Alone I worship by doing religious deeds sincerely for His sake only. (14)\"So, worship what you like besides Him.\" Say: \"The losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on the Day of Resurrection. Verily, that will be a manifest loss! (15)They shall have coverings of Fire, above them and covering (of Fire) beneath them. With this Allah frightens His servants: \"O My servants, therefore have Taqwa of Me! (16)\nCreating Fear of the Punishment of Allah\nAllah says, say O Muhammad, even though you are the Messenger of Allah:\nإِنِّي أَخَافُ إِنْ عَصَيْتُ رَبِّي عَذَابَ يَوْمٍ عَظِيمٍ\n(Verily, if I disobey my Lord, I am afraid of the torment of a great Day.) meaning the Day of Resurrection. This is a conditional sentence, and if what is referred to here applies to the Prophet ﷺ, it applies even more so to others,\nقُلِ اللَّهَ أَعْبُدُ مُخْلِصًا لَهُ دِينِي - فَاعْبُدُوا مَا شِئْتُمْ مِنْ دُونِهِ ۗ\n(Say: \"Allah Alone I worship by doing religious deeds sincerely for His sake only. So, worship what you like besides Him.\") This is also a threat, and a disowning of them.\nقُلْ إِنَّ الْخَاسِرِينَ\n(Say: \"The losers...\") means, the greatest losers of all,\nالَّذِينَ خَسِرُوا أَنْفُسَهُمْ وَأَهْلِيهِمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ\n(are those who will lose themselves and their families on the Day of Resurrection.) means, they will be separated and will never meet again, whether their families have gone to Paradise and they have gone to Hell, or all of them have gone to Hell, they will never meet or feel happiness again.\nأَلَا ذَٰلِكَ هُوَ الْخُسْرَانُ الْمُبِينُ\n(Verily, that will be a manifest loss!) means, this is the clearest and most obvious loss. Then He describes their state in the Fire:\nلَهُمْ مِنْ فَوْقِهِمْ ظُلَلٌ مِنَ النَّارِ وَمِنْ تَحْتِهِمْ ظُلَلٌ ۚ\n(They shall have coverings of Fire, above them and covering (of Fire) beneath them.) This is like the Ayat:\nلَهُمْ مِنْ جَهَنَّمَ مِهَادٌ وَمِنْ فَوْقِهِمْ غَوَاشٍ ۚ وَكَذَٰلِكَ نَجْزِي الظَّالِمِينَ\n(Theirs will be a bed of Hell (Fire), and over them coverings (of Hell-fire). Thus do We recompense the wrongdoers)(7:41)\nيَوْمَ يَغْشَاهُمُ الْعَذَابُ مِنْ فَوْقِهِمْ وَمِنْ تَحْتِ أَرْجُلِهِمْ وَيَقُولُ ذُوقُوا مَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ\n(On the Day when the torment (Hell-fire) shall cover them from above them and from underneath their feet, and it will be said: \"Taste what you used to do.\")(29:55)\nذَٰلِكَ يُخَوِّفُ اللَّهُ بِهِ عِبَادَهُ ۚ\n(With this Allah frightens His servants:) means, Allah tells us about this, which will undoubtedly come to pass, to frighten His servants, so that they will keep away from unlawful things and from sin.\nيَا عِبَادِ فَاتَّقُونِ\n(O My servants, therefore have Taqwa of Me!) means, 'fear My wrath, My anger, My punishment and My vengeance.'","href":"/tafsir/39?verse=13","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:39:17","title":"Ibn Kathir · 39:17–18","text":"Those who avoid At-Taghut by not worshipping them and turn to Allah, for them are glad tidings; so announce the good news to My servants (17)Those who listen to the Word and follow the best thereof, those are (the ones) whom Allah has guided and those are men of understanding (18)\nGood News for the Righteous\nAbdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam said, narrating from his father:\nوَالَّذِينَ اجْتَنَبُوا الطَّاغُوتَ أَنْ يَعْبُدُوهَا\n(Those who avoid At-Taghut by not worshipping them) was revealed concerning Zayd bin 'Amr bin Nufayl and Abu Dharr and Salman Al-Farisi, may Allah be pleased with them. The correct view is that it includes them and all others who avoided worshipping idols and turned to the worship of Ar-Rahman. These are the people for whom there is good news in this world and in the Hereafter. Then Allah says:\nفَبَشِّرْ عِبَادِ - الَّذِينَ يَسْتَمِعُونَ الْقَوْلَ فَيَتَّبِعُونَ أَحْسَنَهُ ۚ\n(so announce the good news to My servants – those who listen to the Word and follow the best thereof,) meaning, those who understand it and act in accordance with it. This is like the Words of Allah, may He be exalted, to Musa, peace be upon him, when He gave him the Tawrah:\nفَخُذْهَا بِقُوَّةٍ وَأْمُرْ قَوْمَكَ يَأْخُذُوا بِأَحْسَنِهَا\n(Hold unto these with firmness, and enjoin your people to take the better therein)(7:145).\nأُولَٰئِكَ الَّذِينَ هَدَاهُمُ اللَّهُ ۖ\n(those are whom Allah has guided) means, those who are described in this manner are the ones whom Allah has guided in this world and the Hereafter.\nوَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمْ أُولُو الْأَلْبَابِ\n(and those are men of understanding.) means, they possess sound reasoning and an upright nature.","href":"/tafsir/39?verse=17","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:39:19","title":"Ibn Kathir · 39:19–20","text":"Is, then one against whom the Word of punishment is justified (equal to the one who avoids evil)? Will you rescue him who is in the Fire (19)But those who have Taqwa of their Lord, for them are built lofty rooms, one above another under which rivers flow. (This is) the promise of Allah, and Allah does not fail in (His) promise (20)\nAllah says, 'if He has decreed that someone is to be doomed, can you save him from his misguidance and doom?' Which means, no one can guide him apart from Allah, because whomever Allah leaves astray cannot be guided, and whomever He guides cannot be led astray. Then Allah tells us that His blessed servants will have lofty rooms in Paradise.\nمِنْ فَوْقِهَا غُرَفٌ مَبْنِيَّةٌ\n(are built lofty rooms, one above another), story upon story, solidly-constructed, adorned and high. 'Abdullah bin Al-Imam Ahmad recorded that 'Ali, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nإِنَّ فِي الْجَنَّةِ لَغُرَفًا يُرَى بُطُونُهَا مِنْ ظُهُورِهَا، وَظُهُورُهَا مِنْ بُطُونِهَا\n(In Paradise there are rooms whose inside can be seen from the outside, and the outside can be seen from the inside.) A bedouin asked, 'Who are they for, O Messenger of Allah?' He ﷺ said,\nلِمَنْ أَطَابَ الْكَلَامَ، وَأَطْعَمَ الطَّعَامَ، وَصَلَّى بِاللَّيْلِ وَالنَّاسُ نِيَامٌ\n(For those who speak kindly, feed the hungry and stand in prayer at night whilst the people are sleeping.)\" This was also recorded by At-Tirmidhi, who said, \"Hasan Gharib\". Imam Ahmad recorded from Sahl bin Sa'd, may Allah be pleased with him, that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nإِنَّ أَهْلَ الْجَنَّةِ لَيَتَرَاءَوْنَ فِي الْغُرْفَةِ فِي الْجَنَّةِ، كَمَا تَرَاءَوْنَ الْكَوْكَبَ فِي أُفُقِ السَّمَاءِ\n(The people of Paradise will look towards each other in raised places of Paradise as you look towards the stars on the horizons of the sky.) He said, \"I told An-Nu'man bin Abi 'Ayyash about that, and he said, 'I heard Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri, may Allah be pleased with him, narrate it:\nكَمَا تَرَاءَوْنَ الْكَوْكَبَ الَّذِي فِي الْأُفُقِ الشَّرْقِيِّ أَوِ الْغَرْبِيِّ\n(As you see the stars on the horizon of the east or the west.)'\" It was also recorded in the Two Sahihs. Imam Ahmad said, \"Fazarah narrated to us; Fulayh narrated to us; from Hilal bin 'Ali, from 'Ata' bin Yasar, from Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nإِنَّ أَهْلَ الْجَنَّةِ لَيَتَرَاءَوْنَ فِي الْجَنَّةِ أَهْلَ الْغُرَفِ، كَمَا تَرَاءَوْنَ الْكَوْكَبَ الدُّرِّيَّ الْغَارِبَ فِي الْأُفُقِ الطَّالِعِ، فِي تَفَاضُلِ أَهْلِ الدَّرَجَاتِ\n(The people of Paradise will look towards each other in the raised places of Paradise as you look at the high, bright stars which remain on the horizon. Such will be the difference in superiority which some of them have over others.) They said, \"O Messenger of Allah, are those the abodes of the Prophets?\" He ﷺ said:\nبَلَى، وَالَّذِي نَفْسِي بِيَدِهِ، وَأَقْوَامٌ آمَنُوا بِاللهِ وَصَدَّقُوا الرُّسُلَ\n(No, by the One in Whose Hand is my soul, they are the abodes of people who believed in Allah and in the Messengers.) It was also recorded by At-Tirmidhi, who said, \"Hasan Sahih.\"\nتَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ\n(under which rivers flow.) means, the rivers flow wherever the people want them to flow.\nوَعْدَ اللَّهِ ۖ\n((This is) the promise of Allah,) means, 'all that We have mentioned here is what Allah has promised to His believing servants.'\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يُخْلِفُ الْمِيعَادَ\n(and Allah does not fail in (His) promise.)(3:9)","href":"/tafsir/39?verse=19","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:39:21","title":"Ibn Kathir · 39:21–22","text":"See you not that Allah sends down water from the sky, and causes it to penetrate the earth, as water springs, and afterward thereby produces crops of different colors, and afterward they wither and you see them turn yellow; then He makes them dry and broken pieces. Verily, in this is a reminder for men of understanding (21)Is he whose breast Allah has opened to Islam, so that he is in light from his Lord? So, woe to those whose hearts are hardened against remembrance of Allah! They are in plain error (22)\nThe Parable of the Life of this World\nAllah tells us that water originates in the sky. This is like the Ayah:\nوَأَنْزَلْنَا مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مَاءً طَهُورًا\n(and We send down pure water from the sky)(25:48). So, Allah sends down water from the sky, and it settles in the earth, then He causes it to flow wherever He wills, and He causes springs, great and small, to flow as needed. Allah says:\nفَسَلَكَهُ يَنَابِيعَ فِي الْأَرْضِ\n(and causes it to penetrate the earth, as water springs,) Sa'id bin Jubayr and 'Amir Ash-Sha'bi said that all the water on earth has its origins in the sky. Sa'id bin Jubayr said, its origins lie in the snow, meaning that snow piles up in the mountains, then settles at the bottom (of the mountains) and springs flow from the bottom of them.\nثُمَّ يُخْرِجُ بِهِ زَرْعًا مُخْتَلِفًا أَلْوَانُهُ\n(and afterward thereby produces crops of different colors) means, then from the water which comes down from the sky or flows from springs in the earth, He brings forth crops of different colors, i.e., different kinds of forms, tastes, scents, bencfits, etc.\nثُمَّ يَهِيجُ\n(and afterward they wither) means, after they have been ripe and fresh, they become old and you see them turn yellow when they have dried out.\nثُمَّ يَجْعَلُهُ حُطَامًا\n(then He makes them dry and broken pieces.) means, then they become brittle.\nإِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَذِكْرَىٰ لِأُولِي الْأَلْبَابِ\n(Verily, in this is a reminder for men of understanding.) means, those who are reminded by this and who learn the lesson from it, that this world is like this – it is green and fresh and beautiful, then it will become old and ugly. The young man will become a weak, senile old man, and after all of that comes death. The blessed one is the one whose state after death will be good. Allah often likens the life of this world to the way He sends down water from the sky and crops and fruits grow thereby, then they become dry and brittle. This is like the Ayah:\nوَاضْرِبْ لَهُمْ مَثَلَ الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا كَمَاءٍ أَنْزَلْنَاهُ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ فَاخْتَلَطَ بِهِ نَبَاتُ الْأَرْضِ فَأَصْبَحَ هَشِيمًا تَذْرُوهُ الرِّيَاحُ ۗ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ مُقْتَدِرًا\n(And put forward to them the example of the life of this world: it is like the water (rain) which We send down from the sky, and the vegetation of the earth mingles with it, and becomes fresh and green. But (later) it becomes dry and broken pieces, which the winds scatter. And Allah is able to do everything)(18:45)\nThe People of Truth and the People of Misguidance are not Equal\nأَفَمَنْ شَرَحَ اللَّهُ صَدْرَهُ لِلْإِسْلَامِ فَهُوَ عَلَىٰ نُورٍ مِنْ رَبِّهِ ۚ\n(Is he whose breast Allah has opened to Islam, so that he is in light from his Lord?) means, is this person equal to the one who is hard-hearted and far from the truth? This is like the Ayah:\nأَوَمَنْ كَانَ مَيْتًا فَأَحْيَيْنَاهُ وَجَعَلْنَا لَهُ نُورًا يَمْشِي بِهِ فِي النَّاسِ كَمَنْ مَثَلُهُ فِي الظُّلُمَاتِ لَيْسَ بِخَارِجٍ مِنْهَا ۚ\n(Is he who was dead and We gave him life and set for him a light (i.e. Belief) whereby he can walk amongst men – like him who is in the darkness (i.e., disbelief) from which he can never come out?)(6:122) Allah says:\nفَوَيْلٌ لِلْقَاسِيَةِ قُلُوبُهُمْ مِنْ ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ ۚ\n(So, woe to those whose hearts are hardened against remembrance of Allah!) meaning, they do not become soft when Allah is mentioned, and they do not feel humility or fear, and they do not understand.\nأُولَٰئِكَ فِي ضَلَالٍ مُبِينٍ\n(They are in plain error!).","href":"/tafsir/39?verse=21","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:39:23","title":"Ibn Kathir · 39:23","text":"Allah has sent down the Best Statement, a Book, its parts resembling each other, (and) oft-repeated. The skins of those who fear their Lord shiver from it. Then their skin and their heart soften to the remembrance of Allah. That is the guidance of Allah. He guides therewith whom He wills; and whomever Allah sends astray, for him there is no guide (23)\nThe Description of the Qur'an\nHere Allah praises His Book, the Noble Qur'an, which was revealed to His noble Messenger ﷺ. Allah says,\nاللَّهُ نَزَّلَ أَحْسَنَ الْحَدِيثِ كِتَابًا مُتَشَابِهًا مَثَانِيَ\n(Allah has sent down the Best Statement, a Book, its parts resembling each other (and) oft-repeated.)\nMujahid said, \"This means that the entire Qur'an's parts resemble each other and are oft-repeated.\" Qatadah said, \"One Ayah resembles another and one letter resembles another.\" Ad-Dahhak said, \"It is oft-repeated so that people will understand what their Lord tells them.\" 'Ikrimah and Al-Hasan said, \"There may be an Ayah in one Surah, and another Ayah in another Surah that resembles it.\" Sa'id bin Jubayr narrated from Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him: \"Oft-repeated means that parts of the Qur'an resemble one another and repeat one another.\" Some of the scholars said that it was narrated from Sufyan bin 'Uyaynah that\nمُتَشَابِهًا مَثَانِيَ\n(its parts resembling each other (and) oft-repeated.) means that some passages of the Qur'an may sometimes refer to one thing, so they resemble one another, and sometimes they mention a thing and its opposite. Such as when the believers then the disbelievers are mentioned, or when Paradise then Hell are described, and so on, and this is the meaning of oft-repeated. Examples include the Ayat:\nإِنَّ الْأَبْرَارَ لَفِي نَعِيمٍ - وَإِنَّ الْفُجَّارَ لَفِي جَحِيمٍ\n(Verily, the most righteous will be in delight; and verily, the most wicked will be in the blazing Fire (Hell).)(82:13-14)\nكَلَّا إِنَّ كِتَابَ الْفُجَّارِ لَفِي سِجِّينٍ\n(Nay! Truly, the Record of the most wicked is (preserved) in Sijjin) until\nكَلَّا إِنَّ كِتَابَ الْأَبْرَارِ لَفِي عِلِّيِّينَ\n(Nay! Verily, the Record of the most righteous is (preserved) in 'Illiyyin)(83:7-18)\nهَٰذَا ذِكْرٌ ۚ وَإِنَّ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ لَحُسْنَ مَآبٍ\n(This is a Reminder. And verily, for those who have Taqwa is a good final return (Paradise)) until;\nهَٰذَا ۚ وَإِنَّ لِلطَّاغِينَ لَشَرَّ مَآبٍ\n(This is so! And for those who transgress, there will be an evil final return (Fire).)(38:49-55). And there are other similar passages. All of this has to do with it being oft-repeated, i.e., when two meanings are referred to. But when a passage is about one thing, with some parts of it resembling others, this is \"its parts resembling each other.\" This is not the same as the Mutashabihat mentioned in the Ayah:\nمِنْهُ آيَاتٌ مُحْكَمَاتٌ هُنَّ أُمُّ الْكِتَابِ وَأُخَرُ مُتَشَابِهَاتٌ\n(In it are Ayat that are entirely clear, they are the foundations of the Book; and others not entirely clear)(3:7). that refers to something else altogether.\nتَقْشَعِرُّ مِنْهُ جُلُودُ الَّذِينَ يَخْشَوْنَ رَبَّهُمْ ثُمَّ تَلِينُ جُلُودُهُمْ وَقُلُوبُهُمْ إِلَىٰ ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ\n(The skins of those who fear their Lord shiver from it. Then their skin and their heart soften to the remembrance of Allah.) means, this is the description of the righteous, when they hear the Words of the Compeller, the Protector, the Almighty, the Oft-Forgiving, because they understand the promises and warnings contained therein. The frightening words and threats make their skin shiver from fear.\nثُمَّ تَلِينُ جُلُودُهُمْ وَقُلُوبُهُمْ إِلَىٰ ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ\n(Then their skin and their heart soften to the remembrance of Allah.) because of their hope for His mercy and kindness. They are unlike others, the wicked, immoral sinners, in a number of ways:\nFirst\nThey listen to the recitation of the Ayat [of the Qur'an], while those (sinners) listen to poetic verse recited by female singers.\nSecond\nWhen the Ayat of Ar-Rahman are recited to them, they fall down in prostration weeping, with the proper attitude of fear, hope, love, understanding and knowledge, as Allah says:\nإِنَّمَا الْمُؤْمِنُونَ الَّذِينَ إِذَا ذُكِرَ اللَّهُ وَجِلَتْ قُلُوبُهُمْ وَإِذَا تُلِيَتْ عَلَيْهِمْ آيَاتُهُ زَادَتْهُمْ إِيمَانًا وَعَلَىٰ رَبِّهِمْ يَتَوَكَّلُونَ - الَّذِينَ يُقِيمُونَ الصَّلَاةَ وَمِمَّا رَزَقْنَاهُمْ يُنْفِقُونَ - أُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ حَقًّا ۚ لَهُمْ دَرَجَاتٌ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِمْ وَمَغْفِرَةٌ وَرِزْقٌ كَرِيمٌ\n(The believers are only those who, when Allah is mentioned, feel a fear in their hearts and when His Ayat are recited unto them, they increase their faith; and they put their trust in their Lord; Who perform the Salah and spend out of that We have provided them. It is they who are the believers in it. For them are grades of dignity with their Lord, and forgiveness and a generous provision (i.e., Paradise).)(8:2-4),\nوَالَّذِينَ إِذَا ذُكِّرُوا بِآيَاتِ رَبِّهِمْ لَمْ يَخِرُّوا عَلَيْهَا صُمًّا وَعُمْيَانًا\n(And those who, when they are reminded of the Ayat of their Lord, fall not on them (as if they were) deaf and blind)(25:73). When they hear the Ayat of Allah, they are not too busy to pay attention to them; they listen to them and understand their meanings. So they act upon them and prostrate when they hear them, out of understanding, not out of ignorance and blind following of others.\nThird\nThey adhere to the correct etiquette when they listen to them. As the Companions, may Allah be pleased with them, used to do when they listened to the words of Allah recited by the Messenger of Allah ﷺ. Their skin Would shiver, and their hearts would soften to the remembrance of Allah. They did not shout or do other actions that are not natural; on the contrary, they would sit quietly with the proper attitude of fear, in an unparalleled fashion. they attained the victory of praise from their Lord in this world and the Hereafter. 'Abdur-Razzaq said, \"Ma'mar told us that Qatadah, may Allah have mercy on him, recited,\nتَقْشَعِرُّ مِنْهُ جُلُودُ الَّذِينَ يَخْشَوْنَ رَبَّهُمْ ثُمَّ تَلِينُ جُلُودُهُمْ وَقُلُوبُهُمْ إِلَىٰ ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ\n(The skins of those who fear their Lord shiver from it. Then their skin and their heart soften to the remembrance of Allah.) and said, 'This is the characteristic of the friends of Allah; Allah has described them in this manner, saying that their skin shivers, their eyes weep and their hearts find rest to the remembrance of Allah. He did not say that they lose their minds and swoon; that is the characteristic of the followers of innovation, and that comes from the Shaytan.'\" Allah's saying:\nذَٰلِكَ هُدَى اللَّهِ يَهْدِي بِهِ مَن يَشَاءُ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ ۚ\n(That is the guidance of Allah. He guides therewith whom He wills;) means, this is the characteristic of those whom Allah has guided, and anyone who does anything different is one of those whom Allah has sent astray.\nوَمَنْ يُضْلِلِ اللَّهُ فَمَا لَهُ مِنْ هَادٍ\n(and whomever Allah sends astray, for him there is no guide.)","href":"/tafsir/39?verse=23","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:39:24","title":"Ibn Kathir · 39:24–26","text":"Is he then, who will confront with his face the awful torment on the Day of Resurrection? And it will be said to the wrongdoers: \"Taste what you used to earn! (24)Those before them denied, and so the torment came on them from directions they perceived not (25)So, Allah made them to taste the disgrace in the present life, but greater is the torment of the Hereafter if they only knew (26)\nThe Final Destination of the Disbelievers\nأَفَمَنْ يَتَّقِي بِوَجْهِهِ سُوءَ الْعَذَابِ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ ۚ\n(Is he then, who will confront with his face the awful torment on the Day of Resurrection?) he will be rebuked and he and the evildoers like him will be told:\nذُوقُوا مَا كُنْتُمْ تَكْسِبُونَ\n(Taste what you used to earn!) 'Is this like the one who comes secure on the Day of Resurrection?' as Allah says:\nأَفَمَنْ يَمْشِي مُكِبًّا عَلَىٰ وَجْهِهِ أَهْدَىٰ أَمَّنْ يَمْشِي سَوِيًّا عَلَىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ\n(Is he who walks prone on his face, more rightly guided, or he who walks upright on the straight way?)(67:22);\nيَوْمَ يُسْحَبُونَ فِي النَّارِ عَلَىٰ وُجُوهِهِمْ ذُوقُوا مَسَّ سَقَرَ\n(The Day they will be dragged on their faces into the Fire (it will be said to them): \"Taste you the touch of Hell!\")(54:48), and\nأَفَمَنْ يُلْقَىٰ فِي النَّارِ خَيْرٌ أَمْ مَنْ يَأْتِي آمِنًا يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ ۚ\n(Is he who is cast into the Fire better or he who comes secure on the Day of Resurrection?)(41:40) In each of these Ayat, it was sufficient to refer to one of the two groups.\nكَذَّبَ الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ فَأَتَاهُمُ الْعَذَابُ مِنْ حَيْثُ لَا يَشْعُرُونَ\n(Those before them denied, and so the torment came on them from directions they perceived not.) means, the previous generations who denied the Messengers were destroyed by Allah for their sins. And none had they to protect them from Allah.\nفَأَذَاقَهُمُ اللَّهُ الْخِزْيَ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا ۖ\n(So Allah made them to taste the disgrace in the present life,) means, by means of the punishment and revenge which He sent down upon them, and the rejoicing of the believers for what happened to them. So, let those who are addressed beware, for they have rejected the noblest of the Messengers and the Seal of the Prophets ﷺ. And what Allah has promised them of severe punishment in the Hereafter is worse than whatever befell them in this world. Allah says:\nوَلَعَذَابُ الْآخِرَةِ أَكْبَرُ ۚ لَوْ كَانُوا يَعْلَمُونَ\n(but greater is the torment of the Hereafter if they only knew!)","href":"/tafsir/39?verse=24","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:39:27","title":"Ibn Kathir · 39:27–31","text":"And indeed We have put forth for men, in this Qur'an every kind of parable in order that they may remember (27)An Arabic Qur'an, without any crookedness (therein) in order that they may have Taqwa of Him (28)Allah puts forth a parable: a man belonging to many partners disputing with one another, and a man belonging entirely to one master. Are those two equal in comparison? All the praises and thanks be to Allah! But most of them know not (29)Verily, you will die, and verily, they (too) will die (30)Then, on the Day of Resurrection, you will be disputing before your Lord (31)\nThe Parable of Shirk\nوَلَقَدْ ضَرَبْنَا لِلنَّاسِ فِي هَٰذَا الْقُرْآنِ مِنْ كُلِّ مَثَلٍ\n(And indeed We have put forth for men, in this Qur'an every kind of parable) means, 'We have explained things to mankind in it [the Qur'an] by setting forth examples and parables.'\nلَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَذَكَّرُونَ\n(in order that they may remember.) Because parables bring the meaning closer to people's minds. As Allah says:\nضَرَبَ لَكُمْ مَثَلًا مِنْ أَنْفُسِكُمْ ۖ\n(He sets forth for you a parable from yourselves)(30:28). meaning, 'so that you may learn it from yourselves.' And Allah says:\nوَتِلْكَ الْأَمْثَالُ نَضْرِبُهَا لِلنَّاسِ ۖ وَمَا يَعْقِلُهَا إِلَّا الْعَالِمُونَ\n(in Order that they may have Taqwa of Him.)(29:43).\nقُرْآنًا عَرَبِيًّا غَيْرَ ذِي عِوَجٍ\n(An Arabic Qur'an, without any crookedness (therein)) means, it is in a plain Arabic tongue, with no crookedness, deviation or confusion. It is plain, clear proof. Allah has made it like this and has revealed it like this,\nلَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَّقُونَ\n(in order that they may have Taqwa of Him) means, in order that they may heed the warnings contained therein, and strive to attain the promises therein. Then Allah says:\nضَرَبَ اللَّهُ مَثَلًا رَجُلًا فِيهِ شُرَكَاءُ مُتَشَاكِسُونَ\n(Allah puts forth a parable: a man belonging to many partners disputing with one another,) meaning, they were disputing concerning that slave in whom they all had a share.\nوَرَجُلًا سَلَمًا لِرَجُلٍ\n(and a (slave) man belonging entirely to one master.) means, no one owned him except that one man.\nهَلْ يَسْتَوِيَانِ مَثَلًا\n(Are those two equal in comparison?) meaning, they are not the same. By the same token, the idolator who worships other gods besides Allah and the sincere believer who worships none besides Allah, with no partner or associate, are not equal. What comparison can there be between them? Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, Mujahid and others said, \"This Ayah is the parable of the idolator and the sincere believer.\"\nBecause this parable is so clear and obvious, Allah then says:\nالْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ ۚ\n(All the praises and thanks be to Allah!) i.e., for establishing proof against them.\nبَلْ أَكْثَرُهُمْ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ\n(But most of them know not.) means, and for this reason they associate others in worship with Allah.\nThe fact that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and Quraysh will die, and how They will dispute before Allah\nAllah's saying;\nإِنَّكَ مَيِّتٌ وَإِنَّهُمْ مَيِّتُونَ\n(Verily, you will die, and verily, they (too) will die.) This is one of the Ayat which Abu Bakr As-Siddiq, may Allah be pleased with him, quoted when the Messenger of Allah ﷺ died, so that the people would realize that he had really died. Another Ayah which he quoted was:\nوَمَا مُحَمَّدٌ إِلَّا رَسُولٌ قَدْ خَلَتْ مِنْ قَبْلِهِ الرُّسُلُ ۚ أَفَإِنْ مَاتَ أَوْ قُتِلَ انْقَلَبْتُمْ عَلَىٰ أَعْقَابِكُمْ ۚ وَمَنْ يَنْقَلِبْ عَلَىٰ عَقِبَيْهِ فَلَنْ يَضُرَّ اللَّهَ شَيْئًا ۗ وَسَيَجْزِي اللَّهُ الشَّاكِرِينَ\n(Muhammad is no more than a Messenger, and indeed (many) Messengers have passed away before him. If he dies or is killed, will you then turn back on your heels? And he who turns back on his heels, not the least harm will do to Allah; and Allah will give reward to those who are grateful.)(3:144).\nThe meaning of this Ayah is that you will certainly depart this world and be gathered before Allah in the Hereafter. You will dispute the issues of Tawhid and Shirk before Allah, things over which you disputed in this world, and He will judge between you with truth, and He is the Judge, the All-Knowing. So, He will save the sincere believers who worship Him alone, and He will punish the disbelievers who deny His Oneness and associate others in worship with Him. Although this Ayah speaks about the believers and disbelievers, and how they will dispute in the Hereafter, it also includes all disputants in this world, for their disputes will come back to them in the Hereafter.\nIbn Abi Hatim, may Allah have mercy on him, recorded that Ibn Az-Zubayr, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"When the Ayah\nثُمَّ إِنَّكُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ عِنْدَ رَبِّكُمْ تَخْتَصِمُونَ\n(Then, on the Day of Resurrection, you will be disputing before your Lord.) was revealed, Az-Zubayr, may Allah be pleased with him, said, 'O Messenger of Allah, will we repeat our disputes?' He ﷺ said,\nنَعَمْ\n(Yes.) He (Az-Zubayr) said, 'This is a very serious matter.'\" Ahmad recorded from Az-Zubayr bin Al-'Awwam, may Allah be pleased with him, that when this Surah was revealed to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ:\nإِنَّكَ مَيِّتٌ وَإِنَّهُمْ مَيِّتُونَ - ثُمَّ إِنَّكُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ عِنْدَ رَبِّكُمْ تَخْتَصِمُونَ\n(Verily, you will die, and verily, they (too) will die. Then, on the Day of Resurrection, you will be disputing before your Lord.) Az-Zubayr, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"O Messenger of Allah, will the sins that we committed against others in this world be repeated for us?\" He ﷺ said,\nنَعَمْ، لَيُكَرَّرَنَّ عَلَيْكُمْ حَتّٰى يُؤَدَّى إِلَى كُلِّ ذِي حَقٍّ حَقُّهُ\n(Yes, they will be repeated until everyone who is entitled will have his rights restored to him.)\nAz-Zubayr, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"By Allah, it is a very serious matter.\" It was also recorded by At-Tirmidhi, who said \"Hasan Sahih.\"\nAli bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said:\nثُمَّ إِنَّكُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ عِنْدَ رَبِّكُمْ تَخْتَصِمُونَ\n(Then, on the Day of Resurrection, you will be disputing before your Lord.) means, the truthful one will dispute with the liar, the oppressed will dispute with the oppressor, the one who is guided will dispute with the one who is misguided and the weak will dispute with the arrogant.\nIbn Mandah recorded in Kitab Ar-Ruh that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The people will dispute on the Day of Resurrection, to the extent that the soul will dispute with the body. The soul will say to the body, 'You did such and such,' and the body will say to the soul, 'You told me to do it and you tempted me.' Then Allah will send an angel to judge between them, and he will say, 'You two are like a man who cannot walk but can see, and a man who cannot see but can walk.' They went into a garden and the one who could not walk said to the one who was blind, 'I see fruit there, but I cannot reach it.' The blind man said, 'Climb on me and get it.' So he climbed on him and got it. So which of them is the wrongdoer? They will say, 'Both of them.' The angel will say to them, 'You have passed judgement against yourselves.' The body was a means of transportation for the soul.\"\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that Sa'id bin Jubayr said that Ibn 'Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"This Ayah was revealed and we did not know what it was revealed about:\nثُمَّ إِنَّكُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ عِنْدَ رَبِّكُمْ تَخْتَصِمُونَ\n(Then, on the Day of Resurrection, you will be disputing before your Lord.)\" He said, \"We said, what will we dispute about? There is no dispute between us and the People of the Book, so what will we dispute about? Until the Fitnah occurred.\" Then Ibn 'Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"This is what our Lord promised us we would dispute about.\" This was recorded by An-Nasa'i.","href":"/tafsir/39?verse=27","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:39:32","title":"Ibn Kathir · 39:32–35","text":"Then, who does more wrong than one who utters a lie against Allah, and denies the truth when it comes to him! Is there not in Hell an abode for the disbelievers (32)And he who has brought the truth and (those who) believed therein, they are those who have Taqwa (33)They shall have all that they will desire with their Lord. That is the reward of the doers of good (34)So that Allah may expiate from them the evil of what they did and give them the reward, according to the best of what they used to do (35)\nThe Punishment of the Disbelievers and Liars, and the Reward of the Sincere Believers\nThe idolators uttered lies against Allah and said that there were other gods besides Him and claimed that the angels were the daughters of Allah and that Allah had a son – glorified be He far above all that they say. Moreover, they rejected the truth when it came to them on the lips of the Messengers (peace and blessings be upon them all). Allah says:\nفَمَنْ أَظْلَمُ مِمَّنْ كَذَبَ عَلَى اللَّهِ وَكَذَّبَ بِالصِّدْقِ إِذْ جَاءَهُ ۚ\n(Then, who does more wrong than one who utters a lie against Allah, and denies the truth when it comes to him!) meaning, there is no one who does more wrong than such a person, because he combines the two aspects of falsehood, disbelief in Allah and disbelief in the Messenger of Allah. They made false claims and rejected the truth, Allah threatened them:\nأَلَيْسَ فِي جَهَنَّمَ مَثْوًى لِلْكَافِرِينَ\n(Is there not in Hell an abode for the disbelievers?) who are the deniers and rejecters. Then Allah says:\nوَالَّذِي جَاءَ بِالصِّدْقِ وَصَدَّقَ بِهِ ۙ\n(And he who has brought the truth and (those who) believed therein,) Mujahid, Qatadah, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas and Ibn Zayd said, \"The one who brought the truth was the Messenger ﷺ.\" 'Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam said:\nوَالَّذِي جَاءَ بِالصِّدْقِ\n(\"And he who has brought the truth) means the Messenger of Allah ﷺ.\nوَصَدَّقَ بِهِ\n(and (those who) believed therein) means the Muslims.\"\nأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْمُتَّقُونَ\n(they are those who have Taqwa). Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"They fear and shun Shirk.\"\nلَهُمْ مَا يَشَاءُونَ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِمْ ۚ\n(They shall have all that they will desire with their Lord.) means, in Paradise; whatever they ask for they will have.\nذَٰلِكَ جَزَاءُ الْمُحْسِنِينَ - لِيُكَفِّرَ اللَّهُ عَنْهُمْ أَسْوَأَ الَّذِي عَمِلُوا وَيَجْزِيَهُمْ أَجْرَهُمْ بِأَحْسَنِ الَّذِي كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ\n(That is the reward of doers of good. So that Allah may expiate from them the evil of what they did and give them the reward, according to the best of what they used to do.) This is like the Ayah:\nأُولَٰئِكَ الَّذِينَ نَتَقَبَّلُ عَنْهُمْ أَحْسَنَ مَا عَمِلُوا وَنَتَجَاوَزُ عَنْ سَيِّئَاتِهِمْ فِي أَصْحَابِ الْجَنَّةِ ۖ وَعْدَ الصِّدْقِ الَّذِي كَانُوا يُوعَدُونَ\n(They are those from whom We shall accept the best of their deeds and overlook their evil deeds. (They shall be) among the dwellers of Paradise, a promise of truth, which they have been promised.)(46:16).","href":"/tafsir/39?verse=32","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:39:36","title":"Ibn Kathir · 39:36–40","text":"Is not Allah Sufficient for His servant? Yet they try to frighten you with those besides Him! And whom Allah sends astray, for him there will be no guide (36)And whomsoever Allah guides, for him there will be no misleader. Is not Allah Almighty, Possessor of Retribution (37)And verily, if you ask them: \"Who created the heavens and the earth?\" Surely, they will say: \"Allah.\" Say: \"Tell me then, the things that you invoke besides Allah – if Allah intended some harm for me, could they remove His harm? Or if He intended some mercy for me, could they withhold His mercy?\" Say: \"Sufficient for me is Allah; in Him those who trust must put their trust. (38)Say: \"O My people! Work according to your way, I am working. Then you will come to know (39)\"To whom comes a disgracing torment, and on whom descends an everlasting torment. (40)\nAllah is Sufficient for His Servant\nAllah says:\nأَلَيْسَ اللَّهُ بِكَافٍ عَبْدَهُ ۖ\n(Is not Allah Sufficient for His servant?) Some of them read it \"His servants.\" It means that Allah is Sufficient for the one who worships Him and relies upon Him.\nوَيُخَوِّفُونَكَ بِالَّذِينَ مِنْ دُونِهِ ۚ\n(Yet they try to frighten you with those besides Him!) means, the idolators tried to scare the Messenger of Allah ﷺ with their idols and gods which they called upon besides Allah out of ignorance and misguidance. Allah says:\nوَمَنْ يُضْلِلِ اللَّهُ فَمَا لَهُ مِنْ هَادٍ - وَمَنْ يَهْدِ اللَّهُ فَمَا لَهُ مِنْ مُضِلٍّ ۗ أَلَيْسَ اللَّهُ بِعَزِيزٍ ذِي انْتِقَامٍ\n(And whom Allah sends astray, for him there will be no guide. And whomsoever Allah guides, for him there will be no misleader. Is not Allah Almighty, Possessor of Retribution?) meaning, whoever relies on Him and turns to Him, will never be forsaken, for He is the Almighty Who cannot be overwhelmed by another, and there is none more severe than Him in exacting retribution on those who disbelieve in Him, associate others in worship with Him and resist His Messenger ﷺ.\nThe Idolators admit that Allah is the Sole Creator because Their gods are incapable\nوَلَئِنْ سَأَلْتَهُمْ مَنْ خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ لَيَقُولُنَّ اللَّهُ ۚ\n(And verily, if you ask them: \"Who created the heavens and the earth?\" Surely, they will say: \"Allah.\") means, the idolators used to recognize that Allah was the Creator of all things, but despite that they still worshipped others besides Him, others who had no power to bring benefit or cause harm. Allah said:\nقُلْ أَفَرَأَيْتُمْ مَا تَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ إِنْ أَرَادَنِيَ اللَّهُ بِضُرٍّ هَلْ هُنَّ كَاشِفَاتُ ضُرِّهِ أَوْ أَرَادَنِي بِرَحْمَةٍ هَلْ هُنَّ مُمْسِكَاتُ رَحْمَتِهِ ۚ\n(Say: \"Tell me then, the things that you invoke besides Allah – if Allah intended some harm for me, could they remove His harm? Or if He (Allah) intended some mercy for me, could they withhold His mercy?\") meaning, they cannot do any of that at all. Here Ibn Abi Hatim recorded a narration from Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, attributing it to the Prophet ﷺ:\nاحْفَظِ اللهَ يَحْفَظْكَ، احْفَظِ اللهَ تَجِدْهُ تُجَاهَكَ، تَعَرَّفْ إِلَى اللهِ فِي الرَّخَاءِ يَعْرِفْكَ فِي الشِّدَّةِ، إِذَا سَأَلْتَ فَاسْأَلِ اللهَ، وَإِذَا اسْتَعَنْتَ فَاسْتَعِنْ بِاللهِ، وَاعْلَمْ أَنَّ الْأُمَّةَ لَوِ اجْتَمَعُوا عَلىٰ أَنْ يَضُرُّوكَ بِشَيْءٍ لَمْ يَكْتُبْهُ اللهُ عَلَيْكَ لَمْ يَضُرُّوكَ، وَلَوِ اجْتَمَعُوا عَلىٰ أَنْ يَنْفَعُوكَ بِشَيْءٍ لَمْ يَكْتُبْهُ اللهُ لَكَ لَمْ يَنْفَعُوكَ، جَفَّتِ الصُّحُفُ وَرُفِعَتِ الْأَقْلَامُ، وَاعْمَلْ للهِ بِالشُّكْرِ فِي الْيَقِينِ.وَاعْلَمْ أَنَّ فِي الصَّبْرِ عَلىٰ مَا تَكْرَهُ خَيْرًا كَثِيرًا، وَأَنَّ النَّصْرَ مَعَ الصَّبْرِ، وَأَنَّ الْفَرَجَ مَعَ الْكَرْبِ، وَأَنَّ مَعَ الْعُسْرِ يُسْرًا\n(Be mindful of Allah and He will protect you; be mindful of Allah and you will find Him ever with you. Turn to Allah in times of ease and He will turn to you in times of difficulty. If you ask anyone for anything, then ask Allah; if you seek help from anyone, then seek help from Allah. Know that even if the entire nation were to come together to do you some harm that Allah has not decreed for you, they will never be able to harm you, and if they were to come together to do you some good that Allah has not decreed for you, they will never be able to do that. The pages have dried and the pens have been lifted. Strive for the sake of Allah with thankfulness and firm conviction, and know that in patiently persevering with regard to something that you dislike there is much goodness. Victory comes with patience, a way out comes from difficulty and with hardship comes ease.)\nقُلْ حَسْبِيَ اللَّهُ ۖ\n(Say: \"Sufficient for me is Allah...\") means, 'Allah is enough for me.'\nعَلَيْهِ تَوَكَّلْتُ ۖ وَعَلَيْهِ فَلْيَتَوَكَّلِ الْمُتَوَكِّلُونَ\n(In Him I put my trust, and let all those that trust, put their trust in Him.)[12: 67] This is like what Hud, peace be upon him, said to his people:\nإِنْ نَقُولُ إِلَّا اعْتَرَاكَ بَعْضُ آلِهَتِنَا بِسُوءٍ ۗ قَالَ إِنِّي أُشْهِدُ اللَّهَ وَاشْهَدُوا أَنِّي بَرِيءٌ مِمَّا تُشْرِكُونَ - مِنْ دُونِهِ ۖ فَكِيدُونِي جَمِيعًا ثُمَّ لَا تُنْظِرُونِ - إِنِّي تَوَكَّلْتُ عَلَى اللَّهِ رَبِّي وَرَبِّكُمْ ۚ مَا مِنْ دَابَّةٍ إِلَّا هُوَ آخِذٌ بِنَاصِيَتِهَا ۚ إِنَّ رَبِّي عَلَىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ\n(\"All that we say is that some of our gods have seized you with evil. \" He said: \"I call Allah to witness and bear you witness that I am free from that which you ascribe as partners in worship, with Him. So plot against me, all of you, and give me no respite. I put my trust in Allah, my Lord and your Lord! There is not a moving creature but He has the grasp of its forelock. Verily, my Lord is on the straight path.\")(11:54-56).\nقُلْ يَا قَوْمِ اعْمَلُوا عَلَىٰ مَكَانَتِكُمْ\n(Say: \"O My people! Work according to your way...\") This is a threat and a warning.\nإِنِّي عَامِلٌ\n(I am working) means, 'according to my way.'\nفَسَوْفَ تَعْلَمُونَ\n(Then you will come to know) means, you will learn the consequences.\nمَنْ يَأْتِيهِ عَذَابٌ يُخْزِيهِ\n(To whom comes a disgracing torment,) means, in this world,\nوَيَحِلُّ عَلَيْهِ عَذَابٌ مُقِيمٌ\n(and on whom descends an everlasting torment.) means, ongoing and eternal, with no escape, which will come on the Day of Resurrection. We seek refuge with Allah from that.","href":"/tafsir/39?verse=36","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:39:41","title":"Ibn Kathir · 39:41–42","text":"Verily, We have sent down to you the Book for mankind in truth. So, whosoever accepts the guidance, it is only for himself; and whosoever goes astray, he goes astray only to his (own) loss. And you are not a trustee over them (41)It is Allah Who takes away the souls at the time of their death, and those that die not during their sleep. He keeps those (souls) for which He has ordained death and sends the rest for a term appointed. Verily, in this are signs for a people who think deeply (42)\nAllah says, addressing His Messenger Muhammad ﷺ:\nإِنَّا أَنْزَلْنَا عَلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ\n(Verily, We have sent down to you the Book) meaning, the Qur'an.\nلِلنَّاسِ بِالْحَقِّ\n(for mankind in truth.) means, for all of creation, mankind and Jinn, so that he may warn them therewith.\nفَمَنِ اهْتَدَىٰ فَلِنَفْسِهِ ۖ\n(So, whosoever accepts the guidance, it is only for himself;) means, the benefit of that will return to him.\nوَمَنْ ضَلَّ فَإِنَّمَا يَضِلُّ عَلَيْهَا ۖ\n(and whosoever goes astray, he goes astray only for his (own) loss.) means, the consequences of that will return to him.\nوَمَا أَنْتَ عَلَيْهِمْ بِوَكِيلٍ\n(And you are not a trustee over them.) means, 'you are not responsible for guiding them.'\nإِنَّمَا أَنْتَ نَذِيرٌ ۚ وَاللَّهُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ وَكِيلٌ\n(But you are only a warner. And Allah is a Trustee over all things)(11:12).\nفَإِنَّمَا عَلَيْكَ الْبَلَاغُ وَعَلَيْنَا الْحِسَابُ\n(your duty is only to convey and on Us is the reckoning)(13:40).\nAllah is the One Who causes Death and gives Life\nThen Allah tells us that He is in control of all things and does as He wills. He causes men to die (the \"greater death\") when He sends the angels to take men's souls from their bodies, and He causes them to \"die a lesser death\" when they sleep. Allah says:\nوَهُوَ الَّذِي يَتَوَفَّاكُمْ بِاللَّيْلِ وَيَعْلَمُ مَا جَرَحْتُمْ بِالنَّهَارِ ثُمَّ يَبْعَثُكُمْ فِيهِ لِيُقْضَىٰ أَجَلٌ مُسَمًّى ۖ ثُمَّ إِلَيْهِ مَرْجِعُكُمْ ثُمَّ يُنَبِّئُكُمْ بِمَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ - وَهُوَ الْقَاهِرُ فَوْقَ عِبَادِهِ ۖ وَيُرْسِلُ عَلَيْكُمْ حَفَظَةً حَتَّىٰ إِذَا جَاءَ أَحَدَكُمُ الْمَوْتُ تَوَفَّتْهُ رُسُلُنَا وَهُمْ لَا يُفَرِّطُونَ\n(It is He, Who takes your souls by night (when you are asleep), and has knowledge of all that you have done by day, then He raises (wakes) you up again that a term appointed be fulfilled, then (in the end) unto Him will be your return. Then He will inform you of that which you used to do. He is the Irresistible, over His servants, and He sends guardians (angels guarding and writing all of one's good and bad deeds) over you, until when death approaches one of you, Our messengers (angels) take his soul, and they never neglect their duty.)(6:60-61).\nHere Allah mentions the two deaths, the lesser death then the greater death after it; in the Ayah above (39: 42), He mentions the greater then the lesser. Allah says:\nاللَّهُ يَتَوَفَّى الْأَنْفُسَ حِينَ مَوْتِهَا وَالَّتِي لَمْ تَمُتْ فِي مَنَامِهَا ۖ فَيُمْسِكُ الَّتِي قَضَىٰ عَلَيْهَا الْمَوْتَ وَيُرْسِلُ الْأُخْرَىٰ إِلَىٰ أَجَلٍ مُسَمًّى ۚ\n(It is Allah Who takes away the souls at the time of their death, and those that die not during their sleep. He keeps those (souls) for which He has ordained death and sends the rest for a term appointed.)\nThis indicates that they [the souls] meet in the higher realm, as was stated in the Hadith attributed to the Prophet ﷺ which was narrated by Ibn Mandah and others. In the Two Sahihs of Al-Bukhari and Muslim, it is reported that Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nإِذَا أَوَىٰ أَحَدُكُمْ إِلىٰ فِرَاشِهِ فَلْيَنْفُضْهُ بِدَاخِلَةِ إِزَارِهِ، فَإِنَّهُ لَا يَدْرِي مَا خَلَفَهُ عَلَيْهِ، ثُمَّ لِيَقُلْ: بِاسْمِكَ رَبِّي وَضَعْتُ جَنْبِي، وَبِكَ أَرْفَعُهُ، إِنْ أَمْسَكْتَ نَفْسِي فَارْحَمْهَا، وَإِنْ أَرْسَلْتَهَا فَاحْفَظْهَا بِمَا تَحْفَظُ بِهِ عِبَادَكَ الصَّالِحِينَ\n(When anyone of you goes to bed, let him brush down the bed with his garment, for he does not know what has come on his bed since he left it. Then let him say, \"In Your Name, O Lord, I lay down my side and in Your Name I raise it up; if You take my soul, have mercy on it, and if You send it back, protect it with that which You protect Your righteous servants.\")\nفَيُمْسِكُ الَّتِي قَضَىٰ عَلَيْهَا الْمَوْتَ\n(He keeps those (souls) for which He has ordained death) means, those which have died, and He returns the others back for an appointed term. As-Suddi said, \"For the rest of their lives.\"\nIbn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"He keeps the souls of the dead and sends back the souls of the living, and He does not make any mistakes.\nإِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِقَوْمٍ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ\n(Verily, in this are signs for a people who think deeply.)","href":"/tafsir/39?verse=41","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:39:43","title":"Ibn Kathir · 39:43–45","text":"Have they taken as intercessors besides Allah? Say: \"Even if they have power over nothing whatever and have no intelligence? (43)Say: \"To Allah belongs all intercession. His is the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. Then to Him you shall be brought back. (44)And when Allah Alone is mentioned, the hearts of those who believe not in the Hereafter are filled with disgust and when those besides Him are mentioned, behold, they rejoice (45)\nThere is no Intercession except with Allah, and how the Idolators are filled with Disgust when Allah is mentioned alone\nAllah condemns the idolators for taking intercessors besides Allah, namely the idols and false gods whom they have taken on the basis of their own whims, with no evidence or proof. These idols are not able to do anything; they have no minds with which to think, and they cannot hear or see. They are inanimate and are much worse off than animals. Then Allah says: 'Say – O Muhammad – to these people who claim that those whom they have taken as intercessors with Allah, that intercession is of no avail except for the one with whom Allah is pleased and to whom He has granted permission to intercede. The whole matter rests with Him.'\nمَنْ ذَا الَّذِي يَشْفَعُ عِنْدَهُ إِلَّا بِإِذْنِهِ ۚ\n(Who is he that can intercede with Him except with His permission?)(2:255).\nلَهُ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ ۖ\n(His is the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth.) means, He is the One Who is in control of all that.\nثُمَّ إِلَيْهِ تُرْجَعُونَ\n(Then to Him you shall be brought back.) means, 'on the Day of Resurrection, then He will judge between you with His justice, and He will reward or punish each person according to his deeds.' Then Allah condemns the idolators further:\nوَإِذَا ذُكِرَ اللَّهُ وَحْدَهُ\n(And when Allah Alone is mentioned) means, when it is said there is no (true) God except Allah Alone,\nاشْمَأَزَّتْ قُلُوبُ الَّذِينَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالْآخِرَةِ\n(the hearts of those who believe not in the Hereafter are filled with disgust) Mujahid said, \"Their hearts are filled with disgust means they recoil in horror.\" This is like the Ayah:\nإِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا إِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا اللَّهُ يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ\n(Truly, when it was said to them: \"La ilaha illa Allah,\" they puffed themselves up with pride.)(37:35) which means, they were too proud to follow it. Their hearts could not accept anything good, and whoever cannot accept good will accept evil. Allah says:\nوَإِذَا ذُكِرَ الَّذِينَ مِنْ دُونِهِ\n(and when those besides Him are mentioned,) meaning, the idols and false gods – this was the view of Mujahid –\nإِذَا هُمْ يَسْتَبْشِرُونَ\n(behold, they rejoice!) means, they feel happy.","href":"/tafsir/39?verse=43","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:39:46","title":"Ibn Kathir · 39:46–48","text":"Say: \"O Allah! Creator of the heavens and the earth! All-Knower of the unseen and the seen! You will judge between your servants about that wherein they used to differ. (46)And those who did wrong, if they had all that is on the earth and therewith as much again, they verily, would offer it to ransom themselves therewith on the Day of Resurrection from the evil torment; and there will become apparent to them from Allah what they had not been reckoning (47)And the evils of that which they earned will become apparent to them, and that which they used to mock at will encircle them (48)\nHow to supplicate\nAfter condemning the idolators for their love of Shirk and their hatred of Tawhid, Allah then says:\nقُلِ اللَّهُمَّ فَاطِرَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ عَالِمَ الْغَيْبِ وَالشَّهَادَةِ\n(Say: \"O Allah! Creator of the heavens and the earth! All-Knower of the unseen and the seen!...\") meaning, 'call you upon Allah Alone with no partner or associate, Who has created the heavens and the earth and originated them,' i.e., made them like nothing that ever before existed.\nعَالِمَ الْغَيْبِ وَالشَّهَادَةِ\n(All-Knower of the unseen and the seen!) means, what is secret and what is open.\nأَنْتَ تَحْكُمُ بَيْنَ عِبَادِكَ فِي مَا كَانُوا فِيهِ يَخْتَلِفُونَ\n(You will judge between your servants about that wherein they used to differ.) means, in this world; 'You will judge between them on the Day when they are resurrected and brought forth from their graves.' In his Sahih, Muslim recorded that Abu Salamah bin 'Abdur-Rahman said, \"I asked 'A'ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, how the Messenger of Allah ﷺ started his prayer when he stood up to pray at night. She said, may Allah be pleased with her: 'When the Messenger of Allah ﷺ stood up to pray at night, he would start his prayer with the words:\nاللّٰهُمَّ رَبَّ جِبْرِيلَ وَمِيكَائِيلَ وَإِسْرَافِيلَ، فَاطِرَ السَّمٰوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ، عَالِمَ الْغَيْبِ وَالشَّهَادَةِ، أَنْتَ تَحْكُمُ بَيْنَ عِبَادِكَ فِيمَا كَانُوا فِيهِ يَخْتَلِفُونَ، اهْدِنِي لِمَا اخْتُلِفَ فِيهِ مِنَ الْحَقِّ بِإِذْنِكَ، إِنَّكَ تَهْدِي مَنْ تَشَاءُ إِلىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ\n(O Allah, Lord of Jibril, Mika'il and Israfil, Creator of the heavens and the earth, Knower of the unseen and the seen, You will judge between Your servants concerning that wherein they differ. Guide me with regard to that wherein there is dispute concerning the truth by Your leave, for You guide whomsoever You will to the straight path.)\"\nNo Ransom will be accepted on the Day of Resurrection\nوَلَوْ أَنَّ لِلَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا\n(And those who did wrong,) means, the idolators.\nمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ جَمِيعًا وَمِثْلَهُ مَعَهُ\n(if they had all that is in earth and therewith as much again,)\nلَافْتَدَوْا بِهِ مِنْ سُوءِ الْعَذَابِ\n(they verily, would offer it to ransom themselves therewith from the evil torment;) means, that which Allah has decreed for them on the Day of Resurrection. But the ransom will not be accepted from them, even if it were to be an earth-full of gold as He mentioned elswhere (3:91). Then Allah says:\nوَبَدَا لَهُمْ مِنَ اللَّهِ مَا لَمْ يَكُونُوا يَحْتَسِبُونَ\n(and there will become apparent to them from Allah what they had not been reckoning.) which means, when they come to realize what Allah's punishment for them will be, which they had never before imagined.\nوَبَدَا لَهُمْ سَيِّئَاتُ مَا كَسَبُوا\n(And the evils of that which they earned will become apparent to them,) means, they will see the punishment for the forbidden actions and sins which they committed in this world.\nوَحَاقَ بِهِمْ مَا كَانُوا بِهِ يَسْتَهْزِئُونَ\n(and that which they used to mock at will encircle them.) means, the punishment which they used to make fun of in this world will encompass them.","href":"/tafsir/39?verse=46","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:39:49","title":"Ibn Kathir · 39:49–52","text":"When harm touches man, he calls to Us (for help); then when We have changed it into a favor from Us, he says: \"Only because of knowledge I obtained it.\" Nay, it is only a trial, but most of them know not (49)Verily, those before them said it, yet (all) that they had earned availed them not (50)So, the evil results of that which they earned overtook them. And those who did wrong of these will also be overtaken by the evil results for that which they earned; and they will never be able to escape (51)Do they not know that Allah expands the provision for whom He wills, and straitens it. Verily, in this are signs for the folk who believe (52)\nHow Man changes when He is blessed after suffering Harm\nAllah tells us how man, when he is suffering from harm, prays to Allah, turning to Him in repentance and calling upon Him, but when He makes things easy for him, he transgresses and commits sins.\nإِنَّمَا أُوتِيتُهُ عَلَىٰ عِلْمٍ\n(Only because of knowledge I obtained it.) means, 'because Allah knows that I deserve it; if it were not for the fact that Allah regards me as special, He would not have given me this.' Qatadah said, \"Because I know that I deserve it.\" Allah says:\nبَلْ هِيَ فِتْنَةٌ\n(Nay, it is only a trial,) meaning, 'the matter is not as he claims; on the contrary, We have blessed him with this as a test to see whether he will be obedient or disobedient – although We have prior knowledge of that.' In fact, it is a trial.\nوَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَهُمْ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ\n(but most of them know not!) So they say what they say and claim what they claim.\nقَدْ قَالَهَا الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ\n(Verily, those before them said it,) means, the previous nations who came before said the same things and made the same claims,\nفَمَا أَغْنَىٰ عَنْهُمْ مَا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ\n(yet (all) that they had earned availed them not.) means, what they said was not right and all that they had gathered did not save them.\nفَأَصَابَهُمْ سَيِّئَاتُ مَا كَسَبُوا ۚ وَالَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا مِنْ هَٰؤُلَاءِ\n(So, the evil results of that which they earned overtook them. And those who did wrong of these...) means, the people who are addressed here,\nسَيُصِيبُهُمْ سَيِّئَاتُ مَا كَسَبُوا\n(will also be overtaken by the evil results (torment) for that which they earned;) just as happened to those earlier peoples.\nوَمَا هُمْ بِمُعْجِزِينَ\n(and they will never be able to escape.) This is like the Ayah in which Allah tells us how Qarun reacted when his people told him:\nلَا تَفْرَحْ ۖ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يُحِبُّ الْفَرِحِينَ - وَابْتَغِ فِيمَا آتَاكَ اللَّهُ الدَّارَ الْآخِرَةَ ۖ وَلَا تَنْسَ نَصِيبَكَ مِنَ الدُّنْيَا ۖ وَأَحْسِنْ كَمَا أَحْسَنَ اللَّهُ إِلَيْكَ ۖ وَلَا تَبْغِ الْفَسَادَ فِي الْأَرْضِ ۖ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يُحِبُّ الْمُفْسِدِينَ - قَالَ إِنَّمَا أُوتِيتُهُ عَلَىٰ عِلْمٍ عِنْدِي ۚ أَوَلَمْ يَعْلَمْ أَنَّ اللَّهَ قَدْ أَهْلَكَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِ مِنَ الْقُرُونِ مَنْ هُوَ أَشَدُّ مِنْهُ قُوَّةً وَأَكْثَرُ جَمْعًا ۚ وَلَا يُسْأَلُ عَنْ ذُنُوبِهِمُ الْمُجْرِمُونَ\n(\"Do not exult, verily, Allah likes not those who exult. But seek, with that (wealth) which Allah has bestowed on you, the home of the Hereafter, and forget not your portion of lawful enjoyment in this world; and do good as Allah has been good to you, and seek not mischief in the land. Verily, Allah likes not the corrupters.\" He said: \"This has been given to me only because of the knowledge I possess.\" Did he not know that Allah had destroyed before him generations, men who were stronger than him in might and greater in the amount (of riches) they had collected? But the criminals will not be questioned of their sins.\")(28:76-78). And Allah says:\nوَقَالُوا نَحْنُ أَكْثَرُ أَمْوَالًا وَأَوْلَادًا وَمَا نَحْنُ بِمُعَذَّبِينَ\n(And they say: \"We are more in wealth and in children, and we are not going to be punished.\")(34:35).\nأَوَلَمْ يَعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ يَبْسُطُ الرِّزْقَ لِمَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَقْدِرُ ۚ\n(Do they not know that Allah expands the provision for whom He wills, and straitens it.) means, He gives plenty to some and restricts the provision for others.\nإِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِقَوْمٍ يُؤْمِنُونَ\n(Verily, in this are signs for the folk who believe!) means, there is a lesson and proof.","href":"/tafsir/39?verse=49","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:39:53","title":"Ibn Kathir · 39:53–59","text":"Say: \"O My servants who have transgressed against themselves! Despair not of the mercy of Allah, verily, Allah forgives all sins. Truly, He is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful. (53)\"And turn in repentance (and in obedience with true faith) to your Lord and submit to Him before the torment comes upon you, (and) then you will not be helped. (54)\"And follow the best of that which is sent down to you from your Lord, before the torment comes on you suddenly while you perceive not! (55)Lest a person should say: \"Alas, my grief that I was undutiful to Allah, and I was indeed among those who mocked. (56)Or (lest) he should say: \"If only Allah had guided me, I should indeed have been among those who have Taqwa. (57)Or (lest) he should say when he sees the torment: \"If only I had another chance, then I should indeed be among the doers of good. (58)Yes! Verily, there came to you My Ayat and you denied them, and were proud and were among the disbelievers (59)\nThe Call to repent before the Punishment comes\nThis Ayah is a call to all sinners, be they disbelievers or others, to repent and turn to Allah. This Ayah tells us that Allah, may He be blessed and exalted, will forgive all the sins of those who repent to Him and turn back to Him, no matter what or how many his sins are, even if they are like the foam of the sea. This cannot be interpreted as meaning that sins will be forgiven without repentance, because Shirk can only be forgiven for the one who repents from it. Al-Bukhari recorded that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said that some of the people of Shirk killed many people and committed Zina (illegal sexual acts) to a great extent; they came to Muhammad ﷺ and said, \"What you are saying and calling us to is good; if only you could tell us that there is an expiation for what we have done.\" Then the following Ayat were revealed:\nوَالَّذِينَ لَا يَدْعُونَ مَعَ اللَّهِ إِلَٰهًا آخَرَ وَلَا يَقْتُلُونَ النَّفْسَ الَّتِي حَرَّمَ اللَّهُ إِلَّا بِالْحَقِّ وَلَا يَزْنُونَ ۚ\n(And those who invoke not any other god along with Allah, nor kill such person as Allah has forbidden, except for just cause, nor commit illegal sexual intercourse)(25:68).\nقُلْ يَا عِبَادِيَ الَّذِينَ أَسْرَفُوا عَلَىٰ أَنْفُسِهِمْ لَا تَقْنَطُوا مِنْ رَحْمَةِ اللَّهِ ۚ\n(Say: \"O My servants who have transgressed against themselves! Despair not of the mercy of Allah.) This was also recorded by Muslim, Abu Dawud and An-Nasa'i. What is meant by the first Ayah (25:68) is:\nإِلَّا مَنْ تَابَ وَآمَنَ وَعَمِلَ عَمَلًا صَالِحًا\n(Except those who repent and believe, and do righteous deeds)(25:70). Imam Ahmad recorded that Asma' bint Yazid, said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ reciting,\nإِنَّهُ عَمَلٌ غَيْرُ صَالِحٍ ۖ\n(verily, his work is unrighteous)(11:46). And I heard him ﷺ say:\nقُلْ يَا عِبَادِي الَّذِينَ أَسْرَفُوا عَلَىٰ أَنْفُسِهِمْ لَا تَقْنَطُوا مِنْ رَحْمَةِ اللَّهِ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَغْفِرُ الذُّنُوبَ جَمِيعًا ۚ وَ لَا يُبَالِي إِنَّهُ هُوَ الْغَفُورُ الرَّحِيمُ\n(Say: \"O My servants who have transgressed against themselves! Despair not of the mercy of Allah, verily, Allah forgives all sins He does not reckon him Truly, He is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful).\" This was also recorded by Abu Dawud and At-Tirmidhi.\nAll of these Hadiths indicate that what is meant is that Allah forgives all sins provided that a person repents. Additionally, one must not despair of the mercy of Allah even if his sins are many and great, for the door of repentance and mercy is expansive. Allah says:\nأَلَمْ يَعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ هُوَ يَقْبَلُ التَّوْبَةَ عَنْ عِبَادِهِ\n(Know they not that Allah accepts repentance from His servants)(9:104).\nوَمَنْ يَعْمَلْ سُوءًا أَوْ يَظْلِمْ نَفْسَهُ ثُمَّ يَسْتَغْفِرِ اللَّهَ يَجِدِ اللَّهَ غَفُورًا رَحِيمًا\n(And whoever does evil or wrongs himself but afterwards seeks Allah's forgiveness, he will find Allah Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.)(4:110). Concerning the hypocrites, Allah says:\nإِنَّ الْمُنَافِقِينَ فِي الدَّرْكِ الْأَسْفَلِ مِنَ النَّارِ وَلَنْ تَجِدَ لَهُمْ نَصِيرًا - إِلَّا الَّذِينَ تَابُوا وَأَصْلَحُوا\n(Verily, the hypocrites will be in the lowest depth (grade) of the Fire; no helper will you find for them. Except those who repent, and do righteous good deeds)(4:145-146). And Allah says:\nلَقَدْ كَفَرَ الَّذِينَ قَالُوا إِنَّ اللَّهَ ثَالِثُ ثَلَاثَةٍ ۘ وَمَا مِنْ إِلَٰهٍ إِلَّا إِلَٰهٌ وَاحِدٌ ۚ وَإِنْ لَمْ يَنْتَهُوا عَمَّا يَقُولُونَ لَيَمَسَّنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنْهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ\n(Surely, disbelievers are those who said: \"Allah is the third of the three (in a Trinity).\" But there is no god but One. And if they cease not from what they say, verily, a painful torment will befall on the disbelievers among them.)(5:73). Then He says:\nأَفَلَا يَتُوبُونَ إِلَى اللَّهِ وَيَسْتَغْفِرُونَهُ ۚ وَاللَّهُ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ\n(Will they not turn in repentance to Allah and ask His forgiveness? For Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.)(5:74) And Allah says:\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ فَتَنُواْ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَـتِ ثُمَّ لَمْ يَتُوبُواْ\n(Verily, those who put into trial the believing men and believing women (by torturing them), and then do not turn in repentance (to Allah))(85: 10).\nAl-Hasan Al-Basri, may Allah have mercy on him, said, \"Look at this generosity and kindness! They killed His close friends but He still called them to repentance and forgiveness.\" There are many Ayat on this topic.\nThe Two Sahihs record the Hadith of Abu Sa'id, may Allah be pleased with him, from Messenger of Allah ﷺ about the man who killed ninety-nine people. Later on, he regretted it and asked a worshipper among the Children of Israel whether he could repent. He told him no, so he killed him, thus completing one hundred. Then he asked one of their scholars whether he could repent. He said, \"What is stopping you from repenting?\" Then he told him to go to a town where Allah was worshipped. He set out for that town, but death came to him while he was on the road. The angels of mercy and the angels of punishment disputed over him, so Allah commanded them to measure the distance between the two towns; whichever he was closer to was the one to which he belonged. They found that he was closer to the town he was heading for, so the angels of mercy took him. It was said that when he was dying, he moved himself (towards that town), and Allah commanded the good town to move closer to him and the other town to move away. This is basic meaning of the Hadith; we have quoted it in full elsewhere.\nAli bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, commented on the Ayah:\nقُلْ يَا عِبَادِيَ الَّذِينَ أَسْرَفُوا عَلَىٰ أَنْفُسِهِمْ لَا تَقْنَطُوا مِنْ رَحْمَةِ اللَّهِ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَغْفِرُ الذُّنُوبَ جَمِيعًا ۚ\n(Say: \"O My servants who have transgressed against themselves! Despair not of the mercy of Allah, verily, Allah forgives all sins...\")\nAllah invites all to His forgiveness; those who claim that the Messiah is God, those who claim that the Messiah is the son of God, those who claim that 'Uzayr is the son of God, those who claim that Allah is poor, those who claim that the Hand of Allah is tied up, and those who say that Allah is the third of three [Trinity]. Allah says to all of these:\nأَفَلَا يَتُوبُونَ إِلَى اللَّهِ وَيَسْتَغْفِرُونَهُ ۚ وَاللَّهُ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ\n(Will they not turn in repentance to Allah and ask His forgiveness? For Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.)(5:74).\nAnd He calls to repentance the one who says something even worse than that, the one who says, 'I am your Lord most high,' and says,\nمَا عَلِمْتُ لَكُمْ مِنْ إِلَٰهٍ غَيْرِي\n(\"I know not that you have a god other than me.\")(28:38). Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"Anyone who makes the servants of Allah despair of His mercy after this, has rejected the Book of Allah, but a person cannot repent until Allah decrees that he should repent.\"\nAt-Tabarani recorded that Shutayr bin Shakal said, \"I heard Ibn Mas'ud say, 'The greatest Ayah in the Book of Allah is:\nاللَّهُ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ الْحَيُّ الْقَيُّومُ ۚ\n(Allah! None has the right to be worshipped but He, the Ever Living, the One Who sustains and protects all that exists)(2:255).\nThe most comprehensive Ayah in the Qur'an concerning good and evil is:\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ يَأْمُرُ بِالْعَدْلِ وَالْإِحْسَانِ\n(Verily, Allah enjoins justice and Al-Ihsan)(16:90).\nThe Ayah in the Qur'an which brings the most relief is in Surat Az-Zumar:\nقُلْ يَا عِبَادِيَ الَّذِينَ أَسْرَفُوا عَلَىٰ أَنْفُسِهِمْ لَا تَقْنَطُوا مِنْ رَحْمَةِ اللَّهِ ۚ\n(Say: \"O My servants who have transgressed against themselves! Despair not of the mercy of Allah.\")\nAnd the clearest Ayah in the Qur'an about reliance on Allah is:\nوَمَنْ يَتَّقِ اللَّهَ يَجْعَلْ لَهُ مَخْرَجًا - وَيَرْزُقْهُ مِنْ حَيْثُ لَا يَحْتَسِبُ ۚ\n(And whosoever has Taqwa of Allah, He will make a way for him to get out (from every difficulty). And He will provide him from (sources) he never could imagine)(65:2-3).' Masruq said to him; 'You have spoken the truth.'\"\nHadiths which tell us not to despair\nImam Ahmad recorded that Anas bin Malik, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, say:\nوَالَّذِي نَفْسِي بِيَدِهِ! لَوْ أَخْطَأْتُمْ حتّٰى تَمْلَأَ خَطَايَاكُمْ مَا بَيْنَ السَّمَاءِ وَالْأَرْضِ، ثُمَّ اسْتَغْفَرْتُمُ اللهَ تَعَالَىٰ لَغَفَرَ لَكُمْ، وَالَّذِي نَفْسُ مُحَمَّدٍ بِيَدِهِ! لَوْ لَمْ تُخْطِئُوا لَجَاءَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ بِقَوْمٍ يُخْطِئُونَ، ثُمَّ يَسْتَغْفِرُونَ اللهَ فَيَغْفِرُ لَهُمْ\n(By the One in Whose Hand is my soul, if you were to commit sin until your sins filled the space between heaven and earth, then you were to ask Allah for forgiveness, He would forgive you. By the One in Whose Hand is the soul of Muhammad, if you did not commit sin, Allah would bring other people who would commit sins and then ask Allah for forgiveness so that He could forgive them.)\" This was recorded only by Ahmad.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Abu Ayyub Al-Ansari, may Allah be pleased with him, said, as he was on his deathbed, \"I have concealed something from you that I heard from the Messenger of Allah ﷺ; he said:\nلَوْلَا أَنَّكُمْ تُذْنِبُونَ لَخَلَقَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ قَوْمًا يُذْنِبُونَ، فَيَغْفِرُ لَهُمْ\n(If you did not commit sins, Allah would create people who would sin so that He could forgive them.)\" This was recorded by Imam Ahmad; it was also recorded by Muslim in his Sahih, and by At-Tirmidhi.\nAllah encourages His servants to hasten to repent, as He says:\nوَأَنِيبُوا إِلَىٰ رَبِّكُمْ وَأَسْلِمُوا لَهُ\n(And turn in repentance (and in obedience with true faith) to your Lord and submit to Him) meaning, turn back to Allah and submit yourselves to Him.\nمِنْ قَبْلِ أَنْ يَأْتِيَكُمُ الْعَذَابُ ثُمَّ لَا تُنْصَرُونَ\n(before the torment comes upon you, (and) then you will not be helped.) means, hasten to repent and do righteous deeds before His wrath comes upon you.\nوَاتَّبِعُوا أَحْسَنَ مَا أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْكُمْ مِنْ رَبِّكُمْ\n(And follow the best of that which is sent down to you from your Lord,) means, the Qur'an.\nمِنْ قَبْلِ أَنْ يَأْتِيَكُمُ الْعَذَابُ بَغْتَةً وَأَنْتُمْ لَا تَشْعُرُونَ\n(before the torment comes on you suddenly while you perceive not!) means, without you realizing it.\nأَنْ تَقُولَ نَفْسٌ يَا حَسْرَتَا عَلَىٰ مَا فَرَّطْتُ فِي جَنْبِ اللَّهِ\n(Lest a person should say: \"Alas, my grief that I was undutiful to Allah...\") means, on the Day of Resurrection, the sinner who neglected to repent and turn back to Allah will regret it, and will wish that he had been one of the righteous who obeyed Allah.\nوَإِنْ كُنْتُ لَمِنَ السَّاخِرِينَ\n(and I was indeed among those who mocked.) means, 'my actions in this world were those of one who ridicules and makes fun, not of one who has firm faith and is sincere.'\nأَوْ تَقُولَ لَوْ أَنَّ اللَّهَ هَدَانِي لَكُنْتُ مِنَ الْمُتَّقِينَ - أَوْ تَقُولَ حِينَ تَرَى الْعَذَابَ لَوْ أَنَّ لِي كَرَّةً فَأَكُونَ مِنَ الْمُحْسِنِينَ\n(Or (lest) he should say: \"If only Allah had guided me, I should indeed have been among those who have Taqwa \". Or he should say when he sees the torment: \"If only I had another chance, then I should indeed be among the doers of good.\") means, he will wish that he could go back to this world, so that he could do righteous deeds. 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"Allah tells us what His servants will say before they say it and what they will do before they do it. He says:\nوَلَا يُنَبِّئُكَ مِثْلُ خَبِيرٍ\n(And none can inform you like Him Who is the All-Knower)(35:14).\nأَنْ تَقُولَ نَفْسٌ يَا حَسْرَتَا عَلَىٰ مَا فَرَّطْتُ فِي جَنْبِ اللَّهِ وَإِنْ كُنْتُ لَمِنَ السَّاخِرِينَ - أَوْ تَقُولَ لَوْ أَنَّ اللَّهَ هَدَانِي لَكُنْتُ مِنَ الْمُتَّقِينَ - أَوْ تَقُولَ حِينَ تَرَى الْعَذَابَ لَوْ أَنَّ لِي كَرَّةً فَأَكُونَ مِنَ الْمُحْسِنِينَ\n(Lest a person should say: \"Alas, my grief that I was undutiful to Allah, and I was indeed among those who mocked.\" Or he should say: \"If only Allah had guided me, I should indeed have been among those who have Taqwa.\" Or he should say when he sees the torment: \"If only I had another chance, then I should indeed be among the doers of good.\"). Imam Ahmad recorded that Abu Hurayrah said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nكُلُّ أَهْلِ النَّارِ يَرَىٰ مَقْعَدَهُ مِنَ الْجَنَّةِ فَيَقُولُ: لَوْ أَنَّ اللهَ هَدَانِي! فَتَكُونُ عَلَيْهِ حَسْرَةً، قال: وَكُلُّ أَهْلِ الْجَنَّةِ يَرَىٰ مَقْعَدَهُ مِنَ النَّارِ فَيَقُولُ: لَوْلَا أَنَّ اللهَ هَدَانِي، قال: فَيَكُونُ لَهُ شُكْرًا\n(Each of the people of Hell will be shown his place in Paradise and he will say, \"If only Allah had guided me!\" so it will be a source of regret for him. And each of the people of Paradise will be shown his place in Hell and he will say, \"If it were not for the fact that Allah guided me,\" so it will be a cause of thanks.)\" It was also narrated by An-Nasa'i.\nWhen the sinners wish that they could return to this world so that they could believe the Ayat of Allah and follow His Messengers, Allah will say:\nبَلَىٰ قَدْ جَاءَتْكَ آيَاتِي فَكَذَّبْتَ بِهَا وَاسْتَكْبَرْتَ وَكُنْتَ مِنَ الْكَافِرِينَ\n(Yes! Verily, there came to you My Ayat and you denied them, and were proud and were among the disbelievers.) meaning, 'O you who regret what you did, My Ayat did come to you in the world, and My proof was established against you, but you rejected it and were too arrogant to follow it, and you were among those who disbelieved in it.'","href":"/tafsir/39?verse=53","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:39:60","title":"Ibn Kathir · 39:60–61","text":"And on the Day of Resurrection you will see those who lied against Allah – their faces will be black. Is there not in Hell an abode for the arrogant (60)And Allah will deliver those who have Taqwa to their places of success. Evil shall touch them not, nor shall they grieve (61)\nThe Consequences for Those Who tell Lies against Allah and for Those Who have Taqwa\nAllah tells us that on the Day of Resurrection, some faces will be blackened and some will be whitened. The faces of those who followed splits and divisions will be blackened, and the faces of Ahlus-Sunnah wal-Jama'ah will be whitened. Allah says here:\nوَيَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ تَرَى الَّذِينَ كَذَبُوا عَلَى اللَّهِ\n(And on the Day of Resurrection you will see those who lied against Allah) meaning, by their claims that He had partners or offspring.\nوُجُوهُهُمْ مُسْوَدَّةٌ\n(their faces will be black.) means, because of their lies and fabrications.\nأَلَيْسَ فِي جَهَنَّمَ مَثْوًى لِلْمُتَكَبِّرِينَ\n(Is there not in Hell an abode for the arrogant?) means, is not Hell sufficient for them as a prison and humiliating final destination, because of their stubborn pride, arrogance and refusal to follow the truth?\nوَيُنَجِّي اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ اتَّقَوْا بِمَفَازَتِهِمْ\n(And Allah will deliver those who are those who have Taqwa to their places of success.) means, because of what Allah has decreed for them of happiness and victory.\nلَا يَمَسُّهُمُ السُّوءُ\n(Evil shall touch them not,) means, on the Day of Resurrection.\nوَلَا هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ\n(nor shall they grieve.) means, the greater terror (of that Day) will not cause them grief, for they will be safe from all grief and removed from all evil, and they will attain all that is good.","href":"/tafsir/39?verse=60","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:39:62","title":"Ibn Kathir · 39:62–66","text":"Allah is the Creator of all things, and He is the Trustee over all things (62)To Him belong the Maqalid of the heavens and the earth. And those who disbelieve in the Ayat of Allah, such are they who will be the losers (63)Say: \"Do you order me to worship other than Allah O you fools! (64)And indeed it has been revealed to you, as it was to those before you: \"If you join others in worship with Allah, surely your deeds will be in vain, and you will certainly be among the losers. (65)Nay! But worship Allah, and be among the grateful (66)\nAllah is the Creator and Controller, and associating others in worship with Him cancels out Good Deeds\nAllah tells us that He is the Creator, Lord, Sovereign and Controller of all things; everything is subject to His dominion, power and guardianship.\nلَهُ مَقَالِيدُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ ۗ\n(To Him belong the Maqalid of the heavens and the earth.) Mujahid said, \"Maqalid means 'keys' in Persian.\" This was also the view of Qatadah, Ibn Zayd and Sufyan bin 'Uyaynah.\nAs-Suddi said:\nلَهُ مَقَالِيدُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ ۗ\n(To Him belong the Maqalid of the heavens and the earth.) \"The treasures of the heavens and the earth.\" Both opinions mean that the control of all things is in the Hand of Allah, may He be blessed and exalted, for His is the dominion and to Him is the praise, and He is able to do all things. He says:\nوَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِآيَاتِ اللَّهِ\n(And those who disbelieve in the Ayat of Allah,) meaning, His proof and evidence,\nأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْخَاسِرُونَ\n(such are they who will be the losers.)\nقُلْ أَفَغَيْرَ اللَّهِ تَأْمُرُونِّي أَعْبُدُ أَيُّهَا الْجَاهِلُونَ\n(Say: \"Do you order me to worship other than Allah O you fools!\") The reason for the revelation of this Ayah was narrated by Ibn Abi Hatim and others from Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, that the idolators in their ignorance called the Messenger of Allah ﷺ to worship their gods, then they would worship his God with him. Then these words were revealed:\nقُلْ أَفَغَيْرَ اللَّهِ تَأْمُرُونِّي أَعْبُدُ أَيُّهَا الْجَاهِلُونَ - وَلَقَدْ أُوحِيَ إِلَيْكَ وَإِلَى الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِكَ لَئِنْ أَشْرَكْتَ لَيَحْبَطَنَّ عَمَلُكَ وَلَتَكُونَنَّ مِنَ الْخَاسِرِينَ\n(Say: \"Do you order me to worship other than Allah? O you fools!\" And indeed it has been revealed to you, as it was to those before you: \"If you join others in worship with Allah, surely your deeds will be in vain, and you will certainly be among the losers.\") This is like the Ayah:\nوَلَوْ أَشْرَكُوا لَحَبِطَ عَنْهُمْ مَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ\n(But if they had joined in worship others with Allah, all that they used to do would have been of no benefit to them.)(6:88).\nبَلِ اللَّهَ فَاعْبُدْ وَكُنْ مِنَ الشَّاكِرِينَ\n(Nay! But worship Allah, and be among the grateful.) means, 'you and those who follow you and believe in you should make your worship sincerely for Allah Alone, with no partner or associate.'","href":"/tafsir/39?verse=62","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:39:67","title":"Ibn Kathir · 39:67","text":"They made not a just estimate of Allah such as is due to Him. And on the Day of Resurrection the whole of the earth will be grasped by His Hand and the heavens will be rolled up in His Right Hand. Glorified be He, and High be He above all that they associate as partners with Him (67)\nThe Idolators did not make a just Estimate of Allah such as is due to Him\nوَمَا قَدَرُوا اللَّهَ حَقَّ قَدْرِهِ\n(They made not a just estimate of Allah such as is due to Him.) means, the idolators did not give Allah His due when they worshipped others alongside Him. He is the Almighty, and there is none mightier than Him; He is the One Who is able to do all things; He is the Owner of all things and everything is under His control and power. Mujahid said, \"This was revealed concerning Quraysh.\" As-Suddi said, \"They did not venerate Him as He deserves to be venerated.\" Muhammad bin Ka'b said, \"If they had made a just estimate of Allah such as is due to Him, they would not have lied.\" 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said:\nوَمَا قَدَرُوا اللَّهَ حَقَّ قَدْرِهِ\n(They made not a just estimate of Allah such as is due to Him.) \"These are the disbeliever who did not believe that Allah had power over them. Whoever believes that Allah is able to do all things, has made a just estimate of Allah such as is due to Him, and whoever does not believe that, has not made a just estimate of Allah such as is due to Him.\"\nMany Hadiths have been narrated concerning this Ayah and how it and other Ayat like it are to be interpreted and accepted without any attempts to twist or change the meaning. Concerning the Ayah,\nوَمَا قَدَرُوا اللَّهَ حَقَّ قَدْرِهِ\n(They made not a just estimate of Allah such as is due to Him.) Al-Bukhari recorded that 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"One of the rabbis came to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and said, 'O Muhammad! We learn that Allah will put the heavens on one finger, the earths on one finger, the trees on one finger, the water and dust on one finger, and the rest of creation on one finger, then He will say: I am the King.' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ smiled so broadly that his molars could be seen, in confirmation of what the rabbi had said. Then the Messenger of Allah ﷺ recited:\nوَمَا قَدَرُوا اللَّهَ حَقَّ قَدْرِهِ وَالْأَرْضُ جَمِيعًا قَبْضَتُهُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ\n(They made not a just estimate of Allah such as is due to Him. And on the Day of Resurrection the whole of the earth will be grasped by His Hand).\" Al-Bukhari also recorded this in other places of his Sahih. It was also recorded by Imam Ahmad and Muslim, and by At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa'i in the (books of) Tafsir in their Sunans.\nAbu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ say:\nيَقْبِضُ اللهُ تَعَالَى الْأَرْضَ، وَيَطْوِي السَّمَاءَ بِيَمِينِهِ، ثُمَّ يَقُولُ: أَنَا الْمَلِكُ، أَيْنَ مُلُوكُ الْأَرْضِ؟\n(Allah will grasp the earth and roll up the heavens in His Right Hand, then He will say: \"I am the King, where are the kings of the earth?\")\" This version was recorded only by Al-Bukhari; Muslim recorded another version.\nAl-Bukhari also recorded from Ibn 'Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nإِنَّ اللهَ تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَىٰ يَقْبِضُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ الْأَرَضِينَ عَلَىٰ أُصْبُعٍ، وَتَكُونُ السَّمٰوَاتُ بِيَمِينِهِ، ثُمَّ يَقُولُ: أَنَا الْمَلِكُ\n(On the Day of Resurrection, Allah, may He be blessed and exalted, will grasp the earth with one finger, and the heavens will be in His Right Hand, then He will say, \"I am the King.\")\nThis version was also recorded by Al-Bukhari It is recorded that Ibn 'Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ recited this Ayah on the Minbar one day:\nوَمَا قَدَرُوا اللَّهَ حَقَّ قَدْرِهِ وَالْأَرْضُ جَمِيعًا قَبْضَتُهُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ وَالسَّمَاوَاتُ مَطْوِيَّاتٌ بِيَمِينِهِ ۚ سُبْحَانَهُ وَتَعَالَىٰ عَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ\n(They made not a just estimate of Allah such as is due to Him. On the Day of Resurrection the whole earth will be grasped by His Hand and the heavens will be rolled up in His Right Hand. Glorified be He, and High be He above all that they associate as partners with Him!) The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said while moving his hand forward and backward:\nيُمَجِّدُ الرَّبُّ نَفْسَهُ: أَنَا الْجَبَّارُ، أَنَا الْمُتَكَبِّرُ، أَنَا الْمَلِكُ، أَنَا الْعَزِيزُ، أَنَا الْكَرِيمُ\n(And the Lord will glorify Himself, saying \"I am Compeller, I am the Proud, I am the King, I am the Mighty, I am the Most Generous.\")\nAnd the Minbar shook so much that we feared that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ would fall.\" This was also recorded by Muslim, An-Nasa'i and Ibn Majah.","href":"/tafsir/39?verse=67","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:39:68","title":"Ibn Kathir · 39:68–70","text":"And the Trumpet will be blown, and all who are in the heavens and all who are on the earth will swoon away, except him whom Allah wills. Then it will be blown another time, and behold they will be standing, looking on (68)And the earth will shine with the light of its Lord, and the Book will be presented, and the Prophets and the witnesses will be brought forward, and it will be judged between them with truth, and they will not be wronged (69)And each person will be paid in full of what he did; and He is Best Aware of what they do (70)\nThe Blast of the Trumpet, the Judgement and the Recompense\nAllah tells us about the terrors of the Day of Judgement, with its mighty signs and terrifying upheaval.\nوَنُفِخَ فِي الصُّورِ فَصَعِقَ مَنْ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَنْ فِي الْأَرْضِ إِلَّا مَنْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ ۖ\n(And the Trumpet will be blown and all who are in the heavens and all who are on the earth will swoon away, except him whom Allah wills.)\nThis will be the second trumpet-blast, which will cause people to die. By this trumpet-blast, everyone who is alive in the heavens and on earth will be caused to die, except for him whom Allah wills. Then the souls of the remaining creatures will be taken, until the last one to die will be the Angel of Death, and there will be left only the Ever Living, Eternal One, Who was there in the beginning and will be at the end, forever. He will say three times,\nلِمَنِ الْمُلْكُ الْيَوْمَ ۖ\n(\"Whose is the kingdom this day?\"), then He will answer Himself:\nلِلَّهِ الْوَاحِدِ الْقَهَّارِ\n(\"It is Allah's, the One, the Irresistible!\")(40:16). 'I am the One existing Alone, I subjugated all things and I decreed that all things must come to an end.' Then the first one to be brought back to life will be Israfil, and Allah will command him to sound the Trumpet again. This will be the third trumpet-blast, the trumpet-blast of Resurrection. Allah says:\nثُمَّ نُفِخَ فِيهِ أُخْرَىٰ فَإِذَا هُمْ قِيَامٌ يَنْظُرُونَ\n(Then it will be blown another time, and behold they will be standing, looking on) means, after they have been bones and dust, they will come alive, looking at the terrors of the Day of Resurrection. This is like the Ayat:\nفَإِنَّمَا هِيَ زَجْرَةٌ وَاحِدَةٌ - فَإِذَا هُمْ بِالسَّاهِرَةِ\n(But it will be only a single Zajrah, when behold, they find themselves alive.)(79:13-14)\nيَوْمَ يَدْعُوكُمْ فَتَسْتَجِيبُونَ بِحَمْدِهِ وَتَظُنُّونَ إِنْ لَبِثْتُمْ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا\n(On the Day when He will call you, and you will respond with His praise, and you will think that you have stayed (in this world) but a little while!)(17:52), and\nوَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ أَنْ تَقُومَ السَّمَاءُ وَالْأَرْضُ بِأَمْرِهِ ۚ ثُمَّ إِذَا دَعَاكُمْ دَعْوَةً مِنَ الْأَرْضِ إِذَا أَنْتُمْ تَخْرُجُونَ\n(And among His signs is that the heaven and the earth stand by His command. Then afterwards when He will call you by a single call, behold, you will come out from the earth.)(30:25)\nImam Ahmad recorded that a man said to 'Abdullah bin 'Amr, may Allah be pleased with him, \"You say that the Hour will come at such and such time.\" He said, \"I thought that I would not narrate to you anymore. All that I said was that after a little while you would see something of great importance.\" 'Abdullah bin 'Amr, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nيَخْرُجُ الدَّجَّالُ فِي أُمَّتِي فَيَمْكُثُ فِيهِمْ أَرْبَعِينَ\n(The Dajjal will emerge in my Ummah and he will stay among them for forty.) I do not know whether he said forty days or forty months or forty years or forty nights.\nفَيَبْعَثُ اللهُ تَعَالَىٰ عِيسَى ابْنَ مَرْيَمَ عَلَيْهِ الصَّلَاةُ وَالسَّلَامُ، كَأَنَّهُ عُرْوَةُ بْنُ مَسْعُودٍ الثَّقَفِيُّ، فَيَظْهَرُ فَيُهْلِكُهُ اللهُ تَعَالَىٰ، ثُمَّ يَلْبَثُ النَّاسُ بَعْدَهُ سِنِينَ سَبْعًا، لَيْسَ بَيْنَ اثْنَيْنِ عَدَاوَةٌ، ثُمَّ يُرْسِلُ اللهُ تَعَالَىٰ رِيحًا بَارِدَةً مِنْ قِبَلِ الشَّامِ، فَلَا يَبْقَىٰ أَحَدٌ فِي قَلْبِهِ مِثْقَالُ ذَرَّةٍ مِنْ إِيمَانٍ إِلَّا قَبَضَتْهُ، حَتّٰى لَوْ أَنَّ أَحَدَهُمْ كَانَ فِي كَبِدِ جَبَلٍ لَدَخَلَتْ عَلَيْهِ\n(Then Allah will send 'Isa bin Maryam, peace be upon him, who resembles 'Urwah bin Mas'ud Ath-Thaqafi, and he will prevail. Allah will destroy him (the Dajjal), then after that mankind will live for seven years with no enmity between any two people. Then Allah will send a cool wind from the direction of Ash-Sham, which will take the soul of every person who has even a speck of faith in his heart; even if one of them were to be inside the heart of a mountain, it would enter upon him.)\" He said, \"I heard it from the Messenger of Allah ﷺ:\nوَيَبْقَىٰ شِرَارُ النَّاسِ فِي خِفَّةِ الطَّيْرِ وَأَحْلَامِ السِّبَاعِ، لَا يَعْرِفُونَ مَعْرُوفًا، وَلَا يُنْكِرُونَ مُنْكَرًا، قال: فَيَتَمَثَّلُ لَهُمُ الشَّيْطَانُ فَيَقُولُ: أَلَا تَسْتَجِيبُونَ؟ فَيَأْمُرُهُمْ بِعِبَادَةِ الْأَوْثَانِ فَيَعْبُدُونَهَا، وَهُمْ فِي ذَلِكَ دَارَّةٌ أَرْزَاقُهُمْ، حَسَنٌ عَيْشُهُمْ، ثُمَّ يُنْفَخُ فِي الصُّورِ، فَلَا يَسْمَعُهُ أَحَدٌ إِلَّا أَصْغَىٰ لَهُ، وَأَوَّلُ مَنْ يَسْمَعُهُ، رَجُلٌ يَلُوطُ حَوْضَهُ فَيَصْعَقُ، ثُمَّ لَا يَبْقَىٰ أَحَدٌ إِلَّا صَعِقَ، ثُمَّ يُرْسِلُ اللهُ تَعَالَىٰ أَوْ - يُنْزِلُ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ - مَطَرًا كَأَنَّهُ الطَّلُّ - أَوِ الظِّلُّ شك نعمان - فَتَنْبُتُ مِنْهُ أَجْسَادُ النَّاسِ، ثُمَّ يُنْفَخُ فِيهِ أُخْرَىٰ فَإِذَا هُمْ قِيَامٌ يَنْظُرُونَ، ثُمَّ يُقَالُ: أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ هَلُمُّوا إِلىٰ رَبِّكُمْ وَقِفُوهُمْ ۖ إِنَّهُمْ مَسْئُولُونَ\n(There will be left the most evil of people, as light as birds and with the hard hearts of wild predators. They will not recognize any good or denounce any evil. Then Shaytan will appear to them and say, \"Will you not obey me?\" Then he will command them to worship idols and they will worship them. At that time they will have ample provision and a good standard of living. Then the Trumpet will be blown, and no one will hear it but he will tilt his head to listen. The first one to hear it will be a man who is filling his water trough, and he will die when he hears it. Then there will be no one left who has not died. Then Allah will send) – or – send down (rain like drizzle) – or – shade – An-Nu'man [one of the narrators] was not sure of its wording (from which the bodies of the people will grow. Then the Trumpet will be blown once more, and they will be standing, looking on. Then it will be said, \"O mankind, come to your Lord, (But stop them, verily, they are to be questioned)(37:24).\nThen it will be said,\nأَخْرِجُوا بَعْثَ النَّارِ، قال: فيُقَالُ: كَمْ؟ فَيُقَالُ: مِنْ كُلِّ أَلْفٍ تِسْعَمِائَةٍ وَتِسْعَةً وَتِسْعِينَ، فَيَوْمَئِذٍ يُبْعَثُ الْوِلْدَانُ شِيبًا، وَيَوْمَئِذٍ يُكْشَفُ عَنْ سَاقٍ\n(\"Send forth the people of Hell.\" It will be said, \"How many\" It will said, \"From every thousand, nine hundred and ninety-nine.\" On that Day, children will be resurrected gray-haired, and on that Day the Shin will be laid bare.)\" This was recorded by Muslim in his Sahih.\nAl-Bukhari recorded that Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, said that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nمَا بَيْنَ النَّفْخَتَيْنِ أَرْبَعُونَ\n(Between the two blasts, there will be only forty.) They said, \"O Abu Hurayrah, forty days?\" He, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"I do not know.\" They said, \"Forty years?\" He said, \"I do not know.\" They said, \"Forty months?\" He said, \"I do not know.\"\nوَيَبْلَى كُلُّ شَيْءٍ مِنَ الْإِنْسَانِ إِلَّا عَجْبَ ذَنَبِهِ فِيهِ يُرَكَّبُ الْخَلْقُ\n(Every part of a man will disinegrate apart from the root of his backbone, and out of that he will be created anew.)\nوَأَشْرَقَتِ الْأَرْضُ بِنُورِ رَبِّهَا\n(And the earth will shine with the light of its Lord,) means, it will shine brightly on the Day of Resurrection when the Truth (Allah), may He be glorified and exalted, manifests Himself to His creation, to pass judgement.\nوَوُضِعَ الْكِتَابُ\n(and the Book will be presented). Qatadah said, \"The Book of deeds.\"\nوَجِيءَ بِالنَّبِيِّينَ\n(and the Prophets will be brought forward,) Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"They will bear witness against the nations, testifying that they conveyed the Message of Allah to them.\"\nوَالشُّهَدَاءِ\n(and the witnesses) means, witnesses from among the angels who record the deeds of all, good and evil alike.\nوَقُضِيَ بَيْنَهُمْ بِالْحَقِّ\n(and it will be judged between them with truth,) means, with justice.\nوَهُمْ لَا يُظْلَمُونَ\n(and they will not be wronged.) Allah says:\nوَنَضَعُ الْمَوَازِينَ الْقِسْطَ لِيَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ فَلَا تُظْلَمُ نَفْسٌ شَيْئًا ۖ وَإِنْ كَانَ مِثْقَالَ حَبَّةٍ مِنْ خَرْدَلٍ أَتَيْنَا بِهَا ۗ وَكَفَىٰ بِنَا حَاسِبِينَ\n(And We shall setup Balances of justice on the Day of Resurrection, then none will be dealt with unjustly in anything. And if there be the weight of a mustard seed, We will bring it. And Sufficient are We to take account.)(21:47)\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَظْلِمُ مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ ۖ وَإِنْ تَكُ حَسَنَةً يُضَاعِفْهَا وَيُؤْتِ مِنْ لَدُنْهُ أَجْرًا عَظِيمًا\n(Surely, Allah wrongs not even of the weight of a speck of dust, but if there is any good (done), He doubles it, and gives from Him a great reward.)(4:40) Allah says:\nوَوُفِّيَتْ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَا عَمِلَتْ\n(And each person will be paid in full of what he did;) meaning, of good and evil.\nوَهُوَ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا يَفْعَلُونَ\n(and He is Best Aware of what they do).","href":"/tafsir/39?verse=68","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:39:71","title":"Ibn Kathir · 39:71–72","text":"And those who disbelieved will be driven to Hell in groups till when they reach it, the gates thereof will be opened. And its keepers will say: \"Did not the Messengers come to you from yourselves, reciting to you the Ayat of your Lord, and warning you of the meeting of this Day of yours?\" They will say: \"Yes,\" but the Word of torment has been justified against the disbelievers (71)It will be said: \"Enter you the gates of Hell, to abide therein. And what an evil abode of the arrogant! (72)\nHow the Disbelievers will be driven to Hell\nAllah tells us how the doomed disbeliever will be driven to Hell by force, with threats and warnings. This is like the Ayah:\nيَوْمَ يُدَعُّونَ إِلَىٰ نَارِ جَهَنَّمَ دَعًّا\n(The Day when they will be pushed down by force to the fire of Hell, with a horrible, forceful pushing.)(52:13) swhich means, they will be pushed and forced towards it, and they will be extremely thirsty, as Allah says:\nيَوْمَ نَحْشُرُ الْمُتَّقِينَ إِلَى الرَّحْمَٰنِ وَفْدًا - وَنَسُوقُ الْمُجْرِمِينَ إِلَىٰ جَهَنَّمَ وِرْدًا\n(The Day We shall gather those who have Taqwa unto the Most Gracious, like a delegation. And We shall drive the criminals to Hell, in a thirsty state.)(19:85-86) When they are in that state, they will be blind, dumb and deaf, and some of them will be walking on their faces:\nوَنَحْشُرُهُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ عَلَىٰ وُجُوهِهِمْ عُمْيًا وَبُكْمًا وَصُمًّا ۖ مَأْوَاهُمْ جَهَنَّمُ ۖ كُلَّمَا خَبَتْ زِدْنَاهُمْ سَعِيرًا\n(and We shall gather them together on the Day of Resurrection on their faces, blind, dumb and deaf; their abode will be Hell; whenever it abates, We shall increase for them the fierceness of the Fire)(17:97).\nحَتَّىٰ إِذَا جَاءُوهَا فُتِحَتْ أَبْوَابُهَا\n(till when they reach it, the gates thereof will be opened.) means, as soon as they arrive, the gates will be opened quickly, in order to hasten on their punishment. Then the keepers of Hell, who are stern angels, severe and strong, will say to them by way of rebuking and reprimanding:\nأَلَمْ يَأْتِكُمْ رُسُلٌ مِنْكُمْ\n(Did not the Messengers come to you from yourselves,) meaning, 'of your own kind, so that you could have spoken to them and learned from them,'\nيَتْلُونَ عَلَيْكُمْ آيَاتِ رَبِّكُمْ\n(reciting to you the Ayat of your Lord,) means, 'establishing proof against you that what they brought to you was true,'\nوَيُنْذِرُونَكُمْ لِقَاءَ يَوْمِكُمْ هَٰذَا\n(and warning you of the meeting of this Day of yours) means, 'warning you of the evil of this Day.' The disbeliever will say to them:\nبَلَىٰ\n(Yes,) meaning, 'they did come to us and warn us and establish proof and evidence against us,'\nوَلَٰكِنْ حَقَّتْ كَلِمَةُ الْعَذَابِ عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ\n(but the Word of torment has been justified against the disbelievers!) means, 'but we rejected them and went against them, because we were already doomed, as it was decreed that we would be, because we had turned away from the truth towards falsehood.' This is like the Ayat:\nكُلَّمَا أُلْقِيَ فِيهَا فَوْجٌ سَأَلَهُمْ خَزَنَتُهَا أَلَمْ يَأْتِكُمْ نَذِيرٌ قَالُوا بَلَىٰ قَدْ جَاءَنَا نَذِيرٌ فَكَذَّبْنَا وَقُلْنَا مَا نَزَّلَ اللَّهُ مِن شَيْءٍ إِنْ أَنتُمْ إِلَّا فِي ضَلَالٍ كَبِيرٍ - وَقَالُوا لَوْ كُنَّا نَسْمَعُ أَوْ نَعْقِلُ مَا كُنَّا فِي أَصْحَابِ السَّعِيرِ\n(Every time a group is cast therein, its keeper will ask: \"Did no warner come to you?\" They will say: \"Yes, indeed a warner came to us, but we denied him and said: 'Allah never revealed anything; you are only in great error.'\" And they will say: \"Had we but listened or used our intelligence, we would not have been among the dwellers of the blazing Fire!\")(67:8) which means, they will feel regret and will blame themselves.\nفَاعْتَرَفُوا بِذَنْبِهِمْ فَسُحْقًا لِأَصْحَابِ السَّعِيرِ\n(Then they will confess their sin. So, away with the dwellers of the blazing Fire!)(67:11) means, they are lost and doomed.\nقِيلَ ادْخُلُوا أَبْوَابَ جَهَنَّمَ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا ۖ\n(It will be said (to them): \"Enter you the gates of Hell, to abide therein...\") means everyone who sees them and the situation they are in, will testify that they deserve the punishment. These words are not attributed to any specific person, but they are said as an indication that the entire universe will bear witness that they deserve what they are suffering, in accordance with the judgement of the Most Just, the All-Knowing. Allah says:\nقِيلَ ادْخُلُوا أَبْوَابَ جَهَنَّمَ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا ۖ\n(It will be said (to them): \"Enter you the gates of Hell, to abide therein...\") meaning, 'to stay there forever; you will never leave or depart.'\nفَبِئْسَ مَثْوَى الْمُتَكَبِّرِينَ\n(And (indeed) what an evil abode of the arrogant!) means, 'what an evil destiny and what an evil place to stay, because of your arrogance in this world and your refusal to follow the truth; this is what has led you to this, what an evil state and what an evil final destination!'","href":"/tafsir/39?verse=71","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:39:73","title":"Ibn Kathir · 39:73–74","text":"And those who had Taqwa will be led to Paradise in groups till when they reach it, and its gates will be opened and its keepers will say: \"Salam 'Alaykum (peace be upon you)! You have done well, so enter here to abide therein forever. (73)And they will say: \"All the praises and thanks be to Allah Who has fulfilled His promise to us and has made us inherit the land. We can dwell in Paradise where we will; how excellent a reward for the workers! (74)\nThe Believers will be taken to Paradise\nHere Allah tells us about the blessed believers, who will be taken to Paradise in groups, one group after another, starting with the best of them: those who are closest to Allah, then the most righteous, then the next best and the next best. Each group will be with others like them, Prophets with Prophets, the true believers with their peers, the martyrs with their counterparts, the scholars with their colleagues, every group composed of people of the same kind.\nحَتَّىٰ إِذَا جَاءُوهَا\n(till when they reach it,) means, when they arrive at the gates of Paradise, after passing over the Sirat, where they will be detained on a bridge between Paradise and Hell, and any injustices that existed between them in this world will be settled until they have all been purified from sin through this trial. Then permission will be granted for them to enter Paradise.\nIt was recorded in the Hadith about the Trumpet that when the believers reach the gates of Paradise, they will consult one another as to who should ask permission for them to enter. They will ask Adam, then Nuh, then Ibrahim, then Musa, then 'Isa, then Muhammad (may blessings and peace be upon them all). This is akin to what will happen in the arena of judgement, when they will ask for someone to intercede for them with Allah when He comes to pass judgement. This is to show the noble position of Muhammad ﷺ above the rest of mankind in all situations.\nIn Sahih Muslim, it is reported that Anas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nأَنَا أَوَّلُ شَفِيعٍ فِي الْجَنَّةِ\n(I will be the first intercessor in Paradise.) According to the wording of Muslim:\nوَأَنَا أَوَّلُ مَنْ يَقْرَعُ بَابَ الْجَنَّةِ\n(I will be the first one to knock at the gates of Paradise.) Imam Ahmad recorded that Anas bin Malik, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nآتِي بَابَ الْجَنَّةِ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ فَأَسْتَفْتِحُ فَيَقُولُ الْخَازِنُ: مَنْ أَنْتَ؟ فَأَقُولُ: مُحَمَّدٌ - قَالَ: - فَيَقُولُ: بِكَ أُمِرْتُ أَنْ لَا أَفْتَحَ لِأَحَدٍ قَبْلَكَ\n(I will come to the gate of Paradise on the Day of Resurrection and will ask for it to be opened. The gatekeeper will say, \"Who are you\" I will say \"Muhammad.\" He will say, \"I was told about you and that I was not to open the gate for anyone before you.\")\" It was also recorded by Muslim.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nأَوَّلُ زُمْرَةٍ تَلِجُ الْجَنَّـةَ، صُوَرُهُمْ عَلَىٰ صُورَةِ الْقَمَرِ لَيْلَةَ الْبَدْرِ، لَا يَبْصُقُونَ فِيهَا، وَلَا يَمْتَخِطُونَ فِيهَا، وَلَا يَتَغَوَّطُونَ فِيهَا، آنِيَتُهُمْ وَأَمْشَاطُهُمُ الذَّهَبُ وَالْفِضَّةُ، وَمَجَامِرُهُمُ الْأَلُوَّةُ وَرَشْحُهُمُ الْمِسْكُ، وَلِكُلِّ وَاحِدٍ مِنْهُمْ زَوْجَتَانِ، يُرَىٰ مُخُّ سَاقِهِمَا مِنْ وَرَاءِ اللَّحْمِ مِنَ الْحُسْنِ، لَا اخْتِلَافَ بَيْنَهُمْ وَلَا تَبَاغُضَ، قُلُوبُهُمْ عَلىٰ قَلْبٍ وَاحِدٍ، يُسَبِّحُونَ اللهَ تَعَالَىٰ بُكْرَةً وَعَشِيًّا\n(The first group to enter Paradise will enter looking like the moon on the night when it is full. They will not spit there, or blow their noses, or defecate. Their vessels and combs will be of gold and silver, their censers will be of aloeswood and their sweat will be musk. Each of them will have two wives, the marrow of whose shin bones will be visible from beneath the skin because of their beauty. There will be no disputes between them and there will be no hatred; their hearts will be as if one heart. They will glorify Allah morning and evening.)\" This was also recorded by Al-Bukhari and Muslim.\nAl-Hafiz Abu Ya'la recorded that Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nأَوَّلُ زُمْرَةٍ يَدْخُلُونَ الْجَنَّةَ عَلىٰ صُورَةِ الْقَمَرِ لَيْلَةَ الْبَدْرِ، وَالَّذِينَ يَلُونَهُمْ عَلىٰ ضَوْءِ أَشَدِّ كَوْكَبٍ دُرِّيٍّ فِي السَّمَاءِ إِضَاءَةً، لَا يَبُولُونَ، وَلَا يَتَغَوَّطُونَ، وَلَا يَتْفِلُونَ، وَلَا يَمْتَخِطُونَ، أَمْشَاطُهُمُ الذَّهَبُ، وَرَشْحُهُمُ الْمِسْكُ، وَمَجَامِرُهُمُ الْأَلُوَّةُ، وَأَزْوَاجُهُمُ الْحُورُ الْعِينُ، أَخْلَاقُهُمْ عَلىٰ خُلُقِ رَجُلٍ وَاحِدٍ، عَلىٰ صُورَةِ أَبِيهِمْ آدَمَ، سِتُّونَ ذِرَاعًا فِي السَّمَاءِ\n(The first group to enter Paradise will look like the moon on the night when it is full. They will be followed by a group which looks like the brightest star shining in the sky. They will not urinate or defecate or spit or blow their noses. Their combs will be of gold, their sweat will be musk and their censers will be of aloeswood. Their wives will be Al-Hur Al-'Iyn, and they will all look the same, as if they are one person in the image of their father Adam, sixty cubits tall.)\" They [Al-Bukhari and Muslim] also produced this from the Hadith of Jabir.\nIt was reported that Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nيَدْخُلُ الْجَنَّةَ مِنْ أُمَّتِي زُمْرَةٌ، هُمْ سَبْعُونَ أَلْفًا،تُضِيءُ وُجُوهُهُمْ إِضَاءَةَ الْقَمَرِ لَيْلَةَ الْبَدْرِ\n(A group of my Ummah, seventy thousand, will enter Paradise with their faces shining like the moon on the night when it is full.)\nUkkashah bin Mihsan stood up and said, 'O Messenger of Allah, pray to Allah to make me one of them.' He said,\nاللّٰهُمَّ اجْعَلْهُ مِنْهُمْ\n(O Allah, make him one of them.) Then one of the Ansar stood up and said, 'O Messenger of Allah, pray to Allah to make me one of them.' He said,\nسَبَقَكَ بِهَا عُكَّاشَةُ\n(Ukkashah has beaten you to it.)\" This was recorded by (Al-Bukhari and Muslim). This Hadith – about the seventy thousand who will enter Paradise without being brought to account – was also recorded by Al-Bukhari and Muslim from Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, Jabir bin 'Abdullah, 'Imran bin Husayn, Ibn Mas'ud, Rifa'ah bin 'Arabah Al-Juhani and Umm Qays bint Mihsan – may Allah be pleased with them all – and also from Abu Hazim from Sahl bin Sa'd, may Allah be pleased with them, who said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nلَيَدْخُلَنَّ الْجَنَّةَ مِنْ أُمَّتِي سَبْعُونَ أَلْفًا - أَوْ سَبْعُمِائَةِ أَلْفٍ - آخِذٌ بَعْضُهُمْ بِبَعْضٍ، حَتّٰى يَدْخُلَ أَوَّلُهُمْ وَآخِرُهُمُ الْجَنَّةَ، وُجُوهُهُمْ عَلىٰ صُورَةِ الْقَمَرِ لَيْلَةَ الْبَدْرِ\n(Seventy thousand or seven hundred thousand of my Ummah will surely enter Paradise, holding on to one another, such that the first and last of them will enter Paradise together, with their faces looking like the moon on the night when it is full.)\"\nحَتَّىٰ إِذَا جَاءُوهَا وَفُتِحَتْ أَبْوَابُهَا وَقَالَ لَهُمْ خَزَنَتُهَا سَلَامٌ عَلَيْكُمْ طِبْتُمْ فَادْخُلُوهَا خَالِدِينَ\n(till when they reach it, and its gates will be opened and its keepers will say: \"Salam 'Alaykum (peace be upon you)! You have done well, so enter here to abide therein forever.\")\nThis is a conditional sentence that is not complete. What it implies is that when they come to the gates of Paradise the gates will be opened for them as a sign of honor, and the angelic gatekeepers will meet them with glad tidings, greetings of peace and praise. Unlike the gatekeepers of Hell who will meet the disbelievers with rebuke and reprimand, the believers will be filled with happiness and joy, each according to his degree of luxury and delights. What happens after this is not mentioned; it is left for the imagination to think of its dearest wishes and be filled with hope. It is known from the Sahih Hadiths that Paradise has eight gates.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nمَنْ أَنْفَقَ زَوْجَيْنِ مِنْ مَالِهِ فِي سَبِيلِ اللهِ تَعَالَىٰ دُعِيَ مِنْ أَبْوَابِ الْجَنَّةِ، وَلِلْجَنَّةِ أَبْوَابٌ، فَمَنْ كَانَ مِنْ أَهْلِ الصَّلَاةِ دُعِيَ مِنْ بَابِ الصَّلَاةِ، وَمَنْ كَانَ مِنْ أَهْلِ الصَّدَقَةِ دُعِيَ مِنْ بَابِ الصَّدَقَةِ، وَمَنْ كَانَ مِنْ أَهْلِ الْجِهَادِ دُعِيَ مِنْ بَابِ الْجِهَادِ، وَمَنْ كَانَ مِنْ أَهْلِ الصِّيَامِ دُعِيَ مِنْ بَابِ الرَّيَّانِ\n(Whoever spends a pair of something from his wealth for the sake of Allah, will be called from the gates of Paradise. Paradise has (several) gates. Whoever is among the people of prayer, will be called from the gate of Prayer; whoever is among the people of charity, will be called from the gate of Charity; whoever is among the people of Jihad, will be called from the gate of Jihad; whoever is among the people of fasting, will be called from the Gate of Ar-Rayyan.)\" Abu Bakr said, 'O Messenger of Allah, it does not matter from which gate one is called, but will anyone be called from all of them?' He ﷺ said,\nنَعَمْ، وَأَرْجُو أَنْ تَكُونَ مِنْهُمْ\n(Yes, and I hope that you will be one of them.)\" Something similar was also recorded by Al-Bukhari and Muslim.\nIt was reported from Sahl bin Sa'd, may Allah be pleased with him, that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nإِنَّ فِي الْجَنَّةِ ثَمَانِيَةَ أَبْوَابٍ، بَابٌ مِنْهَا يُسَمَّى الرَّيَّانَ، لَا يَدْخُلُهُ إِلَّا الصَّائِمُونَ\n(In Paradise there are eight gates; one of them is called Ar-Rayyan, and no one will enter it except those who fast.)\" In Sahih Muslim, it is recorded that 'Umar bin Al-Khattab, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nمَا مِنْكُمْ مِنْ أَحَدٍ يَتَوَضَّأُ فَيُبْلِغُ - أَوْ فَيُسْبِغُ - الْوُضُوءَ، ثُمَّ يَقُولُ: أَشْهَدُ أَنْ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا اللهُ وَأَنَّ مُحَمَّدًا عَبْدُهُ وَرَسُولُهُ، إِلَّا فُتِحَتْ لَهُ أَبْوَابُ الْجَنَّةِ الثَّمَانِيَةُ، يَدْخُلُ مِنْ أَيِّهَا شَاءَ\n(There is no one among you who performs Wudu' and does it well, or – amply –, then he says: \"I testify that there is none worthy of worship except Allah and that Muhammad is His servant and Messenger, \" but the eight gates of Paradise will be opened for him and he will enter through whichever one he wishes.)\"\nThe Width of the Gates of Paradise\nWe ask Allah to make us among its people. In the Two Sahihs, it is reported from Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, in the lengthy Hadith about intercession (that the Prophet ﷺ said):\nفَيَقُولُ اللهُ تَعَالَىٰ: يَا مُحَمَّدُ، أَدْخِلْ مَنْ لَا حِسَابَ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ أُمَّتِكَ مِنَ الْبَابِ الْأَيْمَنِ، وَهُمْ شُرَكَاءُ النَّاسِ فِي الْأَبْوَابِ الأُخَرِ، وَالَّذِي نَفْسُ مُحَمَّدٍ بِيَدِهِ! إِنَّ مَا بَيْنَ الْمِصْرَاعَيْنِ مِنْ مَصَارِيعِ الْجَنَّةِ - مَا بَيْنَ عِضَادَتَيِ الْبَابِ - لَكَمَا بَيْنَ مَكَّةَ وَهَجَرٍ - أَوْ هَجَرٍ وَمَكَّةَ - وفي رواية مَكَّةَ وَبُصْرَىٰ\n(Allah will say: \"O Muhammad, admit those of your Ummah who are not to be brought to account, through the right-hand gate, and they will be counted among those who will enter from other gates as well.\" By the One in Whose Hand is the soul of Muhammad, the distance between the two gateposts of the gates of Paradise is like the distance between Makkah and Hajar – or Hajar and Makkah.)\"\nAccording to another report: (between Makkah and Busra.)\nIt was recorded in Sahih Muslim from 'Utbah bin Ghazwan that (the Prophet ﷺ) gave them a speech in which he told them that the distance between the two gateposts of Paradise was the distance of a forty-year journey, but there would come a day when they would be packed with crowds of people. Allah says,\nوَقَالَ لَهُمْ خَزَنَتُهَا سَلَامٌ عَلَيْكُمْ طِبْتُمْ\n(and its keepers will say: \"Salam 'Alaykum (peace be upon you)! You have done well,\") meaning, 'your deeds and words were good, and your efforts were good, and your reward is good.' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ issued commands during some of his military campaigns that it should be shouted out to the Muslims:\nإِنَّ الْجَنَّةَ لَا يَدْخُلُهَا إِلَّا نَفْسٌ مُسْلِمَةٌ - وفي رواية - مُؤْمِنَةٌ\n(No one enters Paradise except a Muslim soul) or, according to one report, (A believing soul.)\" Allah says,\nفَادْخُلُوهَا خَالِدِينَ\n(so enter here to abide therein forever.) means, to dwell therein, never seeking any change.\nوَقَالُوا الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي صَدَقَنَا وَعْدَهُ\n(And they will say: \"All the praises and thanks be to Allah Who has fulfilled His promise to us...\") means, when the believers see the great reward and splendors, blessing and grand generosity, they will say,\nالْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي صَدَقَنَا وَعْدَهُ\n(All the praises and thanks be to Allah Who has fulfilled His promise to us) meaning, 'the promise which He made to us through His Messengers who called us to this in the world.'\nرَبَّنَا وَآتِنَا مَا وَعَدْتَنَا عَلَىٰ رُسُلِكَ وَلَا تُخْزِنَا يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ ۗ إِنَّكَ لَا تُخْلِفُ الْمِيعَادَ\n(Our Lord! Grant us what You promised unto us through Your Messengers and disgrace us not on the Day of Resurrection, for You never break (Your) promise)(3:194),\nوَقَالُوا الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي هَدَانَا لِهَٰذَا وَمَا كُنَّا لِنَهْتَدِيَ لَوْلَا أَنْ هَدَانَا اللَّهُ ۖ لَقَدْ جَاءَتْ رُسُلُ رَبِّنَا بِالْحَقِّ ۖ\n(and they will say: \"All the praises and thanks be to Allah, Who has guided us to this, and never could we have found guidance, were it not that Allah had guided us! Indeed, the Messengers of our Lord came with the truth.\")(7:43), and\nوَقَالُوا الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي أَذْهَبَ عَنَّا الْحَزَنَ ۖ إِنَّ رَبَّنَا لَغَفُورٌ شَكُورٌ - الَّذِي أَحَلَّنَا دَارَ الْمُقَامَةِ مِنْ فَضْلِهِ لَا يَمَسُّنَا فِيهَا نَصَبٌ وَلَا يَمَسُّنَا فِيهَا لُغُوبٌ\n(And they will say: \"All the praises and thanks be to Allah Who has removed from us (all) grief. Verily, our Lord is indeed Oft-Forgiving, Most Ready to appreciate (good deeds). Who, out of His grace, has lodged us in a home that will last forever, where toil will touch us not nor weariness will touch us.\")(35:34-35)\nوَأَوْرَثَنَا الْأَرْضَ نَتَبَوَّأُ مِنَ الْجَنَّةِ حَيْثُ نَشَاءُ ۖ فَنِعْمَ أَجْرُ الْعَامِلِينَ\n(and has made us inherit (this) land. We can dwell in Paradise where we will; how excellent a reward for the (pious) workers!)\nAbu Al-Aliyah, Abu Salih, Qatadah, As-Suddi and Ibn Zayd said, \"This means the land of Paradise.\" This is like the Ayah:\nوَلَقَدْ كَتَبْنَا فِي الزَّبُورِ مِنْ بَعْدِ الذِّكْرِ أَنَّ الْأَرْضَ يَرِثُهَا عِبَادِيَ الصَّالِحُونَ\n(And indeed We have written in Az-Zabur after Adh-Dhikr that My righteous servants shall inherit the land.)(21:105) they will say:\nنَتَبَوَّأُ مِنَ الْجَنَّةِ حَيْثُ نَشَاءُ\n(We can dwell in Paradise where we will) meaning, 'wherever we want, we can settle; how excellent a reward for our efforts.'\nIn the Two Sahihs, it was reported in the story of the Mi'raj which was narrated by Anas bin Malik, may Allah be pleased with him, that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nأُدْخِلْتُ الْجَنَّةَ، فَإِذَا فِيهَا جَنَابِذُ اللُّؤْلُؤِ، وَإِذَا تُرَابُهَا الْمِسْكُ\n(I was admitted into Paradise where I saw that its domes were pearls and its soil was musk.)\"","href":"/tafsir/39?verse=73","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:39:75","title":"Ibn Kathir · 39:75","text":"And you will see the angels surrounding the Throne from all round, glorifying the praises of their Lord. And they will be judged with truth. And it will be said, \"All the praises and thanks be to Allah, the Lord of all that exits. (75)\nAllah tells us how He will pass judgement on the people of Paradise and Hell, and put each of them in the place fitting for him and for which he is suited; this is justice from Him and He is never unjust. Then He tells us of His angels who surround His majestic Throne, glorifying the praises of their Lord, extolling and magnifying Him, and declaring Him to be above any shortcomings or injustice whatsoever, for He has passed judgement in the fairest and most just manner. He says:\nوَقُضِيَ بَيْنَهُمْ\n(And they will be judged) meaning, all of creation.\nبِالْحَقِّ\n(with truth.) Then He says:\nوَقِيلَ الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(And it will be said, \"All the praises and thanks be to Allah, the Lord of all that exits.\") meaning, all of creation, whether animate or inanimate, will speak words of praise to Allah, the Lord of all that exists, for His wisdom and justice. These words are not attributed to any specific speaker, which indicates that the whole of creation will testify to His praise. Qatadah said, \"Allah began His creation with praise, as He said,\nالْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ\n(All praises and thanks be to Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth)(6:1). and He ended it with praise, as He says:\nوَقُضِيَ بَيْنَهُمْ بِالْحَقِّ وَقِيلَ الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(And they will be judged with truth. And it will be said, \"All the praises and thanks be to Allah, the Lord of all that exists.\").\"","href":"/tafsir/39?verse=75","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:40:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 40:1–3","text":"The Virtues of the Surahs that begin with Ha Mim\nIbn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"Everything has an essence and the essence of the Qur'an is the family of Ha Mim,\" or he said, \"the Ha Mims.\" Mis'ar bin Kidam said, \"They used to be called 'the brides'.\" All of this was recorded by the the Imam, great scholar, Abu 'Ubayd Al-Qasim bin Sallam, may Allah have mercy upon him, in his book Fada'il Al-Qur'an.\nHumayd bin Zanjuyah narrated that 'Abdullah, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The parable of the Qur'an is that of a man who sets out to find a place for his family to stay, and he comes to a place where there is evidence of rainfall. While he is walking about, admiring it, he suddenly comes upon beautiful gardens. He says, 'I liked the first traces of rainfall, but this is far better.' It was said to him, 'The first place is like the Qur'an, and these beautiful gardens are like the splendor of family of Ha Mim in relation to the rest of the Qur'an'.\" This was recorded by Al-Baghawi. Ibn Mas'ud, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"When I reach the family of Ha Mim, it is like reaching a beautiful garden, so I take my time.\"\nبِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nحم - تَنْزِيلُ الْكِتَابِ مِنَ اللَّهِ الْعَزِيزِ الْعَلِيمِ - غَافِرِ الذَّنْبِ وَقَابِلِ التَّوْبِ شَدِيدِ الْعِقَابِ ذِي الطَّوْلِ ۖ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ ۖ إِلَيْهِ الْمَصِيرُ\n(1. Ha Mim.)(2. The revelation of the Book is from Allah, the Almighty, the All-Knower.)(3. The Forgiver of sin, the Acceptor of repentance, the Severe in punishment, the Bestower. La ilaha illa Huwa, to Him is the final return.)\nWe have already discussed the individual letters at the beginning of Surat Al-Baqarah, and there is no need to repeat the discussion here.\nIn a Hadith recorded by Abu Dawud and At-Tirmidhi from one who heard it from the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, it says:\nإِنْ بُيِّتُّمُ اللَّيْلَةَ فَقُولُوا: حٰم لَا يُنْصَرُونَ\n(When you go to bed tonight, recite Ha Mim, La Yunsarun.)\" Its chain of narrators is Sahih.\nتَنْزِيلُ الْكِتَابِ مِنَ اللَّهِ الْعَزِيزِ الْعَلِيمِ\n(The revelation of the Book is from Allah, the Almighty, the All-Knower.) means, this book – the Qur'an – is from Allah, the Owner of might and knowledge, Who cannot be overtaken and from Whom nothing is hidden, not even an ant concealed beneath many layers.\nغَافِرِ الذَّنْبِ وَقَابِلِ التَّوْبِ\n(The Forgiver of sin, the Acceptor of repentance,) means, He forgives sins that have been committed in the past, and He accepts repentance for sins that may be committed in the future, from the one who repents and submits to Him.\nشَدِيدِ الْعِقَابِ\n(the Severe in punishment,) means, to the one who persists in transgression and prefers the life of this world, who stubbornly turns away from the commands of Allah and commits sin. This is like the Ayah:\nنَبِّئْ عِبَادِي أَنِّي أَنَا الْغَفُورُ الرَّحِيمُ - وَأَنَّ عَذَابِي هُوَ الْعَذَابُ الْأَلِيمُ\n(Declare unto My servants that truly I am the Oft-Forgiving, the Most-Merciful. And that My torment is indeed the most painful torment.)(15:49-50). These two attributes (mercy and punishment) are often mentioned together in the Qur'an, so that people will remain in a state of both hope and fear.\nذِي الطَّوْلِ\n(the Bestower.) Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"This means He is Generous and Rich (Independent of means).\" The meaning is that He is Most Generous to His servants, granting ongoing blessings for which they can never sufficiently thank Him.\nوَإِنْ تَعُدُّوا نِعْمَةَ اللَّهِ لَا تُحْصُوهَا ۗ\n(And if you would count the favors of Allah, never could you be able to count them...)(16:18).\nلَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ ۖ\n(La ilaha illa Huwa) means, there is none that is equal to Him in all His attributes; there is no God or Lord besides Him.\nإِلَيْهِ الْمَصِيرُ\n(to Him is the final return.) means, all things will come back to Him and He will reward or punish each person according to his deeds.\nوَهُوَ سَرِيعُ الْحِسَابِ\n(and He is Swift at reckoning)(13:41).","href":"/tafsir/40?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:40:4","title":"Ibn Kathir · 40:4–6","text":"None disputes in the Ayat of Allah but those who disbelieve. So let not their ability of going about here and there through the land (for their purposes) deceive you (4)The people of Nuh and the groups after them denied before these; and every nation plotted against their Messenger to seize him, and disputed by means of falsehood to refute therewith the truth. So I seized them, and how was My punishment (5)Thus has the Word of your Lord been justified against those who disbelieved, that they will be the dwellers of the Fire (6)\nOne of the Attributes of the Disbelievers is That they dispute the Ayat of Allah - and The Consequences of that\nAllah tells us that no one rejects or disputes His signs after clear proof has come,\nإِلَّا الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا\n(but those who disbelieve), i.e., those who reject the signs of Allah and His proof and evidence.\nفَلَا يَغْرُرْكَ تَقَلُّبُهُمْ فِي الْبِلَادِ\n(So let not their ability of going about here and there through the land deceive you!) means, their wealth and luxurious life. This is like the Ayah:\nلَا يَغُرَّنَّكَ تَقَلُّبُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا فِي الْبِلَادِ - مَتَاعٌ قَلِيلٌ ثُمَّ مَأْوَاهُمْ جَهَنَّمُ ۚ وَبِئْسَ الْمِهَادُ\n(Let not the free disposal (and affluence) of the disbelievers throughout the land deceive you. A brief enjoyment; then, their ultimate abode is Hell; and worst indeed is that place for rest.)(3:196-197)\nنُمَتِّعُهُمْ قَلِيلًا ثُمَّ نَضْطَرُّهُمْ إِلَىٰ عَذَابٍ غَلِيظٍ\n(We let them enjoy for a little while, then in the end We shall oblige them to (enter) a great torment.)(31:24).\nThen Allah consoles His Prophet Muhammad ﷺ for the rejection of his people. He tells him that he has an example in the Prophets who came before him, may the blessings and peace of Allah be upon them all, for their nations disbelieved them and opposed them, and only a few believed in them.\nكَذَّبَتْ قَبْلَهُمْ قَوْمُ نُوحٍ\n(The people of Nuh denied before these;) Nuh was the first Messenger whom Allah sent to denounce and forbid idol worship.\nوَالْأَحْزَابُ مِنْ بَعْدِهِمْ\n(and the groups after them) means, from every nation.\nوَهَمَّتْ كُلُّ أُمَّةٍ بِرَسُولِهِمْ لِيَأْخُذُوهُ ۖ\n(and every (disbelieving) nation plotted against their Messenger to seize him,) means, they wanted to kill him by any means possible, and some of them did kill their Messenger.\nوَجَادَلُوا بِالْبَاطِلِ لِيُدْحِضُوا بِهِ الْحَقَّ\n(and disputed by means of falsehood to refute therewith the truth.) means, they came up with specious arguments with which to dispute the truth which was so plain and clear.\nفَأَخَذْتُهُمْ\n(So I seized them) means, 'I destroyed them, because of the sins they committed.'\nفَكَيْفَ كَانَ عِقَابِ\n(and how was My punishment!) means, 'how have you heard that My punishment and vengeance was so severe and painful.' Qatadah said, \"It was terrible, by Allah.\"\nوَكَذَٰلِكَ حَقَّتْ كَلِمَتُ رَبِّكَ عَلَى الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا أَنَّهُمْ أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ\n(Thus has the Word of your Lord been justified against those who disbelieved, that they will be the dwellers of the Fire.) means, 'just as the Word of punishment was justified against those of the past nations who disbelieved, so too is it justified against these disbelievers who have rejected you and gone against you, O Muhammad, and it is even more justified against them, because if they have disbelieved in you, there is no certainty that they will believe in any other Prophet.' And Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/40?verse=4","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:40:7","title":"Ibn Kathir · 40:7–9","text":"Those (angels) who bear the Throne (of Allah) and those around it glorify the praises of their Lord, and believe in Him, and ask forgiveness for those who believe (saying): \"Our Lord! You comprehend all things in mercy and knowledge, so forgive those who repent and follow Your way, and save them from the torment of the blazing Fire (7)Our Lord! And make them enter the 'Adn (Eternal) Gardens which you have promised them – and to the righteous among their fathers, their wives, and their offspring! Verily, You are the Almighty, the All-Wise (8)And save them from the sins, and whomsoever You save from the sins that Day, him verily, You have taken into mercy.\" And that is the supreme success (9)\nThe Bearers of the Throne praise Allah and pray for forgiveness for the Believers\nAllah tells us that the angels who are close to Him, the bearers of the Throne, and the angels who are around Him – all glorify the praises of their Lord. They combine glorification (Tasbih) which implies that He is free of any shortcomings, with praise (Tahmid) which is an affirmation of praise.\nوَيُؤْمِنُونَ بِهِ\n(and believe in Him,) means, they humbly submit themselves before Him.\nوَيَسْتَغْفِرُونَ لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا\n(and ask forgiveness for those who believe) means, for those among the people of earth who believe in the Unseen. Allah commanded that His angels who are close to Him should pray for the believers in their absence, so it is a part of the angels' nature that they say Amin when a believer prays for his brother in his absence. In Sahih Muslim it says:\nإِذَا دَعَا الْمُسْلِمُ لِأَخِيهِ بِظَهْرِ الْغَيْبِ قَالَ الْمَلَكُ: آمِينَ وَلَكَ بِمِثْلِهِ\n(When a Muslim prays for his brother in his absence, the angel says, 'Amin, and may you have something similar to it'.)\" Shahr bin Hawshab said, \"The bearers of the Throne are eight; four of them say, 'Glory and praise be to You, O Allah, to You be praise for Your forebearance after Your knowledge. ' Four of them say, 'Glory and praise be to You, O Allah, to You be praise for Your forgiveness after Your power.' When they pray for forgiveness for those who believe, they say:\nرَبَّنَا وَسِعْتَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ رَحْمَةً وَعِلْمًا\n(Our Lord! You comprehend all things in mercy and knowledge,) meaning, 'Your mercy encompasses their sins and Your knowledge encompasses all their deeds, words and action.'\nفَاغْفِرْ لِلَّذِينَ تَابُوا وَاتَّبَعُوا سَبِيلَكَ\n(so forgive those who repent and follow Your way.)\" That is, 'forgive the sinners when they repent to You and turn to You and give up their former ways, following Your commands to do good and abstain from evil.'\nوَقِهِمْ عَذَابَ الْجَحِيمِ\n(and save them from the torment of the blazing Fire!) means, 'snatch them away from the punishment of Hell, which is a painful, agonizing punishment.'\nرَبَّنَا وَأَدْخِلْهُمْ جَنَّاتِ عَدْنٍ الَّتِي وَعَدْتَهُمْ وَمَنْ صَلَحَ مِنْ آبَائِهِمْ وَأَزْوَاجِهِمْ وَذُرِّيَّاتِهِمْ ۚ\n(Our Lord! And make them enter the 'Adn (Eternal) Gardens which you have promised them – and to the righteous among their fathers, their wives, and their offspring!) meaning, 'bring them together so that they may find delight in one another in neighboring dwellings. ' This is like the Ayah:\nوَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَاتَّبَعَتْهُمْ ذُرِّيَّتُهُمْ بِإِيمَانٍ أَلْحَقْنَا بِهِمْ ذُرِّيَّتَهُمْ وَمَا أَلَتْنَاهُمْ مِنْ عَمَلِهِمْ مِنْ شَيْءٍ ۚ\n(And those who believe and whose offspring follow them in faith, – to them shall We join their offspring, and We shall not decrease the reward of their deeds in anything)(52:21).\nThis means, 'that all of them will be made equal in status. In this way they may delight in one another's company; the one who is in the higher status will not lose anything. On the contrary We will raise the one whose deeds are of a lower status so that they will become equal, as a favor and a blessing from Us.'\nSa'id bin Jubayr said that when the believer enters Paradise, he will ask where his father, son and brother are. It will be said to him, 'they did not reach the same level of good deeds as you did'. He will say, 'but I did it for my sake and for theirs.' Then they will be brought to join him in that higher degree. Then Sa'id bin Jubayr recited this Ayah:\nرَبَّنَا وَأَدْخِلْهُمْ جَنَّاتِ عَدْنٍ الَّتِي وَعَدْتَهُمْ وَمَنْ صَلَحَ مِنْ آبَائِهِمْ وَأَزْوَاجِهِمْ وَذُرِّيَّاتِهِمْ ۚ إِنَّكَ أَنْتَ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ\n(Our Lord! And make them enter the 'Adn (Eternal) Gardens which you have promised them – and to the righteous among their fathers, their wives, and their offspring! Verily, You are the Almighty, the All-Wise.) Mutarrif bin 'Abdullah bin Ash-Shikhkhir said, \"The most sincere of the servants of Allah towards the believers are the angels.\" Then he recited this Ayah:\nرَبَّنَا وَأَدْخِلْهُمْ جَنَّاتِ عَدْنٍ الَّتِي وَعَدْتَهُمْ\n(Our Lord! And make them enter the 'Adn (Eternal) Paradises which you have promised them) He then said, \"The most treacherous of the servants of Allah towards the believers are the Shayatin.\"\nإِنَّكَ أَنْتَ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ\n(You are the Almighty, the All-Wise.) means, 'the One Whom none can resist or overwhelm; what You will happens and what You do not will does not happen; You are Wise in all that You say and do, in all that You legislate and decree.'\nوَقِهِمُ السَّيِّئَاتِ ۚ\n(And save them from the sins,) means, the actions and the consequences.\nوَمَنْ تَقِ السَّيِّئَاتِ يَوْمَئِذٍ\n(and whomsoever You save from the sins that Day,) means, the Day of Resurrection,\nفَقَدْ رَحِمْتَهُ\n(him verily, You have taken into mercy.) means, 'You have protected him and saved him from punishment.'\nوَذَٰلِكَ هُوَ الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ\n(And that is the supreme success.)","href":"/tafsir/40?verse=7","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:40:10","title":"Ibn Kathir · 40:10–14","text":"Those who disbelieve will be addressed: \"Indeed, Allah's aversion was greater towards you than your aversion toward yourselves, when you were called to the Faith but you used to refuse. (10)They will say: \"Our Lord! You have made us to die twice, and You have given us life twice! Now we confess our sins, then is there any way to get out? (11)(It will be said): \"This is because, when Allah Alone was invoked, you disbelieved; but when partners were joined to Him, you believed! So the judgement is only with Allah, the Most High, the Most Great! (12)It is He Who shows you His Ayat and sends down provision for you from the sky. And none remembers but those who turn in repentance (13)So, call you upon Allah making religion sincerely for Him, however much the disbelievers may hate (14)\nThe Regret of the Disbelievers after They enter Hell\nAllah tells us that the disbelievers will feel regret on the Day of Resurrection, when they enter Hell and sink in the agonizing depth of fire. When they actually experience the unbearable punishment of Allah, they will hate themselves with the utmost hatred, because of the sins they committed in the past, which were the cause of their entering the Fire. At that point the angels will tell them in a loud voice that Allah's hatred towards them in this world, when Faith was offered to them and they rejected it, is greater than their hatred towards themselves in this situation. Qatadah said, concerning the Ayah:\nلَمَقْتُ اللَّهِ أَكْبَرُ مِنْ مَقْتِكُمْ أَنْفُسَكُمْ إِذْ تُدْعَوْنَ إِلَى الْإِيمَانِ فَتَكْفُرُونَ\n(Indeed, Allah's aversion was greater towards you than your aversion toward yourselves, when you were called to the Faith but you used to refuse.)\n\"Allah's hatred for the people of misguidance – when Faith is presented to them in this world, and they turn away from it and refuse to accept it – is greater than their hatred for themselves when they see the punishment of Allah with their own eyes on the Day of Resurrection.\" This was also the view of Al-Hasan Al-Basri, Mujahid, As-Suddi, Dharr bin 'Ubaydullah Al-Hamdani, 'Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam and Ibn Jarir At-Tabari, may Allah have mercy on them all.\nقَالُوا رَبَّنَا أَمَتَّنَا اثْنَتَيْنِ وَأَحْيَيْتَنَا اثْنَتَيْنِ\n(They will say: \"Our Lord! You have made us to die twice, and You have given us life twice!...\") Ath-Thawri narrated from Abu Ishaq from Abu Al-Ahwas from Ibn Mas'ud, may Allah be pleased with him: \"This Ayah is like the Ayah:\nكَيْفَ تَكْفُرُونَ بِاللَّهِ وَكُنْتُمْ أَمْوَاتًا فَأَحْيَاكُمْ ۖ ثُمَّ يُمِيتُكُمْ ثُمَّ يُحْيِيكُمْ ثُمَّ إِلَيْهِ تُرْجَعُونَ\n(How can you disbelieve in Allah? Seeing that you were dead and He gave you life. Then He will give you death, then again will bring you to life and then unto Him you will return.)\"(2:28)\nThis was also the view of Ibn 'Abbas, Ad-Dahhak, Qatadah and Abu Malik. This is undoubtedly the correct view. What is meant by all of this is that when they are standing before Allah in the arena of Resurrection, the disbelievers will ask to go back, as Allah says:\nوَلَوْ تَرَىٰ إِذِ الْمُجْرِمُونَ نَاكِسُو رُءُوسِهِمْ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِمْ رَبَّنَا أَبْصَرْنَا وَسَمِعْنَا فَارْجِعْنَا نَعْمَلْ صَالِحًا إِنَّا مُوقِنُونَ\n(And if you only could see when the criminals shall hang their heads before their Lord (saying): \"Our Lord! We have now seen and heard, so send us back, that we will do righteous good deeds. Verily, we now believe with certainty.\")(32:12),\nHowever, they will get no response. Then when they see the Fire and they are held over it and they look at the punishments therein, they will ask even more fervently than before to go back, but they will get no response. Allah says:\nوَلَوْ تَرَىٰ إِذْ وُقِفُوا عَلَى النَّارِ فَقَالُوا يَا لَيْتَنَا نُرَدُّ وَلَا نُكَذِّبَ بِآيَاتِ رَبِّنَا وَنَكُونَ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ - بَلْ بَدَا لَهُمْ مَا كَانُوا يُخْفُونَ مِنْ قَبْلُ ۖ وَلَوْ رُدُّوا لَعَادُوا لِمَا نُهُوا عَنْهُ وَإِنَّهُمْ لَكَاذِبُونَ\n(If you could but see when they will be held over the (Hell) Fire! They will say: \"Would that we were but sent back (to the world)! Then we would not deny the Ayat of our Lord, and we would be of the believers!\" Nay, it has become manifest to them what they had been concealing before. But if they were returned, they would certainly revert to that which they were forbidden. And indeed they are liars.)(6:27-28).\nWhen they actually enter Hell and have a taste of its heat, hooked rods of iron and chains, their plea to go back will be at its most desperate and fervent:\nوَهُمْ يَصْطَرِخُونَ فِيهَا رَبَّنَا أَخْرِجْنَا نَعْمَلْ صَالِحًا غَيْرَ الَّذِي كُنَّا نَعْمَلُ ۚ أَوَلَمْ نُعَمِّرْكُمْ مَا يَتَذَكَّرُ فِيهِ مَنْ تَذَكَّرَ وَجَاءَكُمُ النَّذِيرُ ۖ فَذُوقُوا فَمَا لِلظَّالِمِينَ مِنْ نَصِيرٍ\n(Therein they will cry: \"Our Lord! Bring us out, we shall do righteous good deeds, not that we used do.\" (Allah will reply): \"Did We not give you lives long enough, so that whosoever would receive admonition could receive it? And the warner came to you. So taste you. For the wrongdoers there is no helper.\")(35:37)\nرَبَّنَا أَخْرِجْنَا مِنْهَا فَإِنْ عُدْنَا فَإِنَّا ظَالِمُونَ - قَالَ اخْسَئُوا فِيهَا وَلَا تُكَلِّمُونِ\n(Our Lord! Bring us out of this. If ever we return (to evil), then indeed we shall be wrongdoers.\" He (Allah) will say: \"Remain you in it with ignominy! And speak you not to Me!)(23:107-108).\nAccording to this Ayah, they will speak more eloquently, and they will introduce their plea with the words:\nرَبَّنَا أَمَتَّنَا اثْنَتَيْنِ وَأَحْيَيْتَنَا اثْنَتَيْنِ\n(Our Lord! You have made us to die twice, and You have given us life twice!) meaning, 'by Your almighty power, You have brought us to life after we were dead, then You caused us to die after we were alive; You are able to do whatever You will. We confess our sins and admit that we wronged ourselves in the world,'\nفَهَلْ إِلَىٰ خُرُوجٍ مِنْ سَبِيلٍ\n(then is there any way to get out?) means, 'will You answer our prayer to send us back to the world, for You are able to do that, so that we might do deeds different from those which we used to do? Then if we go back to our former ways, we will indeed be wrongdoers.' The response will be: 'There is no way for you to go back to the world.' Then the reason for that will be given: 'Your nature will not accept the truth and be governed by it, you would reject it and ignore it.' Allah says:\nذَٰلِكُمْ بِأَنَّهُ إِذَا دُعِيَ اللَّهُ وَحْدَهُ كَفَرْتُمْ ۖ وَإِنْ يُشْرَكْ بِهِ تُؤْمِنُوا ۚ\n((It will be said): \"This is because, when Allah Alone was invoked (in worship), you disbelieved; but when partners were joined to Him, you believed!\") meaning, 'if you were to go back, this is how you would be.' This is like the Ayah:\nوَلَوْ رُدُّوا لَعَادُوا لِمَا نُهُوا عَنْهُ وَإِنَّهُمْ لَكَاذِبُونَ\n(But if they were returned (to the world), they would certainly revert to that when they were forbidden. And indeed they are liars)(6:28).\nفَالْحُكْمُ لِلَّهِ الْعَلِيِّ الْكَبِيرِ\n(So the judgement is only with Allah, the Most High, the Most Great!) means, He is the Judge of His creation, the Just Who is never unjust. He guides whomsoever He wills and sends astray whomsoever He wills; He has mercy on whomsoever He wills and punishes whomsoever He wills; there is no God except Him.\nهُوَ الَّذِي يُرِيكُمْ آيَاتِهِ\n(It is He Who shows you His Ayat) means, He demonstrates His power to His servants through the mighty signs which they see in His creation, above and below, which indicate the perfection of its Creator and Originator.\nوَيُنَزِّلُ لَكُمْ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ رِزْقًا\n(and sends down provision for you from the sky.) this refers to rain, through which crops and fruits are brought forth, which with their different colors, tastes, fragrances and forms are a sign of the Creator. It is one kind of water, but by His great power He makes all these things different.\nوَمَا يَتَذَكَّرُ\n(And none remembers) means, no one learns a lesson or is reminded by these things, or takes them as a sign of the might of the Creator,\nإِلَّا مَنْ يُنِيبُ\n(but those who turn in repentance.) which means, those who have insight and turn to Allah, may He be blessed and exalted.\nThe Believers are commanded to worship Allah Alone no matter what Their Circumstances\nفَادْعُوا اللَّهَ مُخْلِصِينَ لَهُ الدِّينَ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْكَافِرُونَ\n(So, call you upon Allah making religion sincerely for Him, however much the disbelievers may hate.)\nThis means, worship Allah and call upon Him alone in all sincerity. Do not be like the idolators in conduct and beliefs. Imam Ahmad recorded that after ending every prayer, 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubayr used to say: \"There is no (true) God except Allah Alone with no partner or associate, His is the dominion and praise, for He is able to do all things; there is no strength and no power except with Allah; there is no (true) God except Allah and we worship none but Him; to Him belongs the blessings and the virtue and good praise; there is no (true) God except Allah, we worship Him in all sincerity even though the disbelievers may hate that.\" He said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to say Tahlil with this after every prayer.\" Something similar was also recorded by Muslim, Abu Dawud and An-Nasa'i.\nIt was reported in Sahih from Ibn Az-Zubayr, may Allah be pleased with him, that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to say the following after the prescribed (obligatory) prayers:\nلَا إِلٰهَ إِلَّا اللهُ وَحْدَهُ لَا شَرِيكَ لَهُ، لَهُ الْمُلْكُ وَلَهُ الْحَمْدُ، وَهُوَ عَلىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ، لَا حَوْلَ وَلَا قُوَّةَ إِلَّا بِاللهِ، لَا إِلٰهَ إِلَّا اللهُ، وَلَا نَعْبُدُ إِلَّا إِيَّاهُ، لَهُ النِّعْمَةُ وَلَهُ الْفَضْلُ وَلَهُ الثَّــنَاءُ الْحَسَنُ، لَا إِلٰهَ إِلَّا اللهُ مُخْلِصِينَ لَهُ الدِّينَ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْكَافِرُونَ\n(There is no (true) God except Allah Alone with no partner or associate, His is the dominion and praise, for He is able to do all things; there is no strength and no power except with Allah; there is no (true) God except Allah and we worship none but Him; His is the blessing and virtue and good praise; there is no (true) God except Allah, we worship Him in all sincerity even though the disbelievers hate that.)","href":"/tafsir/40?verse=10","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:40:15","title":"Ibn Kathir · 40:15–17","text":"(He is Allah) Owner of high ranks and degrees, the Owner of the Throne. He sends the revelation by His command to any of His servants He wills, that he may warn of the Day of Mutual Meeting (15)The Day when they will come out, nothing of them will be hidden from Allah. Whose is the kingdom this Day? It is Allah's, the One, the Irresistible (16)This Day shall every person be recompensed for what he earned. This Day no injustice. Truly, Allah is swift in reckoning (17)\nAllah sends the Revelation to warn His Servants of the Day of Mutual Meeting\nAllah tells us of His might and pride, and that His Mighty Throne is raised above all of His creation like a roof. This is like the Ayah:\nمِنَ اللَّهِ ذِي الْمَعَارِجِ - تَعْرُجُ الْمَلَائِكَةُ وَالرُّوحُ إِلَيْهِ فِي يَوْمٍ كَانَ مِقْدَارُهُ خَمْسِينَ أَلْفَ سَنَةٍ\n(From Allah, the Lord of the ways of ascent. The angels and the Ruh (Jibril) ascend to Him in a Day the measure whereof is fifty thousand years.)(70:3-4).\nIf Allah wills, we will discuss below which is the most correct view the distance between the Throne and the seventh earth according to a group of earlier and later scholars. More than one scholar said that the Throne is made of red rubies. The width between two corners of it is the distance of a fifty thousand year long journey and its height above the seventh earth is the distance of a fifty thousand years long journey.\nيُلْقِي الرُّوحَ مِنْ أَمْرِهِ عَلَىٰ مَنْ يَشَاءُ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ\n(He sends the revelation of His command to any of His servants He wills,) This is like the Ayat:\nيُنَزِّلُ الْمَلَائِكَةَ بِالرُّوحِ مِنْ أَمْرِهِ عَلَىٰ مَنْ يَشَاءُ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ أَنْ أَنْذِرُوا أَنَّهُ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا أَنَا فَاتَّقُونِ\n(He sends down the angels with the Ruh (revelation) of His command to whom of His servants He wills (saying): \"Warn mankind that none has the right to be worshipped but I, so have Taqwa of Me.\")(16:2), and\nوَإِنَّهُ لَتَنْزِيلُ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ - نَزَلَ بِهِ الرُّوحُ الْأَمِينُ - عَلَىٰ قَلْبِكَ لِتَكُونَ مِنَ الْمُنْذِرِينَ\n(And truly, this is a revelation from the Lord of all that exits, Which the trustworthy Ruh (Jibril) has brought down Upon your heart that you may be (one) of the warners.)(26:192-194) Allah says:\nلِيُنْذِرَ يَوْمَ التَّلَاقِ\n(that he may warn (men) of the Day of Mutual Meeting.) 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas said: \"The Day of Mutual Meeting is one of the names of the Day of Resurrection, of which Allah warns His servants.\" That is the Day when everyone will find out about his deeds, good and bad.\nيَوْمَ هُمْ بَارِزُونَ ۖ لَا يَخْفَىٰ عَلَى اللَّهِ مِنْهُمْ شَيْءٌ ۚ\n(The Day when they will come out, nothing of them will be hidden from Allah.) means, they will all appear in the open, with nothing to give them shelter or shade, or cover them. Allah says:\nيَوْمَ هُمْ بَارِزُونَ ۖ لَا يَخْفَىٰ عَلَى اللَّهِ مِنْهُمْ شَيْءٌ ۚ\n(The Day when they will come out, nothing of them will be hidden from Allah.) meaning, everything will be equally known to Him.\nلِمَنِ الْمُلْكُ الْيَوْمَ ۖ لِلَّهِ الْوَاحِدِ الْقَهَّارِ\n(Whose is the kingdom this Day? It is Allah's, the One, the Irresistible!) We have already mentioned the Hadith of Ibn 'Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, that Allah will roll up the heavens and the earth in His Hand and will say,\nأَنَا الْمَلِكُ، أَنَا الْجَبَّارُ، أَنَا الْمُتَكَبِّرُ، أَيْنَ مُلُوكُ الْأَرْضِ؟ أَيْنَ الْجَبَّارُونَ؟ أَيْنَ الْمُتَكَبِّرُونَ؟\n(\"I am the King, I am the Compeller, I am the Proud, where are the kings of the earth? Where are the tyrants? Where are the proud?\") In the Hadith about the Trumpet, it says that Allah will take the souls of all of His creatures, and there will be none left but Him Alone, with no partner or associate. Then He will say, \"Whose is the kingdom today?\" three times, and He will answer Himself by saying,\nلِلَّهِ الْوَاحِدِ الْقَهَّارِ\n(It is Allah's, the One, the Irresistible!) meaning, He is the Only One Who has subjugated all things.\nالْيَوْمَ تُجْزَىٰ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ بِمَا كَسَبَتْ ۚ لَا ظُلْمَ الْيَوْمَ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ سَرِيعُ الْحِسَابِ\n(This Day shall every person be recompensed for what he earned. This Day no injustice (shall be done to anybody).\nTruly, Allah is swift in reckoning.) Here Allah tells us of His justice when He judges between His creation; He does not do even a speck of dust's weight of injustice, whether it be for good or for evil. For every good deed He gives a tenfold reward and for every bad deed He gives recompense of one bad deed. Allah says:\nلَا ظُلْمَ الْيَوْمَ ۚ\n(This Day no injustice (shall be done to anybody).) It was reported in Sahih Muslim from Abu Dharr, may Allah be pleased with him, that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said that Allah said:\nيَا عِبَادِي إِنِّي حَرَّمْتُ الظُّلْمَ عَلىٰ نَفْسِي وَجَعَلْتُهُ بَيْنَكُمْ مُحَرَّمًا فَلَا تَظَالَمُوا - إلى أن قال - يَا عِبَادِي إِنَّمَا هِيَ أَعْمَالُكُمْ أُحْصِيهَا عَلَيْكُمْ ثُمَّ أُوَفِّيكُمْ إِيَّاهَا، فَمَنْ وَجَدَ خَيْرًا فَلْيَحْمَدِ اللهَ تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَىٰ، وَمَنْ وَجَدَ غَيْرَ ذَلِكَ فَلَا يَلُومَنَّ إِلَّا نَفْسَهُ\n(\"O My servants, I have forbidden injustice for Myself, and made it unlawful for you, so do not commit injustice to one another ...\") up to: (\"O My servants, these are your deeds, I record them for you then I will recompense you for them. Whoever finds something good, let him give praise to Allah, and whoever finds something other than that, let him blame no one but himself.\")\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ سَرِيعُ الْحِسَابِ\n(Truly, Allah is swift in reckoning.) means, He will bring all His creation to account as if He is bringing just one person to account. This is like the Ayah:\nمَا خَلْقُكُمْ وَلَا بَعْثُكُمْ إِلَّا كَنَفْسٍ وَاحِدَةٍ ۗ\n(The creation of you all and the resurrection of you all are only as a single person)(31: 28).\nوَمَا أَمْرُنَا إِلَّا وَاحِدَةٌ كَلَمْحٍ بِالْبَصَرِ\n(And Our commandment is but one as the twinkling of an eye.)(54:50)","href":"/tafsir/40?verse=15","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:40:18","title":"Ibn Kathir · 40:18–20","text":"And warn them of the Day that is drawing near, when the hearts will be at the throats Kazimin. There will be no friend, nor an intercessor for the wrongdoers, who could be given heed to (18)Allah knows the fraud of the eyes, and all that the breasts conceal (19)And Allah judges with truth, while those to whom they invoke besides Him, cannot judge anything. Certainly, Allah! He is the All-Hearer, the All-Seer (20)\nWarning of the Day of Resurrection and Allah's judgement on that Day\nThe Day that is drawing near' is one of the names of the Day of Judgement. It is so called because it is close, as Allah says:\nأَزِفَتِ الْآزِفَةُ - لَيْسَ لَهَا مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ كَاشِفَةٌ\n(The Day of Resurrection draws near. None besides Allah can avert it)(53:57-58)\nاقْتَرَبَتِ السَّاعَةُ وَانْشَقَّ الْقَمَرُ\n(The Hour has drawn near, and the moon has been cleft asunder)(54:1)\nاقْتَرَبَ لِلنَّاسِ حِسَابُهُمْ\n(Draws near for mankind their reckoning)(21:1),\nأَتَىٰ أَمْرُ اللَّهِ فَلَا تَسْتَعْجِلُوهُ ۚ\n(The Event (the Hour) ordained by Allah will come to pass, so seek not to hasten it)(16:1),\nفَلَمَّا رَأَوْهُ زُلْفَةً سِيئَتْ وُجُوهُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا\n(But when they will see it approaching, the faces of those who disbelieve will change and turn black with sadness and in grief)(67:27), and\nإِذِ الْقُلُوبُ لَدَى الْحَنَاجِرِ كَاظِمِينَ\n(when the hearts will be at the throats Kazimin.) Qatadah said, \"When the hearts reach the throats because of fear, and they will neither come out nor go back to their places.\" This was also the view of 'Ikrimah, As-Suddi and others.\nكَاظِمِينَ\n(Kazimin) means silent, for no one will speak without His permission:\nيَوْمَ يَقُومُ الرُّوحُ وَالْمَلَائِكَةُ صَفًّا ۖ لَا يَتَكَلَّمُونَ إِلَّا مَنْ أَذِنَ لَهُ الرَّحْمَٰنُ وَقَالَ صَوَابًا\n(The Day that Ar-Ruh (Jibril) and the angels will stand forth in rows, they will not speak except him whom the Most Gracious allows, and he will speak what is right.)(78:38). Ibn Jurayj said:\nكَاظِمِينَ\n(Kazimin) \"It means weeping.\"\nمَا لِلظَّالِمِينَ مِنْ حَمِيمٍ وَلَا شَفِيعٍ يُطَاعُ\n(There will be no friend, nor an intercessor for the wrongdoers, who could be given heed to.) means, those who wronged themselves by associating others in worship with Allah, will have no relative to help them and no intercessor who can plead on their behalf; all means of good will be cut off from them.\nيَعْلَمُ خَائِنَةَ الْأَعْيُنِ وَمَا تُخْفِي الصُّدُورُ\n(Allah knows the fraud of the eyes, and all that the breasts conceal.) Allah tells us about His complete knowledge which encompasses all things, great and small, major and minor, so that people will take note that He knows about them and they will have the proper sense of shyness before Allah. They will pay attention to the fact that He can see them, for He knows the fraud of the eyes, even if the eyes look innocent, and He knows what the hearts conceal. Ad-Dahhak said:\nخَائِنَةَ الْأَعْيُنِ\n(the fraud of the eyes,) \"A wink and a man saying that he has seen something when he has not seen it, or saying that he has not seen it when he did see it.\" Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"Allah knows when the eye looks at something, whether it wants to commit an act of betrayal or not.\" This was also the view of Mujahid and Qatadah. Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, commented on the Ayah:\nوَمَا تُخْفِي الصُّدُورُ\n(and all that the breasts conceal.)\" He knows, if you were able to, whether you would commit Zina with a woman or not.\" As-Suddi said:\nوَمَا تُخْفِي الصُّدُورُ\n(and all that the breasts conceal.) meaning, of insinuating whispers.\nوَاللَّهُ يَقْضِي بِالْحَقِّ ۖ\n(And Allah judges with truth,) means, He judges with justice. Al-A'mash narrated from Sa'id bin Jubayr from Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, that this Ayah means: \"He is able to reward those who do good with good and those who do evil with evil.\"\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ هُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْبَصِيرُ\n(Certainly, Allah! He is the All-Hearer, the All-Seer.) This is how it was interpreted by Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him. This is like the Ayah:\nلِيَجْزِيَ الَّذِينَ أَسَاءُوا بِمَا عَمِلُوا وَيَجْزِيَ الَّذِينَ أَحْسَنُوا بِالْحُسْنَى\n(that He may requite those who do evil with that which they have done, and reward those who do good, with what is best)(53:31).\nوَالَّذِينَ يَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِهِ\n(while those to whom they invoke besides Him,) means, the idols and false gods,\nلَا يَقْضُونَ بِشَيْءٍ\n(cannot judge anything.) means, they do not possess anything and they cannot judge anything.\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ هُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْبَصِيرُ\n(Certainly, Allah! He is the All-Hearer, the All-Seer.) means, He hears all that His creatures say and He knows all about them, so He guides whomsoever He wills and sends astray whomsoever He wills. And He judges with perfect justice in all of that.","href":"/tafsir/40?verse=18","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:40:21","title":"Ibn Kathir · 40:21–22","text":"Have they not traveled in the land and seen what was the end of those who were before them? They were superior to them in strength, and in the traces in the land. But Allah seized them with punishment for their sins. And none had they to protect them from Allah (21)That was because there came to them their Messengers with clear evidences but they disbelieved (in them). So Allah seized them. Verily, He is All-Strong, Severe in punishment (22)\nThe Severe Punishment for the Disbelievers\nأَوَلَمْ يَسِيرُوا\n(Have they not traveled), 'these people who disbelieve in your Message, O Muhammad,'\nفِي الْأَرْضِ فَيَنْظُرُوا كَيْفَ كَانَ عَاقِبَةُ الَّذِينَ كَانُوا مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ\n(in the land and seen what was the end of those who were before them?) means, the nations of the past who disbelieved in their Prophets (peace be upon them), for which the punishment came upon them even though they were stronger than Quraysh.\nوَآثَارًا فِي الْأَرْضِ\n(and in the traces in the land.) means, they left behind traces in the earth, such as structures, buildings and dwellings which these people [i.e., the Quraysh] cannot match. This is like the Ayat:\nوَلَقَدْ مَكَّنَّاهُمْ فِيمَا إِنْ مَكَّنَّاكُمْ فِيهِ\n(And indeed We had firmly established them with that wherewith We have not established you!)(46:26)\nوَأَثَارُوا الْأَرْضَ وَعَمَرُوهَا أَكْثَرَ مِمَّا عَمَرُوهَا\n(and they tilled the earth and populated it in greater numbers than these have done)(30:9). Yet despite this great strength, Allah punished them for their sin, which was their disbelief in their Messengers.\nوَمَا كَانَ لَهُمْ مِنَ اللَّهِ مِنْ وَاقٍ\n(And none had they to protect them from Allah.) means, they had no one who could protect them or ward off the punishment from them.\nThen Allah mentions the reason why He punished them, and the sins which they committed. Allah says:\nذَٰلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ كَانَتْ تَأْتِيهِمْ رُسُلُهُمْ بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ\n(That was because there came to them their Messengers with clear evidences) meaning with clear proof and definitive evidence.\nفَكَفَرُوا\n(but they disbelieved.) means, despite all these signs, they disbelieved and rejected the Message.\nفَأَخَذَهُمُ اللَّهُ\n(So Allah seized them.) means, He destroyed them utterly, and a similar fate awaits the disbelievers.\nإِنَّهُ قَوِيٌّ شَدِيدُ الْعِقَابِ\n(Verily, He is All-Strong, Severe in punishment) means, He is possessed of great strength and might.\nشَدِيدُ الْعِقَابِ\n(Severe in punishment,) means, His punishment is severe and agonizing; we seek refuge with Allah, may He be blessed and exalted, from that.","href":"/tafsir/40?verse=21","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:40:23","title":"Ibn Kathir · 40:23–27","text":"And indeed We sent Musa with Our Ayat, and a manifest authority (23)To Fir'awn, Haman and Qarun, but they called (him): \"A sorcerer, a liar! (24)Then, when he brought them the Truth from Us, they said: \"Kill with him the sons of those who believe and let their women live;\" but the plots of disbelievers are nothing but in vain (25)Fir'awn said: \"Leave me to kill Musa, and let him call his Lord! I fear that he may change your religion, or that he may cause mischief to appear in the land! (26)Musa said: \"Verily, I seek refuge in my Lord and your Lord from every arrogant who believes not in the Day of Reckoning! (27)\nThe Story of Musa and Fir'awn\nAllah consoles His Prophet Muhammad ﷺ for the disbelief of his people and gives him the glad tidings of good consequences and victory in this world and the Hereafter, as happened to Musa bin 'Imran, peace be upon him, whom Allah sent with clear proof and definitive evidence. Allah says:\nبِآيَاتِنَا وَسُلْطَانٍ مُبِينٍ\n(with Our Ayat, and a manifest authority). Authority means proof and evidence.\nإِلَىٰ فِرْعَوْنَ\n(to Fir'awn), who was the king of the Copts of Egypt.\nوَهَامَانَ\n(Haman) who was his adviser.\nوَقَارُونَ\n(and Qarun) who was the richest trader among the people of his time.\nفَقَالُوا سَاحِرٌ كَذَّابٌ\n(but they called (him): \"A sorcerer, liar!\") means, they rejected him and thought he was a sorcerer, a madman and an illusionist who was telling lies about having been sent by Allah. This is like the Ayah:\nكَذَٰلِكَ مَا أَتَى الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ مِنْ رَسُولٍ إِلَّا قَالُوا سَاحِرٌ أَوْ مَجْنُونٌ - أَتَوَاصَوْا بِهِ ۚ بَلْ هُمْ قَوْمٌ طَاغُونَ\n(Likewise, no Messenger came to those before them but they said: \"A sorcerer or a madman!\" Have they transmitted this saying to these? Nay, they are themselves a people transgressing beyond bounds!)(51:52-53)\nفَلَمَّا جَاءَهُمْ بِالْحَقِّ مِنْ عِنْدِنَا\n(Then, when he brought them the Truth from Us,) means, with definite evidence that Allah had sent him to them,\nقَالُوا اقْتُلُوا أَبْنَاءَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مَعَهُ وَاسْتَحْيُوا نِسَاءَهُمْ\n(they said: \"Kill with him the sons of those who believe and let their women live;) This was a second command from Fir'awn to kill the males of the Children of Israel. The first command had been as a precaution against the emergence of a man like Musa, or an act intended to humiliate this people or reduce their numbers or both. The second command was for the second reason, to humiliate the people so that they would regard Musa as a bad omen. they said:\nأُوذِينَا مِنْ قَبْلِ أَنْ تَأْتِيَنَا وَمِنْ بَعْدِ مَا جِئْتَنَا ۚ قَالَ عَسَىٰ رَبُّكُمْ أَنْ يُهْلِكَ عَدُوَّكُمْ وَيَسْتَخْلِفَكُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ فَيَنْظُرَ كَيْفَ تَعْمَلُونَ\n(\"We (Children of Israel) had suffered troubles before you came to us, and since you have come to us.\" He said: \"It may be that your Lord will destroy your enemy and make you successors on the earth, so that He may see how you act?\")(7:129). Qatadah said, this was one command after another.\nوَمَا كَيْدُ الْكَافِرِينَ إِلَّا فِي ضَلَالٍ\n(but the plots of disbelievers are nothing but in vain!) means, their schemes and intentions – to reduce the numbers of the Children of Israel lest they prevail over them – were doomed to failure.\nوَقَالَ فِرْعَوْنُ ذَرُونِي أَقْتُلْ مُوسَىٰ وَلْيَدْعُ رَبَّهُ ۖ\n(Fir'awn said: \"Leave me to kill Musa, and let him call his Lord!...\") Fir'awn, may Allah curse him, resolved to kill Musa, peace be upon him, i.e., he said to his people, 'let me kill him for you.'\nوَلْيَدْعُ رَبَّهُ\n(and let him call his Lord!) means, 'I do not care.' This is the utmost in offensive stubbornness.\nإِنِّي أَخَافُ أَنْ يُبَدِّلَ دِينَكُمْ أَوْ أَنْ يُظْهِرَ فِي الْأَرْضِ الْفَسَادَ\n(I fear that he may change your religion, or that he may cause mischief to appear in the land!) means, Musa; Fir'awn was afraid that Musa would lead his people astray and change their ways and customs. As if Fir'awn would be concerned about what Musa might do to his people! The majority understood this as meaning, 'he will change your religion and cause mischief to appear in the land.'\nوَقَالَ مُوسَىٰ إِنِّي عُذْتُ بِرَبِّي وَرَبِّكُمْ مِنْ كُلِّ مُتَكَبِّرٍ لَا يُؤْمِنُ بِيَوْمِ الْحِسَابِ\n(Musa said: \"Verily, I seek refuge in my Lord and your Lord from every arrogant who believes not in the Day of Reckoning!\") means, when he heard that Fir'awn had said,\nذَرُونِي أَقْتُلْ مُوسَىٰ\n(Leave me to kill Musa,) Musa, peace be upon him, said, \"I seek refuge and protection with Allah from his evil and the evil of those like him.\" So he said:\nإِنِّي عُذْتُ بِرَبِّي وَرَبِّكُمْ\n(Verily, I seek refuge in my Lord and your Lord) – those who were being addressed here –\nمِنْ كُلِّ مُتَكَبِّرٍ\n(from every arrogant) means, from every evildoer,\nلَا يُؤْمِنُ بِيَوْمِ الْحِسَابِ\n(who believes not in the Day of Reckoning!) It was reported in the Hadith narrated from Abu Musa, may Allah be pleased with him, that when the Messenger of Allah ﷺ was afraid of some people, he would say:\nاللّٰهُمَّ إِنَّا نَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ شُرُورِهِمْ، وَنَدْرَأُ بِكَ فِي نُحُورِهِمْ\n(O Allah, we seek refuge in You from their evil and we seek Your help in repulsing them.)","href":"/tafsir/40?verse=23","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:40:28","title":"Ibn Kathir · 40:28–29","text":"And a believing man of Fir'awn's family, who hid his Faith said: \"Would you kill a man because he says: 'My Lord is Allah,' and he has come to you with clear signs from your Lord? And if he is a liar, upon him will be (the sin of) his lie; but if he is telling the truth, then some of that (calamity) wherewith he threatens you will befall on you.\" Verily, Allah guides not one who is a transgressor, a liar (28)\"O my people! Yours is the kingdom today, you being dominant in the land. But who will save us from the torment of Allah, should it befall us?\" Fir'awn said: \"I show you only that which I see, and I guide you only to the path of right policy! (29)\nMusa was supported by a believing Man from Fir'awn's Family\nThe well-known view is that this believing man was a Coptic (Egyptian) from the family of Fir'awn. As-Suddi said, he was a cousin [son of the paternal uncle] of Fir'awn. And it was said that he was the one who was saved along with Musa, peace be upon him. Ibn Jurayj reported that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said \"No one from among the family of Fir'awn believed apart from this man, the wife of Fir'awn, and the one who said,\nيَا مُوسَىٰ إِنَّ الْمَلَأَ يَأْتَمِرُونَ بِكَ لِيَقْتُلُوكَ\n(\"O Musa! Verily, the chiefs are taking counsel together about you, to kill you.\")\" (28:20) This was narrated by Ibn Abi Hatim. This man concealed his Faith from his people, the Egyptians, and did not reveal it except on this day when Fir'awn said,\nذَرُونِي أَقْتُلْ مُوسَىٰ\n(Leave me to kill Musa,) The man was seized with anger for the sake of Allah, and the best of Jihad is to speak a just word before an unjust ruler, as is stated in the Hadith. There is no greater example of this than the words that this man said to Fir'awn:\nأَتَقْتُلُونَ رَجُلًا أَنْ يَقُولَ رَبِّيَ اللَّهُ\n(Would you kill a man because he says: 'My Lord is Allah,) Al-Bukhari narrated a similar story in his Sahih from 'Urwah bin Az-Zubayr, may Allah be pleased with him, who said: \"I said to 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As, may Allah be pleased with him: 'Tell me, what was the worst thing the idolators did to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ?' He said, 'While the Messenger of Allah ﷺ was praying in the courtyard of the Ka'bah, 'Uqbah bin Abi Mu'it came and grabbed the shoulder of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and started twisting his garment so that it strangled him. Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, came and grabbed ['Uqbah's] shoulder and pushed him away from the Prophet ﷺ, then he said,\nأَتَقْتُلُونَ رَجُلًا أَنْ يَقُولَ رَبِّيَ اللَّهُ وَقَدْ جَاءَكُمْ بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ مِنْ رَبِّكُمْ\n(Would you kill a man because he says: 'My Lord is Allah,' and he has come to you with clear signs from your Lord?).'\" This was recorded by Al-Bukhari. Allah's saying;\nوَقَدْ جَاءَكُمْ بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ مِنْ رَبِّكُمْ\n(and he has come to you with clear signs from your Lord?) means, \"how can you kill a man just because he says, 'My Lord is Allah,' and he brings proof that what he is saying is the truth?\" Then, for the sake of argument, he went along with them and said,\nوَإِنْ يَكُ كَاذِبًا فَعَلَيْهِ كَذِبُهُ ۖ وَإِنْ يَكُ صَادِقًا يُصِبْكُمْ بَعْضُ الَّذِي يَعِدُكُمْ ۖ\n(And if he is a liar, upon him will be (the sin of) his lie; but if he is telling the truth, then some of that (calamity) wherewith he threatens you will befall on you.) meaning, 'if you do not believe in what he is saying, then it is only common sense to leave him alone and not harm him; if he is lying, then Allah will punish him for his lies in this world and in the Hereafter. If he is telling the truth and you harm him, then some of what he is warning about will happen to you too, because he is threatening you with punishment in this world and in the Hereafter if you go against him. It is possible that he is telling the truth in your case, so you should leave him and his people alone, and not harm them.' Allah tells us that Musa asked Fir'awn and his people to leave them in peace, as Allah says:\nوَلَقَدْ فَتَنَّا قَبْلَهُمْ قَوْمَ فِرْعَوْنَ وَجَاءَهُمْ رَسُولٌ كَرِيمٌ - أَنْ أَدُّوا إِلَيَّ عِبَادَ اللَّهِ ۖ إِنِّي لَكُمْ رَسُولٌ أَمِينٌ - وَأَنْ لَا تَعْلُوا عَلَى اللَّهِ ۖ إِنِّي آتِيكُمْ بِسُلْطَانٍ مُبِينٍ - وَإِنِّي عُذْتُ بِرَبِّي وَرَبِّكُمْ أَنْ تَرْجُمُونِ - وَإِنْ لَمْ تُؤْمِنُوا لِي فَاعْتَزِلُونِ\n(And indeed We tried before them Fir'awn's people, when there came to them a noble Messenger, saying: \"Deliver to me the servants of Allah. Verily, I am to you a Messenger worthy of all trust. And exalt not yourselves against Allah. Truly, I have come to you with a manifest authority. And truly, I seek refuge with my Lord and your Lord, lest you should stone me. But if you believe me not, then keep away from me and leave me alone.\")(44:17-21). Similarly, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ told the Quraysh to leave him alone and let him call the servants of Allah to Allah; he asked them not to harm him, and to uphold the ties of kinship that existed between him and them, by not harming him. Allah says:\nقُلْ لَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا إِلَّا الْمَوَدَّةَ فِي الْقُرْبَىٰ ۗ\n(Say: \"No reward do I ask of you for this except to be kind to me for my kinship with you.\")(42:23), meaning, 'do not harm me, because of the ties of kinship that exist between me and you; so do not harm me, and let me address my call to the people.' This was the basis of the truce agreed upon on the day of Al-Hudaybiyah, which was a manifest victory.\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَهْدِي مَنْ هُوَ مُسْرِفٌ كَذَّابٌ\n(Verily, Allah guides not one who is a transgressor, a liar!) means, 'if the one who claims to have been sent by Allah is a liar, as you say, this would be obvious to everyone from his words and deeds, for they would be inconsistent and self-contradictory. But we can see that this man is upright and what he says is consistent. If he was a sinner and a liar, Allah would not have guided him and made his words and actions rational and consistent as you see them.' Then this believer warned his people that they would lose the blessings Allah bestowed upon them and that the vengeance of Allah would befall them:\nيَا قَوْمِ لَكُمُ الْمُلْكُ الْيَوْمَ ظَاهِرِينَ فِي الْأَرْضِ\n(O my people! Yours is the kingdom today, you being dominant in the land.) means, 'Allah has blessed you with this kingdom, dominance in the land, power and authority, so take care of this blessing by giving thanks to Allah and believing in his Messenger, and beware of the punishment of Allah if you reject His Messenger.'\nفَمَنْ يَنْصُرُنَا مِنْ بَأْسِ اللَّهِ إِنْ جَاءَنَا\n(But who will save us from the torment of Allah, should it befall us?) means, 'these soldiers and troops will not avail you anything and will not ward off the punishment of Allah, if He decides to punish us.' Fir'awn said to his people, in response to the advice of this righteous man who was more deserving of kingship than Fir'awn:\nمَا أُرِيكُمْ إِلَّا مَا أَرَىٰ\n(I show you only that which I see,) meaning, 'I only tell you and advise you to do that which I think is good for myself, too.' But Fir'awn lied, because he knew that Musa was telling the truth concerning the Message which he brought.\nقَالَ لَقَدْ عَلِمْتَ مَا أَنْزَلَ هَٰؤُلَاءِ إِلَّا رَبُّ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ بَصَائِرَ\n([Musa] said: \"Verily, you know that these signs have been sent down by none but the Lord of the heavens and the earth.\")(17:102)\nوَجَحَدُوا بِهَا وَاسْتَيْقَنَتْهَا أَنْفُسُهُمْ ظُلْمًا وَعُلُوًّا ۚ\n(And they belied them (those Ayat) wrongfully and arrogantly, though they were themselves convinced thereof)(27:14)\nمَا أُرِيكُمْ إِلَّا مَا أَرَىٰ\n(I show you only that which I see,) – Fir'awn uttered a lie and a fabrication; he betrayed Allah and His Messenger, and cheated his people by not advising them sincerely.\nوَمَا أَهْدِيكُمْ إِلَّا سَبِيلَ الرَّشَادِ\n(and I guide you only to the path of right policy!) means, 'and I am only calling you to the path of truth, sincerity and guidance.' This was also a lie, but his people obeyed him and followed him. Allah says:\nفَاتَّبَعُوا أَمْرَ فِرْعَوْنَ ۖ وَمَا أَمْرُ فِرْعَوْنَ بِرَشِيدٍ\n(they followed the command of Fir'awn, and the command of Fir'awn was no right guide)(11:97).\nوَأَضَلَّ فِرْعَوْنُ قَوْمَهُ وَمَا هَدَىٰ\n(And Fir'awn led his people astray, and he did not guide them.)(20:79) According to a Hadith:\nمَا مِنْ إِمَامٍ يَمُوتُ يَوْمَ يَمُوتُ وَهُوَ غَاشٌّ لِرَعِيَّتِهِ، إِلَّا لَمْ يَرَحْ رَائِحَةَ الْجَنَّةِ، وَإِنَّ رِيحَهَا لَيُوجَدُ مِنْ مَسِيرَةِ خَمْسِمِائَةِ عَامٍ\n(There is no leader who dies having cheated his people, but he will never smell the fragrance of Paradise, and its fragrance can be detected from a distance of a five-hundred year journey.)\" And Allah is the Guide to the straight path.","href":"/tafsir/40?verse=28","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:40:30","title":"Ibn Kathir · 40:30–35","text":"And he who believed said: \"O my people! Verily, I fear for you an end like that day (of disaster) of the groups (of old)! (30)\"Like the end of the people of Nuh, and 'Ad, and Thamud and those who came after them. And Allah wills no injustice for (His) servants. (31)\"And, O my people! Verily, I fear for you the Day when there will be mutual calling. (32)A Day when you will turn your backs and flee having no protector from Allah. And whomsoever Allah sends astray, for him there is no guide (33)And indeed Yusuf did come to you, in times gone by, with clear signs, but you ceased not to doubt in that which he did bring to you, till when he died, you said: \"No Messenger will Allah send after him.\" Thus Allah leaves astray him who is a transgressor and a skeptic (34)Those who dispute about the Ayat of Allah, without any authority that has come to them, it is greatly hateful and disgusting to Allah and to those who believe. Thus does Allah seal up the heart of every arrogant, tyrant (35)\nHere Allah tells us that this righteous man, the believer from among the family of Fir'awn, warned his people of the punishment of Allah in this world and the Hereafter, saying,\nيَا قَوْمِ إِنِّي أَخَافُ عَلَيْكُمْ مِثْلَ يَوْمِ الْأَحْزَابِ\n(O my people! Verily, I fear for you an end like that day (of disaster) of the groups (of old)!) meaning, those of the earlier nations who disbelieved the Messengers of Allah, such as the people of Nuh, 'Ad, Thamud and the disbelieving nations who came after them, how the punishment of Allah came upon them and they had no one to protect them or ward off that punishment.\nوَمَا اللَّهُ يُرِيدُ ظُلْمًا لِلْعِبَادِ\n(And Allah wills no injustice for (His) servants.) means, Allah destroyed them for their sins and for their disbelief in and rejection of His Messengers; this was His command and His decree concerning them that was fulfilled. Then he said:\nوَيَا قَوْمِ إِنِّي أَخَافُ عَلَيْكُمْ يَوْمَ التَّنَادِ\n(And, O my people! Verily, I fear for you the Day when there will be mutual calling.) meaning, the Day of Resurrection.\nيَوْمَ تُوَلُّونَ مُدْبِرِينَ\n(A Day when you will turn your backs and flee) means, running away.\nكَلَّا لَا وَزَرَ - إِلَىٰ رَبِّكَ يَوْمَئِذٍ الْمُسْتَقَرُّ\n(No! There is no refuge! Unto your Lord will be the place of rest that Day.)(75:11-12) Allah says:\nمَا لَكُمْ مِنَ اللَّهِ مِنْ عَاصِمٍ\n(having no protector from Allah.) meaning, 'you will have no one to protect you from the punishment and torment of Allah.'\nوَمَنْ يُضْلِلِ اللَّهُ فَمَا لَهُ مِنْ هَادٍ\n(And whomsoever Allah sends astray, for him there is no guide.) means, whomever Allah sends astray will have no other guide except Him. Allah's saying:\nوَلَقَدْ جَاءَكُمْ يُوسُفُ مِنْ قَبْلُ بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ\n(And indeed Yusuf came to you, in times gone by, with clear signs,) refers to the people of Egypt. Allah sent a Messenger to them before the time of Musa, peace be upon him, in the person of Yusuf, peace be upon him, who attained a high position in the government of the people of Egypt. He was a Messenger who called his people to Allah with justice, but they did not obey him in matters of worshipping Allah, they only obeyed him in worldly matters that pertained to his position in the government. Allah says:\nفَمَا زِلْتُمْ فِي شَكٍّ مِمَّا جَاءَكُمْ بِهِ ۖ حَتَّىٰ إِذَا هَلَكَ قُلْتُمْ لَنْ يَبْعَثَ اللَّهُ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ رَسُولًا ۚ\n(but you ceased not to doubt in that which he brought to you, till when he died, you said: \"No Messenger will Allah send after him.\") means, 'you despaired, and said by way of wishful thinking,'\nلَنْ يَبْعَثَ اللَّهُ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ رَسُولًا\n(No Messenger will Allah send after him.) This was because of their disbelief and rejection (of the Messengers).\nكَذَٰلِكَ يُضِلُّ اللَّهُ مَنْ هُوَ مُسْرِفٌ مُرْتَابٌ\n(Thus Allah leaves astray him who is a transgressor and a skeptic.) means, this is the state of the one whom Allah sends astray because of his sinful actions and the doubts in his heart.\nالَّذِينَ يُجَادِلُونَ فِي آيَاتِ اللَّهِ بِغَيْرِ سُلْطَانٍ أَتَاهُمْ ۖ\n(Those who dispute about the Ayat of Allah, without any authority that has come to them,) means, those who attempt to refute truth with falsehood and who dispute the proof without evidence or proof from Allah, Allah will hate them with the utmost loathing. Allah says:\nكَبُرَ مَقْتًا عِنْدَ اللَّهِ وَعِنْدَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا ۚ\n(it is greatly hateful and disgusting to Allah and to those who believe.) meaning, the believers too will despise those who are like this, and whoever is like this, Allah will put a seal on his heart so that after that he will not acknowledge anything good or denounce anything evil. Allah says:\nكَذَٰلِكَ يَطْبَعُ اللَّهُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ قَلْبِ مُتَكَبِّرٍ\n(Thus does Allah seal up the heart of every arrogant.) meaning, so that they cannot follow the truth.\nجَبَّارٍ\n(tyrant.)","href":"/tafsir/40?verse=30","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:40:36","title":"Ibn Kathir · 40:36–37","text":"## How Fir`awn mocked the Lord of Musa\n\nAllah tells us of the arrogant and hostile defiance of Fir`awn and his rejection of Musa, when he commanded his minister Haman to build him a tower, i.e., a tall, high, strong fortress. He built it of bricks made from baked clay, as Allah says:\n\nفَأَوْقِدْ لِى يَهَـمَـنُ عَلَى الطِّينِ فَاجْعَل لِّى صَرْحاً\n\n(So kindle for me (a fire), O Haman, to bake (bricks out of) clay, and set up for me a lofty tower) (28:38).\n\nلَّعَـلِّى أَبْلُغُ الاٌّسْبَـبَ - أَسْبَـبَ السَّمَـوَتِ\n\n(that I may arrive at the ways -- the ways of the heavens,) Sa`id bin Jubayr and Abu Salih said, \"The gates of the heavens.\" Or it was said, the ways of the heavens.\n\nفَأَطَّلِعَ إِلَى إِلَـهِ مُوسَى وَإِنِّى لاّظُنُّهُ كَـذِباً\n\n(and I may look upon the God of Musa, but verily, I think him to be a liar.) Because of his disbelief and defiance, he did not believe that Allah had sent Musa to him. Allah says:\n\nوَكَـذَلِكَ زُيِّنَ لِفِرْعَوْنَ سُوءُ عَمَلِهِ وَصُدَّ عَنِ السَّبِيلِ\n\n(Thus it was made fair seeming, in Fir`awn's eyes, the evil of his deeds, and he was hindered from the path;) means, this act of his building the tower, by means of which he wanted to deceive his people and make them think that he could prove that Musa was lying. Allah says:\n\nوَمَا كَـيْدُ فِرْعَوْنَ إِلاَّ فِى تَبَابٍ\n\n(and the plot of Fir`awn led to nothing but loss and destruction.) Ibn `Abbas and Mujahid said, \"Meaning nothing but ruin.\"","href":"/tafsir/40?verse=36","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:40:38","title":"Ibn Kathir · 40:38–40","text":"And the man who believed said: \"O my people! Follow me, I will guide you to the way of right conduct. (38)\"O my people! Truly, this life of the world is nothing but an enjoyment, and verily, the Hereafter that is the home that will remain forever. (39)\"Whoever does an evil deed, will not be requited except the like thereof; and whosoever does a righteous deed, whether male or female and is a true believer, such will enter Paradise, where they will be provided therein without limit. (40)\nMore of what the Believer from Fir'awn's Family said\nThis believer said to his people who persisted in their rebellion and transgression, and preferred the life of this world:\nيَا قَوْمِ اتَّبِعُونِ أَهْدِكُمْ سَبِيلَ الرَّشَادِ\n(O my people! Follow me, I will guide you to the way of right conduct.) This is in contrast to the false claim of Fir'awn:\nوَمَا أَهْدِيكُمْ إِلَّا سَبِيلَ الرَّشَادِ\n(and I guide you only to the path of right policy.) Then he sought to make them shun this world which they preferred to the Hereafter, and which had prevented them from believing in the Messenger of Allah, Musa, peace be upon him. He said:\nيَا قَوْمِ إِنَّمَا هَٰذِهِ الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا مَتَاعٌ\n(O my people! Truly, this life of the world is nothing but an enjoyment,) meaning, it is insignificant and fleeting, and soon it will diminish and pass away.\nوَإِنَّ الْآخِرَةَ هِيَ دَارُ الْقَرَارِ\n(and verily, the Hereafter that is the home that will remain forever.) means, the abode which will never end and from which there will be no departure, which will be either Paradise or Hell. Allah says:\nمَنْ عَمِلَ سَيِّئَةً فَلَا يُجْزَىٰ إِلَّا مِثْلَهَا ۖ\n(Whosoever does an evil deed, will not be requited except the like thereof;) means, one like it.\nوَمَنْ عَمِلَ صَالِحًا مِنْ ذَكَرٍ أَوْ أُنْثَىٰ وَهُوَ مُؤْمِنٌ فَأُولَٰئِكَ يَدْخُلُونَ الْجَنَّةَ يُرْزَقُونَ فِيهَا بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ\n(and whosoever does a righteous deed, whether male or female and is a true believer, such will enter Paradise, where they will be provided therein without limit.) means, the reward cannot be enumerated, but Allah will give an immense reward without end. And Allah is the Guide to the straight path.","href":"/tafsir/40?verse=38","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:40:41","title":"Ibn Kathir · 40:41–46","text":"\"And O my people! How is it that I call you to salvation while you call me to the Fire! (41)\"You invite me to disbelieve in Allah, and to join partners in worship with Him of which I have no knowledge; and I invite you to the Almighty, the Oft-Forgiving! (42)\"'La Jarama', you call me to one that does not have a claim in this world or in the Hereafter. And our return will be to Allah, and the transgressors, they shall be the dwellers of the Fire! (43)\"And you will remember what I am telling you, and my affair I leave it to Allah. Verily, Allah is the All-Seer of (His) servants. (44)So, Allah saved him from the evils that they plotted (against him), while an evil torment encompassed Fir'awn's people (45)The Fire, they are exposed to it, morning and afternoon. And on the Day when the Hour will be established (it will be said to the angels): \"Admit Fir'awn's people into the severest torment! (46)\nThe Conclusion of the Believer's Words, and the ultimate Destiny of both Parties\nThat believer said: 'Why do I call you to salvation, which is the worship of Allah alone with no partner or associate, and belief in His Messenger, whom He has sent,'\nوَتَدْعُونَنِي إِلَى النَّارِ - تَدْعُونَنِي لِأَكْفُرَ بِاللَّهِ وَأُشْرِكَ بِهِ مَا لَيْسَ لِي بِهِ عِلْمٌ\n(while you call me to the Fire! You invite me to disbelieve in Allah, and to join partners in worship with Him of which I have no knowledge;) means, on the basis of ignorance, with no proof or evidence.\nوَأَنَا أَدْعُوكُمْ إِلَى الْعَزِيزِ الْغَفَّارِ\n(and I invite you to the Almighty, the Oft-Forgiving!) means, with all His might and pride, He still forgives the sin of the one who repents to Him.\nلَا جَرَمَ أَنَّمَا تَدْعُونَنِي إِلَيْهِ\n('Lā Jarama', you call me to one) They say it means, \"Truly.\" As-Suddi and Ibn Jarir said that the meaning of His saying:\nلَا جَرَمَ\n('La Jarama') means \"Truly.\" Ad-Dahhak said:\nلَا جَرَمَ\n('La Jarama') means, \"No lie.\" 'Ali bin Abi Talhah and Ibn 'Abbas said:\nلَا جَرَمَ\n('La Jarama') means, \"Indeed, the one that you call me to of idols and false gods\nلَيْسَ لَهُ دَعْوَةٌ فِي الدُّنْيَا وَلَا فِي الْآخِرَةِ\n(that does not have a claim in this world or in the Hereafter).\" Mujahid said, \"The idols that do not have anything.\" Qatadah said, \"This means that idols possess no power either to benefit or to harm.\" As-Suddi said, \"They do not respond to those who call upon them, either in this world or in the Hereafter.\" This is like the Ayah:\nوَمَنْ أَضَلُّ مِمَّنْ يَدْعُو مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ مَنْ لَا يَسْتَجِيبُ لَهُ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ وَهُمْ عَنْ دُعَائِهِمْ غَافِلُونَ - وَإِذَا حُشِرَ النَّاسُ كَانُوا لَهُمْ أَعْدَاءً وَكَانُوا بِعِبَادَتِهِمْ كَافِرِينَ\n(And who is more astray than one who calls on besides Allah, such as will not answer him till the Day of Resurrection, and who are unaware of their calls to them? And when the people are gathered, they will become their enemies and deny their worship.)(46:5-6)\nإِنْ تَدْعُوهُمْ لَا يَسْمَعُوا دُعَاءَكُمْ وَلَوْ سَمِعُوا مَا اسْتَجَابُوا لَكُمْ ۖ\n(If you invoke them, they hear not your call; and if they were to hear, they could not grant it to you)(35:14).\nوَأَنَّ مَرَدَّنَا إِلَى اللَّهِ\n(And our return will be to Allah,) means, in the Hereafter, where He will reward or punish each person according to his deeds. He says:\nوَأَنَّ الْمُسْرِفِينَ هُمْ أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ\n(and the transgressors, they shall be the dwellers of the Fire!) meaning, they will dwell therein forever, because of their great sin, which is associating others in worship with Allah.\nفَسَتَذْكُرُونَ مَا أَقُولُ لَكُمْ ۚ\n(And you will remember what I am telling you,) means, 'you will come to know the truth of what I enjoined upon 'you and forbade you to do, the advice I gave you and what I explained to you. You will come to know, and you will feel regret at the time when regret will be of no avail.'\nوَأُفَوِّضُ أَمْرِي إِلَى اللَّهِ ۚ\n(and my affair I leave it to Allah.) means, 'I put my trust in Allah and seek His help, and I renounce you utterly.'\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ بَصِيرٌ بِالْعِبَادِ\n(Verily, Allah is the All-Seer of (His) servants.) means, He knows all about them, may He be exalted and sanctified, and He guides those who deserve to be guided and sends astray those who deserve to be sent astray; His is the perfect proof, utmost wisdom and mighty power.\nفَوَقَاهُ اللَّهُ سَيِّئَاتِ مَا مَكَرُوا ۖ\n(So Allah saved him from the evils that they plotted,) means, in this world and in the Hereafter; in this world, Allah saved him along with Musa, peace be upon him, and in the Hereafter (He will admit him) to Paradise.\nProof of the Torment of the Grave\nوَحَاقَ بِآلِ فِرْعَوْنَ سُوءُ الْعَذَابِ\n(while an evil torment encompassed Fir'awn's people.) this refers to drowning in the sea, then being transferred from there to Hell, for their souls are exposed to the Fire morning and evening until the Hour begins. When the Day of Resurrection comes, their souls and bodies will be reunited in Hell. Allah says:\nوَيَوْمَ تَقُومُ السَّاعَةُ أَدْخِلُوا آلَ فِرْعَوْنَ أَشَدَّ الْعَذَابِ\n(And on the Day when the Hour will be established (it will be said to the angels): \"Admit Fir'awn's people to the severest torment!\") meaning, more intense pain and greater agony. This Ayah contains one of the major proofs used by the Ahlus-Sunnah to prove that there will be torment in the grave during the period of Al-Barzakh; it is the phrase:\nالنَّارُ يُعْرَضُونَ عَلَيْهَا غُدُوًّا وَعَشِيًّا ۖ\n(The Fire, they are exposed to it, morning and afternoon). But the question arises: this Ayah was undoubtedly revealed in Makkah, but they use it as evidence to prove that there will be torment in the grave during the period of Al-Barzakh.\nImam Ahmad recorded from 'A'ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, that a Jewish woman used to serve her, and whenever 'A'ishah did her a favor, the Jewish woman would say, \"May Allah save you from the torment of the grave. \" 'A'ishah said, \"Then the Messenger of Allah ﷺ came in, and I said, 'O Messenger of Allah, will there be any torment in the grave before the Day of Resurrection?' He ﷺ said,\nلَا، مَنْ زَعَمَ ذَلِكَ؟\n(No, who said that?) I said, 'This Jewish woman, whenever I do her a favor, she says: May Allah save you from the torment of the grave.'\" The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nكَذَبَتْ يَهُودُ وَهُمْ عَلَى اللهِ أَكْذَبُ، لَا عَذَابَ دُونَ يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ\n(The Jews are lying, and they tell more lies about Allah. There is no torment except on the Day of Resurrection.) Then as much time passed as Allah willed should pass, then one day he came out at midday, wrapped in his robe with his eyes reddening, calling at the top of his voice:\nالْقَبْرُ كَقِطَعِ اللَّيْلِ الْمُظْلِمِ، أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ لَوْ تَعْلَمُونَ مَا أَعْلَمُ لَبَكَيْتُمْ كَثِيرًا وَضَحِكْتُمْ قَلِيلًا، أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ، اسْتَعِـــــــــيذُوا بِاللهِ مِنْ عَذَابِ الْقَبْرِ، فَإِنَّ عَذَابَ الْقَبْرِ حَقٌّ\n(The grave is like patches of dark night! O people, if you knew what I know, you would weep much and laugh little. O people, seek refuge with Allah from the torment of the grave, for the torment of the grave is real.)\"\nThis chain of narration is Sahih according to the conditions of Al-Bukhari and Muslim, although they did not record it. It was said, 'how can this report be reconciled with the fact that the Ayah was revealed in Makkah and the Ayah indicates that there will be torment during the period of Al-Barzakh?' The answer is that the Ayah refers to the souls (of Fir'awn and his people) being exposed to the Fire morning and evening; it does not say that the pain will affect their bodies in the grave. So it may be that this has to do specifically with their souls. With regard to there being any effect on their bodies in Al-Barzakh, and their feeling pain as a result, this is indicated in the Sunnah, in some Hadiths which we will mention below.\nIt was said that this Ayah refers to the punishment of the disbelievers in Al-Barzakh, and that it does not by itself imply that the believer will be punished in the grave for his sins. This is indicated by the Hadith recorded by Imam Ahmad from 'A'ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, according to which the Messenger of Allah ﷺ entered upon 'A'ishah when a Jewish woman was with her, and she (the Jewish woman) was saying, \"I was told that you will be tried in the grave.\" The Messenger of Allah was worried and said:\nإِنَّمَا يُفْتَنُ يَهُودُ\n(Only the Jews will be tested.) 'A'ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, said, \"Several nights passed, then the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nأَلَا إِنَّكُمْ تُفْتَنُونَ فِي الْقُبُورِ\n(Verily you will be tested in the graves.)\" 'A'ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, said, \"After that, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to seek refuge with Allah from the torment of the grave.\" This was also recorded by Muslim.\nIt could be said that this Ayah indicates that the souls will be punished in Al-Barzakh, but this does not necessarily imply that the bodies in their graves will be affected by that. When Allah revealed something about the torment of the grave to His Prophet ﷺ, he sought refuge with Allah from that. And Allah knows best. The Hadiths which speak of the torment of the grave are very many. Qatadah said, concerning the Ayah,\nغُدُوًّا وَعَشِيًّا\n(morning and afternoon.): \"(This means) every morning and every evening, for as long as this world remains, it will be said to them by way of rebuke and humiliation, O people of Fir'awn, this is your position.\" Ibn Zayd said, \"They are there today, being exposed to it morning and evening, until the Hour begins.\nوَيَوْمَ تَقُومُ السَّاعَةُ أَدْخِلُوا آلَ فِرْعَوْنَ أَشَدَّ الْعَذَابِ\n(And on the Day when the Hour will be established (it will be said to the angels): \"Cause Fir'awn's people to enter the severest torment!\")\nThe people of Fir'awn are like foolish camels, stumbling into rocks and trees without thinking.\" Imam Ahmad recorded that Ibn 'Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nإِنَّ أَحَدَكُمْ إِذَا مَاتَ عُرِضَ عَلَيْهِ مَقْعَدُهُ بِالْغَدَاةِ وَالْعَشِيِّ، إِنْ كَانَ مِنْ أَهْلِ الْجَنَّةِ فَمِنْ أَهْلِ الْجَنَّةِ، وَإِنْ كَانَ مِنْ أَهْلِ النَّارِ فَمِنْ أَهْلِ النَّارِ، فَيُقَالُ: هٰذَا مَقْعَدُكَ حَتّٰى يَبْعَثَكَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ إِلَيْهِ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ\n(When one of you dies, he is shown his place [in Paradise or Hell] morning and evening; if he is one of the people of Paradise, then he is one of the people of Paradise, and if he is one of the people of Hell, then he is one of the people of Hell. It will be said to him, this is your place until Allah resurrects you to go to it on the Day of Resurrection.)\" It was also reported in the Two Sahihs.","href":"/tafsir/40?verse=41","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:40:47","title":"Ibn Kathir · 40:47–50","text":"And, when they will dispute in the Fire, the weak will say to those who were arrogant: \"Verily, we followed you, can you then take from us some portion of the Fire? (47)Those who were arrogant will say: \"We are all (together) in this (Fire)! Verily, Allah has judged between (His) servants! (48)And those in the Fire will say to the keepers (angels) of Hell: \"Call upon your Lord to lighten for us the torment for a day! (49)They will say: \"Did there not come to you, your Messengers with (clear) evidences\" They will say: \"Yes.\" They will reply: \"Then call (as you like)! And the invocation of the disbelievers is nothing but in vain! (50)\nThe Dispute of the People of Hell\nAllah tells us how the people of Hell will dispute and argue with one another, and Fir'awn and his people will be among them. The weak, who were the followers, will say to those who were arrogant, who were the leaders and masters:\nإِنَّا كُنَّا لَكُمْ تَبَعًا\n(Verily, we followed you,) meaning, 'we obeyed you and heeded your call to disbelief and misguidance in the world, '\nفَهَلْ أَنْتُمْ مُغْنُونَ عَنَّا نَصِيبًا مِنَ النَّارِ\n(can you then take from us some portion of the Fire?) means, 'can you carry a part of our burden for us?'\nقَالَ الَّذِينَ اسْتَكْبَرُوا إِنَّا كُلٌّ فِيهَا\n(Those who were arrogant will say: \"We are all (together) in this (Fire)!...\") meaning, 'we will not bear any part of your burden for you; our own punishment is enough for us to bear.'\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ قَدْ حَكَمَ بَيْنَ الْعِبَادِ\n(Verily, Allah has judged (His) servants!) means, 'He has shared out the punishment among us according to what each of us deserves'. This is like the Ayah:\nقَالَ لِكُلٍّ ضِعْفٌ وَلَٰكِنْ لَا تَعْلَمُونَ\n(He will say: \"For each one there is double (torment), but you know not.\")(7:38)\nوَقَالَ الَّذِينَ فِي النَّارِ لِخَزَنَةِ جَهَنَّمَ ادْعُوا رَبَّكُمْ يُخَفِّفْ عَنَّا يَوْمًا مِنَ الْعَذَابِ\n(And those in the Fire will say to the keepers (angels) of Hell: \"Call upon your Lord to lighten for us the torment for a day!\") They know that Allah will not answer them and will not listen to their prayer, because He said,\nاخْسَئُوا فِيهَا وَلَا تُكَلِّمُونِ\n(Remain you in it with ignominy! And speak you not to Me!)(23:108), so they will ask the keepers of Hell, who are like jailers watching over the people of Hell, to pray to Allah to lessen the Fire for them if only for one day. But the keepers of Hell will refuse, saying to them,\nأَوَلَمْ تَكُ تَأْتِيكُمْ رُسُلُكُمْ بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ\n(Did there not come to you, your Messengers with (clear) evidences?) meaning, was not proof established in the world on the lips of the Messengers?\nقَالُوا بَلَىٰ ۚ قَالُوا فَادْعُوا ۗ\n(They will say: \"Yes.\" They will reply: \"Then call (as you like)!...\") means, you are on your own. We will not pray for you or listen to you; we do not want you to be saved and we have nothing to do with you. Moreover, we tell you that it is all the same whether you offer supplication or not, because Allah will not respond and He will not lighten the torment for you.' They will say:\nوَمَا دُعَاءُ الْكَافِرِينَ إِلَّا فِي ضَلَالٍ\n(And the invocation of the disbelievers is nothing but in vain!) meaning, it will not be accepted or responded to.","href":"/tafsir/40?verse=47","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:40:51","title":"Ibn Kathir · 40:51–56","text":"## The Victory of the Messengers and the Believers\n\nإِنَّا لَنَنصُرُ رُسُلَنَا وَالَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ فِى الْحَيَوةِ الدُّنْيَا\n(Verily, We will indeed make victorious Our Messengers and those who believe in this world's life). As-Suddi, \"Allah never sends a Messenger to a people and they kill him or some of the believers who call them to the truth, then that generation passes away, but He then sends them someone who will support their call and will seek vengeance for their blood from those who did that to them in this world. So the Prophets and believers may be killed in this world, but their call will prevail in this world.\" Allah granted victory to His Prophet Muhammad ﷺ and his Companions over those who had opposed him, disbelieved in him and shown hostility towards him. He caused His Word and His religion to prevail over all other religions, commanded him to emigrate from his people to Al-Madinah, where He gave him supporters and helpers. Then He caused him to prevail over the idolators on the day of Badr, when He granted him victory over them and he humiliated them, killing their leaders and taking their elite prisoner, driving them before him in chains. Then he did them the favor of accepting ransom from them. Shortly after that, Allah enabled him to conquer Makkah, and he rejoiced in his return to his homeland, the sacred and holy land of Al-Haram. Through him, Allah saved it from its disbelief and Shirk. Then Allah enabled him to conquer the Yemen, and the entire Arabian Peninsula submitted to him, and the people entered the religion of Allah in crowds. Then Allah took him (in death), because of his high status and honor, and He established his Companions as his Khalifahs. They conveyed the religion of Allah from him, called mankind to Allah, they conquered many regions, countries and cities, and opened people's hearts, until the call of Muhammad ﷺ spread throughout the world, east and west. This religion will continue to prevail until the Hour begins. Allah says:\nإِنَّا لَنَنصُرُ رُسُلَنَا وَالَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ فِى الْحَيَوةِ الدُّنْيَا وَيَوْمَ يَقُومُ الاٌّشْهَـدُ\n(Verily, We will indeed make victorious Our Messengers and those who believe in this world's life and on the Day when the witnesses will stand forth) meaning, on the Day of Resurrection the victory will be greater and more complete. Mujahid said, \"The witnesses are the angels.\"\nيَوْمَ لاَ يَنفَعُ الظَّـلِمِينَ مَعْذِرَتُهُمْ\n(The Day when their excuses will be of no profit to wrongdoers.) is referring to the same as;\nوَيَوْمَ يَقُومُ الاٌّشْهَـدُ\n(...the Day when the witnesses will stand forth.) Others read it with that meaning;\nوَيَوْمَ يَقُومُ الاٌّشْهَـدُيَوْمَ لاَ يَنفَعُ الظَّـلِمِينَ\n(And the Day the witnesses will stand forth, is a Day when there will be no profit to wrongdoers.) and the wrongdoers are the idolators.\nمَعْذِرَتُهُمْ\n(their excuses) means, no excuse or ransom will be accepted from them.\nوَلَهُمُ الْلَّعْنَةُ\n(Theirs will be the curse,) means, they will be cast out far away from the mercy of Allah.\nوَلَهُمْ سُوءُ الدَّارِ\n(and theirs will be the evil abode.) means, the Hell-fire, as As-Suddi said, a terrible abode and dwellingplace.\n\n## Indication that the Messenger and the Believers will prevail just as Musa and the Children of Israel prevailed\n\nوَلَقَدْ ءَاتَيْنَا مُوسَى الْهُدَى\n(And, indeed We gave Musa the guidance.) means, the guidance and light with which Allah sent him.\nوَأَوْرَثْنَا بَنِى إِسْرَءِيلَ الْكِتَـبَ\n(and We caused the Children of Israel to inherit the Scripture.) means, `We caused them to prevail in the end and they inherited the land and accumulated wealth of Fir`awn, because of their patience in obeying Allah and following His Messenger Musa.' The Scripture which they inherited, the Tawrah, was\nهُدًى وَذِكْرَى لاٌّوْلِى الاٌّلْبَـبِ\n(A guide and a reminder for men of understanding.) i.e. those of a sound and upright nature.\nفَاصْبِرْ\n(So be patient) means, `O Muhammad,'\nإِنَّ وَعْدَ اللَّهِ حَقٌّ\n(Verily, the promise of Allah is true,) means, `We have promised that your word will prevail and that the ultimate victory will be for you and those who follow you, and Allah does not break His promises. What We have told you is true and there is no doubt in it whatsoever.'\nوَاسْتَغْفِـرْ لِذَنبِكَ\n(and ask forgiveness for your fault,) This encourages the Ummah to seek forgiveness.\nوَسَبِّحْ بِحَمْدِ رَبِّكَ بِالْعَشِىِّ\n(and glorify the praises of your Lord in the `Ashi) meaning, at the end of the day and the beginning of the night,\nوَالابْكَارِ\n(and in the Ibkar.) meaning, at the beginning of the day and the end of the night.\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ يُجَـدِلُونَ فِى ءَايَـتِ اللَّهِ بِغَيْرِ سُلْطَـنٍ أَتَـهُمْ\n(Verily, those who dispute about the Ayat of Allah, without any authority having come to them,) means, they try to refute the truth with falsehood, and to refute sound evidence with dubious arguments, having no proof or evidence from Allah.\nإِن فِى صُدُورِهِمْ إِلاَّ كِبْرٌ مَّـا هُم بِبَـلِغِيهِ\n(there is nothing else in their breasts except pride. They will never have it.) means, they are too proud to follow the truth and submit to the one who has brought it. But their attempts to suppress the truth and elevate falsehood will fail; the truth will prevail and their words and aspirations will be defeated.\nفَاسْتَعِذْ بِاللَّهِ\n(So seek refuge in Allah. ) means, from being like these people,\nإِنَّهُ هُوَ السَّمِيعُ البَصِيرُ\n(Verily, it is He Who is the All-Hearer, the All-Seer.) or seek refuge with Him from being like these people who dispute about the Ayat of Allah without any authority having come to them.","href":"/tafsir/40?verse=51","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:40:57","title":"Ibn Kathir · 40:57–59","text":"The creation of the heavens and the earth is indeed greater than the creation of mankind; yet, most of the people do not know (57)And not equal are the blind and those who see; nor those who believe, and do righteous good deeds, and those who do evil. Little do you remember (58)Verily, the Hour is surely coming, there is no doubt about it, yet most men believe not (59)\nLife after Death\nAllah tells us that He will bring back His creation on the Day of Resurrection. That is very easy for Him, because He created the heavens and the earth, and creating them is greater than creating mankind, the first time and when He creates them again. The One Who is able to do that is able to do anything that is less than that. As Allah says:\nأَوَلَمْ يَرَوْا أَنَّ اللَّهَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ وَلَمْ يَعْيَ بِخَلْقِهِنَّ بِقَادِرٍ عَلَىٰ أَنْ يُحْيِيَ الْمَوْتَىٰ ۚ بَلَىٰ إِنَّهُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ\n(Do they not see that Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth, and was not wearied by their creation, is able to give life to the dead? Yes, He surely is able to do all things.)(46:33) And Allah says here:\nلَخَلْقُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ أَكْبَرُ مِنْ خَلْقِ النَّاسِ وَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ\n(The creation of the heavens and the earth is indeed greater than the creation of mankind; yet, most of mankind know not.) hence they do not think about or ponder this proof. Similarly, many of the Arabs recognized that Allah had created the heavens and the earth, but they denied and rejected the idea of the resurrection; they acknowledged something which was greater than that which they denied. Then Allah says:\nوَمَا يَسْتَوِي الْأَعْمَىٰ وَالْبَصِيرُ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ وَلَا الْمُسِيءُ ۚ قَلِيلًا مَا تَتَذَكَّرُونَ\n(And not equal are the blind and those who see; nor are those who believe, and do righteous good deeds, and those who do evil. Little do you remember!) The blind man who cannot see anything is not the same as the sighted man who can see everything as far as his eyesight reaches – there is a huge difference between them. By the same token, the righteous believers and the immoral disbelievers are not equal.\nقَلِيلًا مَا تَتَذَكَّرُونَ\n(Little do you remember!) means, most of the people remember little.\nإِنَّ السَّاعَةَ لَآتِيَةٌ\n(Verily, the Hour (Day of Judgement) is surely coming,) means, it will indeed come to pass.\nلَا رَيْبَ فِيهَا وَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ\n(there is no doubt about it, yet most men believe not.) means, they do not believe in it, and in fact they doubt its existence altogether.","href":"/tafsir/40?verse=57","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:40:60","title":"Ibn Kathir · 40:60","text":"And your Lord said: \"Call upon Me, I will answer you. Verily, those who scorn My worship they will surely enter Hell in humiliation! (60)\nThe Command to call upon Allah\nBy His grace and kindness, Allah encourages His servants to call upon Him, and He guarantees to respond. Sufyan Ath-Thawri used to say: \"O You Who love most those who ask of You, and O You Who hate most those who do not ask of You, and there is no one like that apart from You, O Lord.\" This was recorded by Ibn Abi Hatim. Similarly; the poet said: \"Allah hates not to be asked, and the son of Adam hates to be asked.\"\nQatadah said that Ka'b Al-Ahbar said, \"This Ummah has been given three things which were not given to any nation before, only to Prophets. When Allah sent a Prophet, He said to him, 'You are a witness over your nation.' But you have been made witnesses over mankind; it was said to the Prophets individually, 'Allah has not laid upon you any hardship in religion,' but He said to this entire Ummah:\nوَمَا جَعَلَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِي الدِّينِ مِنْ حَرَجٍ\n(and [Allah] has not laid upon you in religion any hardship)(22:78) and it was said to the Prophets individually; 'Call upon Me, I will answer you,' but it was said to this Ummah,\nادْعُونِي أَسْتَجِبْ لَكُمْ\n(Call upon Me, I will answer you).\" This was recorded by Ibn Abi Hatim.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Al-Nu'man bin Bashir, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nإِنَّ الدُّعَاءَ هُوَ الْعِبَادَةُ\n(Indeed the supplication is the worship.)\" Then he recited,\nادْعُونِي أَسْتَجِبْ لَكُمْ ۚ إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ عَنْ عِبَادَتِي سَيَدْخُلُونَ جَهَنَّمَ دَاخِرِينَ\n(And your Lord said: \"Call upon Me, I will answer you. Verily, those who scorn My worship they will surely enter Hell in humiliation!\"). This was also recorded by the Sunan compilers; At-Tirmdhi, An-Nasa'i, Ibn Majah, and Ibn Abi Hatim and Ibn Jarir. At-Tirmidhi said, \"Hasan Sahih.\" It was also recorded by Abu Dawud, At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa'i, and Ibn Jarir with a different chain of narration. Allah's saying:\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ عَنْ عِبَادَتِي\n(Verily, those who scorn My worship) means, 'those who are too proud to call on Me and single Me out,'\nسَيَدْخُلُونَ جَهَنَّمَ دَاخِرِينَ\n(they will surely enter Hell in humiliation!) means, in disgrace and insignificance. Imam Ahmad recorded from 'Amr bin Shu'ayb from his father, from his grandfather that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nيُحْشَرُ الْمُتَكَبِّرُونَ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ أَمْثَالَ الذَّرِّ فِي صُوَرِ النَّاسِ، يَعْلُوهُمْ كُلُّ شَيْءٍ مِنَ الصَّغَارِ، حَتّٰى يَدْخُلُوا سِجْنًا فِي جَهَنَّمَ يُقَالُ لَهُ: بُولَسُ، تَعْلُوهُمْ نَارُ الْأنْيَارِ، يُسْقَوْنَ مِنْ طِينَةِ الْخَبَالِ، عُصَارَةِ أَهْلِ النَّارِ\n(The proud will be gathered on the Day of Resurrection like ants in the image of people, and everything will be stepping on them, humiliating them, until they enter a prison in Hell called Bulas. They will be fed flames of fire, and given for drink a paste of insanity dripping from the people the Fire.)\"","href":"/tafsir/40?verse=60","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:40:61","title":"Ibn Kathir · 40:61–65","text":"Allah, it is He Who has made the night for you that you may rest therein and the day for you to see. Truly, Allah is full of bounty to mankind; yet, most of mankind give no thanks (61)That is Allah, your Lord, the Creator of all things, La ilaha ila Huwa. How then are you turning away (62)Thus were turned away those who used to deny the Ayat of Allah (63)Allah, it is He Who has made for you the earth as a dwelling place and the sky as a canopy, and has given you shape and made your shapes good and pure (looking) and has provided you with good things. That is Allah, your Lord, so Blessed be Allah, the Lord of all that exists (64)He is the Ever Living, La ilaha illa Huwa; so invoke Him making the religion for Him Alone. All the praises and thanks be to Allah, the Lord of all that exits (65)\nSigns of the Power and Oneness of Allah\nAllah reminds us of His grace towards His creation in that He has given them the night in which they rest and relax from their activities so that they can go back to them for their livelihood during the day. He has given them the day with its light, so that they can undertake their journeys and engage in their business.\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ لَذُو فَضْلٍ عَلَى النَّاسِ وَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لَا يَشْكُرُونَ\n(Truly, Allah is full of bounty to mankind; yet, most of mankind give no thanks.) means, they do not express gratitude for the favors which Allah bestows upon them. Then Allah says:\nذَٰلِكُمُ اللَّهُ رَبُّكُمْ خَالِقُ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ ۖ\n(That is Allah, your Lord, the Creator of all things, La ilaha illa Huwa.) means, the One Who does all of these things is Allah, the One, the Unique, the Creator of all things, besides Whom there is no other god or lord.\nفَأَنَّىٰ تُؤْفَكُونَ\n(How then are you turning away?) means, 'how can you worship idols which cannot create anything but are themselves hand-made and carved?'\nكَذَٰلِكَ يُؤْفَكُ الَّذِينَ كَانُوا بِآيَاتِ اللَّهِ يَجْحَدُونَ\n(Thus were turned away those who used to deny the Ayat of Allah) means, just as these people [Quraysh] were led astray by their worship of gods other than Allah, those who came before them also disbelieved and worshipped others, with no proof or evidence, but on the basis of ignorance and desires. They denied the signs and proof of Allah.\nاللَّهُ الَّذِي جَعَلَ لَكُمُ الْأَرْضَ قَرَارًا\n(Allah, it is He Who has made for you the earth as a dwelling place) means, 'He made it stable and spread it out for you, so that you might live on it and travel about in it; He strengthened it with the mountains so that it does not shake with you.'\nوَالسَّمَاءَ بِنَاءً\n(and the sky as a canopy,) means, 'a roof covering and protecting the world.'\nوَصَوَّرَكُمْ فَأَحْسَنَ صُوَرَكُمْ\n(and has given you shape and made your shapes good) means, 'He created you in the best and most perfect form.'\nوَرَزَقَكُمْ مِنَ الطَّيِّبَاتِ\n(and has provided you with good and pure things.) means, of food and drink in this world. Allah states that that He is the Creator of the dwelling place and of the inhabitants and of the provision; He is the Creator and Provider, as He says in Surat Al-Baqarah:\nيَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ اعْبُدُوا رَبَّكُمُ الَّذِي خَلَقَكُمْ وَالَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَّقُونَ - الَّذِي جَعَلَ لَكُمُ الْأَرْضَ فِرَاشًا وَالسَّمَاءَ بِنَاءً وَأَنْزَلَ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مَاءً فَأَخْرَجَ بِهِ مِنَ الثَّمَرَاتِ رِزْقًا لَكُمْ ۖ فَلَا تَجْعَلُوا لِلَّهِ أَنْدَادًا وَأَنْتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ\n(O mankind! Worship your Lord (Allah), Who created you and those who were before you so that you may have Taqwa. Who has made the earth a resting place for you, and the sky as a canopy, and sent down water (rain) from the sky and brought forth therewith fruits as a provision for you. Then do not set up rivals unto Allah while you know.)(2:21-22)\nAnd here Allah says, after mentioning the creation of all these things:\nذَٰلِكُمُ اللَّهُ رَبُّكُمْ ۖ فَتَبَارَكَ اللَّهُ رَبُّ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(That is Allah, your Lord, so Blessed be Allah, the Lord of all that exists.) meaning, exalted and sanctified and glorified be Allah, the Lord of all the worlds. Then He says:\nهُوَ الْحَيُّ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ\n(He is the Ever Living, La ilaha illa Huwa;) means, He is the Ever Living, from eternity to eternity, Who was, is and shall be, the First and the Last, the Manifest, the Hidden.\nلَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ\n(La ilaha illa Huwa) means, there is none comparable or equal to Him.\nفَادْعُوهُ مُخْلِصِينَ لَهُ الدِّينَ\n(so invoke Him making the religion for Him Alone.) means, affirm His Oneness by testifying that there is no God but He. Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds.\nImam Ahmad recorded that after ending every prayer, 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubayr used to say:\nلَا إِلٰهَ إِلَّا اللهُ وَحْدَهُ لَا شَرِيكَ لَهُ،لَهُ الْمُلْكُ وَلَهُ الْحَمْدُ، وَهُوَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ، لَا حَوْلَ وَلَا قُوَّةَ إِلَّا بِاللهِ، لَا إِلٰهَ إِلَّا اللهُ، وَلَا نَعْبُدُ إِلَّا إِيَّاهُ، لَهُ النِّعْمَةُ وَلَهُ الْفَضْلُ وَلَهُ الثَّنَاءُ الْحَسَنُ، لَا إِلٰهَ إِلَّا اللهُ مُخْلِصِينَ لَهُ الدِّينَ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْكَافِرُونَ\n(There is no (true) God except Allah Alone with no partner or associate, to Him belongs the dominion and praise, for He is able to do all things; there is no strength and no power except with Allah; there is no (true) God except Allah and we worship none but Him; to Him belong blessings and virtue and goodly praise; there is no (true) God except Allah, we worship Him in all sincerity even though the disbelievers may hate that.)\nHe said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to say the Tahlil in this fashion after every prayer.\" Similar was also recorded by Muslim, Abu Dawud and An-Nasa'i.","href":"/tafsir/40?verse=61","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:40:66","title":"Ibn Kathir · 40:66–68","text":"Say: \"I have been forbidden to worship those whom you worship besides Allah, since there have come to me evidences from my Lord; and I am commanded to submit to the Lord of all that exists (66)It is He, Who has created you from dust, then from a Nutfah then from a clot (a piece of coagulated blood), then brings you forth as an infant, then (makes you grow) to reach the age of full strength, and afterwards to be old – though some among you die before – and that you reach an appointed term in order that you may understand (67)It is He Who gives life and causes death. And when He decides upon a thing He says to it only: \"Be!\" - and it is (68)\nThe Prohibition of Shirk, the Order for Tawhid, and the Evidence\nAllah says, 'say, O Muhammad, to these idolators, that Allah forbids them to worship anyone, such as these idols and false gods, except Him.' Allah explains that no one apart from Him is deserving of worship, as He says:\nهُوَ الَّذِي خَلَقَكُمْ مِنْ تُرَابٍ ثُمَّ مِنْ نُطْفَةٍ ثُمَّ مِنْ عَلَقَةٍ ثُمَّ يُخْرِجُكُمْ طِفْلًا ثُمَّ لِتَبْلُغُوا أَشُدَّكُمْ ثُمَّ لِتَكُونُوا شُيُوخًا ۚ\n(It is He, Who has created you from dust, then from a Nutfah then from a clot (a piece of coagulated blood), then brings you forth as an infant, then (makes you grow) to reach the age of full strength, and afterwards to be old.) meaning, He is the One Who Alone, with no partner or associate, causes you to pass through these different stages, and this happens in accordance with His command, will and decree.\nوَمِنْكُمْ مَنْ يُتَوَفَّىٰ مِنْ قَبْلُ ۖ\n(though some among you die before) means, before being fully formed and emerging to this world; so his mother miscarries him. And there are some who die in infancy or in their youth, or when they are adults but before they reach old age, as Allah says:\nلِنُبَيِّنَ لَكُمْ ۚ وَنُقِرُّ فِي الْأَرْحَامِ مَا نَشَاءُ إِلَىٰ أَجَلٍ مُسَمًّى\n(that We may make (it) clear to you. And We cause whom We will to remain in the wombs for an appointed term)(22:5).\nوَلِتَبْلُغُوا أَجَلًا مُسَمًّى وَلَعَلَّكُمْ تَعْقِلُونَ\n(and that you reach an appointed term in order that you may understand.)\nIbn Jurayj said, \"In order that you may remember the Resurrection.\" Then Allah says:\nهُوَ الَّذِي يُحْيِي وَيُمِيتُ ۖ\n(It is He Who gives life and causes death.) meaning, He is the Only One Who does that, and none is able to do that except He.\nفَإِذَا قَضَىٰ أَمْرًا فَإِنَّمَا يَقُولُ لَهُ كُنْ فَيَكُونُ\n(And when He decides upon a thing He says to it only: \"Be!\" – and it is.) means, He cannot be opposed or resisted. Whatever He wills definitely comes to pass.","href":"/tafsir/40?verse=66","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:40:69","title":"Ibn Kathir · 40:69–76","text":"See you not those who dispute about the Ayat of Allah How are they turning away (69)Those who deny the Book, and that with which We sent Our Messengers they will come to know (70)When iron collars will be rounded over their necks, and the chains, they shall be dragged along (71)In the boiling water, then they will be burned in the Fire (72)Then it will be said to them: \"Where are (all) those whom you used to consider partners (73)\"Besides Allah?\" They will say: \"They have vanished from us. Nay, we did not call upon anything before.\" Thus Allah leads astray the disbelievers (74)That was because you had been exulting in the earth without any right, and that you used to rejoice extremely (75)Enter the gates of Hell to abide therein, and (indeed) what an evil abode of the arrogant (76)\nThe End of Those Who dispute and deny the Signs of Allah\nAllah says, 'do you not wonder, O Muhammad, at those who deny the signs of Allah and dispute the truth by means of falsehood, how their minds are diverted from the truth and are misguided?'\nالَّذِينَ كَذَّبُوا بِالْكِتَابِ وَبِمَا أَرْسَلْنَا بِهِ رُسُلَنَا ۖ\n(Those who deny the Book, and that with which We sent Our Messengers) means, guidance and clear proof.\nفَسَوْفَ يَعْلَمُونَ\n(they will come to know.) This is a stern warning and clear threat from the Lord to these people. This is like the Ayah:\nوَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِلْمُكَذِّبِينَ\n(Woe that Day to the deniers!)(77:15)\nإِذِ الْأَغْلَالُ فِي أَعْنَاقِهِمْ وَالسَّلَاسِلُ ۚ\n(When iron collars will be rounded over their necks, and the chains.) means, the chains will be attached to the iron collars, and the keepers of Hell will drag them along on their faces, sometimes to the boiling water, and sometimes to the Fire. Allah says:\nيُسْحَبُونَ - فِي الْحَمِيمِ ثُمَّ فِي النَّارِ يُسْجَرُونَ\n(they shall be dragged along, in the boiling water, then they will be burned in the Fire.) This is like the Ayat:\nهَٰذِهِ جَهَنَّمُ الَّتِي يُكَذِّبُ بِهَا الْمُجْرِمُونَ - يَطُوفُونَ بَيْنَهَا وَبَيْنَ حَمِيمٍ آنٍ\n(This is the Hell which the criminals denied. They will go between it and the fierce boiling water!)(55:43-44).\nAfter describing how they will eat Zaqqum (a bitter tree of Hell) and drink Hamim (boiling water), Allah says:\nثُمَّ إِنَّ مَرْجِعَهُمْ لَإِلَى الْجَحِيمِ\n(Then thereafter, verily, their return is to the flaming fire of Hell.)(37:68), And Allah says:\nوَأَصْحَابُ الشِّمَالِ مَا أَصْحَابُ الشِّمَالِ - فِي سَمُومٍ وَحَمِيمٍ - وَظِلٍّ مِنْ يَحْمُومٍ - لَا بَارِدٍ وَلَا كَرِيمٍ\n(And those on the Left Hand – how (unfortunate) will be those on the Left Hand? In fierce hot wind and boiling water, and shadow of black smoke, (that shadow) neither cool nor (even) pleasant.) until\nثُمَّ إِنَّكُمْ أَيُّهَا الضَّالُّونَ الْمُكَذِّبُونَ - لَآكِلُونَ مِنْ شَجَرٍ مِنْ زَقُّومٍ - فَمَالِئُونَ مِنْهَا الْبُطُونَ - فَشَارِبُونَ عَلَيْهِ مِنَ الْحَمِيمِ - فَشَارِبُونَ شُرْبَ الْهِيمِ - هَٰذَا نُزُلُهُمْ يَوْمَ الدِّينِ\n(Then moreover, verily, – you the erring-ones, the deniers (of Resurrection)! You verily, will eat of the trees of Zaqqum. Then you will fill your bellies therewith, and drink boiling water on top of it. And you will drink (that) like thirsty camels! That will be their entertainment on the Day of Recompense!)(56: 41-44, 51-56),\nإِنَّ شَجَرَتَ الزَّقُّومِ - طَعَامُ الْأَثِيمِ - كَالْمُهْلِ يَغْلِي فِي الْبُطُونِ - كَغَلْيِ الْحَمِيمِ - خُذُوهُ فَاعْتِلُوهُ إِلَىٰ سَوَاءِ الْجَحِيمِ - ثُمَّ صُبُّوا فَوْقَ رَأْسِهِ مِنْ عَذَابِ الْحَمِيمِ - ذُقْ إِنَّكَ أَنْتَ الْعَزِيزُ الْكَرِيمُ - إِنَّ هَٰذَا مَا كُنْتُمْ بِهِ تَمْتَرُونَ\n(Verily, the tree of Zaqqum will be the food of the sinners. Like boiling oil, it will boil in the bellies, like the boiling of scalding water. (It will be said:) \"Seize him and drag him into the midst of blazing Fire, then pour over his head the torment of boiling water. Taste you (this)! Verily, you were (pretending to be) the mighty, the generous! Verily, this is that whereof you used to doubt!\")(44:43-50) i.e., this will be said to them to rebuke and ridicule them.\nثُمَّ قِيلَ لَهُمْ أَيْنَ مَا كُنْتُمْ تُشْرِكُونَ - مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ ۖ\n(Then it will be said to them: \"Where are (all) those whom you considered partners – besides Allah?\") means, it will be said to them, 'where are the idols whom you used to worship instead of Allah? Can they help you today?'\nقَالُوا ضَلُّوا عَنَّا\n(They will say: \"They have vanished from us...\") mean, they have gone away and they cannot do anything for us.'\nبَلْ لَمْ نَكُنْ نَدْعُو مِنْ قَبْلُ شَيْئًا\n(Nay, we did not invoke (worship) anything before.) means, they will deny that they worshipped them. This is like the Ayah:\nثُمَّ لَمْ تَكُنْ فِتْنَتُهُمْ إِلَّا أَنْ قَالُوا وَاللَّهِ رَبِّنَا مَا كُنَّا مُشْرِكِينَ\n(There will then be (left) no Fitnah (excuse) for them but to say: \"By Allah, our Lord, we were not those who joined others in worship with Allah.\")(6:23) Allah says:\nكَذَٰلِكَ يُضِلُّ اللَّهُ الْكَافِرِينَ\n(Thus Allah leads astray the disbelievers).\nذَٰلِكُمْ بِمَا كُنْتُمْ تَفْرَحُونَ فِي الْأَرْضِ بِغَيْرِ الْحَقِّ وَبِمَا كُنْتُمْ تَمْرَحُونَ\n(That was because you had been exulting in the earth without any right, and that you used to rejoice extremely.) means, the angels will say to them, 'what you are suffering now is your recompense for your exulting in the earth without any right, and for your extravagance.'\nادْخُلُوا أَبْوَابَ جَهَنَّمَ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا ۖ فَبِئْسَ مَثْوَى الْمُتَكَبِّرِينَ\n(Enter the gates of Hell to abide therein, and (indeed) what an evil abode of the arrogant!) means, what a terrible abode and final destination, filled with humiliation and severe punishment for those who arrogantly ignored the signs of Allah and refused to accept His proof and evidence. And Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/40?verse=69","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:40:77","title":"Ibn Kathir · 40:77–78","text":"So be patient, verily, the promise of Allah is true and whether We show you some part of what We have promised them, or We cause you to die, then still it is to Us they all shall be returned (77)And, indeed We have sent Messengers before you, of some of them We have related to you their story. And of some We have not related to you their story, and it was not given to any Messenger that he should bring a sign except by the leave of Allah. But, when comes the commandment of Allah, the matter will be decided with truth, and the followers of falsehood will then be lost (78)\nThe Command to be Patient and Good News of Victory\nHere Allah commands His Messenger ﷺ to patiently bear the rejection of those who rejected him: 'Allah will fulfill His promise to you that you will be victorious and will prevail over your people, and you and those who follow you, will be the successful ones in this world and the Hereafter.'\nفَإِمَّا نُرِيَنَّكَ بَعْضَ الَّذِي نَعِدُهُمْ\n(and whether We show you some part of what We have promised them,) means, in this world, and this is what happened, for Allah gave them the joy of humiliating the leaders and nobles (of the Quraysh), who were killed on the day of Badr, then Allah granted them victory over Makkah and the entire Arabian Peninsula during the lifetime of the Prophet ﷺ.\nأَوْ نَتَوَفَّيَنَّكَ فَإِلَيْنَا يُرْجَعُونَ\n(or We cause you to die, then still it is to Us they all shall be returned.) means, 'and We shall inflict a severe punishment upon them in the Hereafter.' Then Allah says, consoling [His Prophet ﷺ]:\nوَلَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا رُسُلًا مِنْ قَبْلِكَ مِنْهُمْ مَنْ قَصَصْنَا عَلَيْكَ وَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ لَمْ نَقْصُصْ عَلَيْكَ ۗ\n(And, indeed We have sent Messengers before you, of some of them We have related to you their story.) as Allah also says in Surat An-Nisa', meaning, 'We have revealed the stories of some of them and how their people disbelieved in them, but the Messengers ultimately prevailed.'\nوَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ لَمْ نَقْصُصْ عَلَيْكَ\n(And of some We have not related to you their story,) and they are many, many more than those whose stories have been told, as has been stated in Surat An-Nisa'. Praise and blessings be to Allah.\nوَمَا كَانَ لِرَسُولٍ أَنْ يَأْتِيَ بِآيَةٍ إِلَّا بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ ۚ\n(and it was not given to any Messenger that he should bring a sign except by the leave of Allah.) means, none of the Prophets was able to bring miracles to his people except when Allah granted him permission to do that as a sign of the truth of the message he brought to them.\nفَإِذَا جَاءَ أَمْرُ اللَّهِ\n(But, when comes the commandment of Allah,) means, His punishment and vengeance which will encompass the disbelievers,\nقُضِيَ بِالْحَقِّ\n(the matter will be decided with truth,) so the believers will be saved and the disbelievers will be destroyed. Allah says:\nوَخَسِرَ هُنَالِكَ الْمُبْطِلُونَ\n(and the followers of falsehood will then be lost.)","href":"/tafsir/40?verse=77","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:40:79","title":"Ibn Kathir · 40:79–81","text":"Allah, it is He Who has made cattle for you, that you may ride on some of them, and of some you eat (79)And you have (many other) benefits from them, and that you may reach by their means a desire that is in your breasts, and on them and on ships you are carried (80)And He shows you His Ayat. Which, then of the Ayat of Allah do you deny (81)\nThe Cattle are also a Blessing from Allah and a Sign from Him\nAllah reminds His servants of His blessing in that He created the cattle [Al-An'am] for them, which refers to camels, cows and sheep; some of them they ride and some of them they eat. Camels may be ridden or eaten; their milk is drunk and they are used for carrying heavy burdens on journeys to distant lands. Cattle are eaten and their milk is drunk; they are also used for plowing the earth. Sheep are eaten and their milk is also drunk. The hair and wool of all of these animals is used to make tents, clothing and furnishings, as we have already discussed in Surat Al-An'am and Surat An-Nahl, etc. Allah says here:\nاللَّهُ الَّذِي جَعَلَ لَكُمُ الْأَنْعَامَ لِتَرْكَبُوا مِنْهَا وَمِنْهَا تَأْكُلُونَ - وَلَكُمْ فِيهَا مَنَافِعُ وَلِتَبْلُغُوا عَلَيْهَا حَاجَةً فِي صُدُورِكُمْ وَعَلَيْهَا وَعَلَى الْفُلْكِ تُحْمَلُونَ\n(Allah, it is He Who has made cattle for you, that you may ride on some of them, and of some you eat. And you have (many other) benefits from them, and that you may reach by their means a desire that is in your breasts, and on them and on ships you are carried.)\nوَيُرِيكُمْ آيَاتِهِ\n(And He shows you His Ayat.) means, 'His proof and evidence, on the horizons and in yourselves.'\nفَأَيَّ آيَاتِ اللَّهِ تُنْكِرُونَ\n(Which, then of the Ayat of Allah do you deny?) means, you cannot deny any of His signs and proofs, unless you are stubborn and arrogant.","href":"/tafsir/40?verse=79","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:40:82","title":"Ibn Kathir · 40:82–85","text":"Have they not traveled through the earth and seen what was the end of those before them? They were more in number than them and mightier in strength, and in the traces in the land; yet all that they used to earn availed them not (82)Then when their Messengers came to them with clear proofs, they were glad (and proud) with that which they had of the knowledge (of worldly things). And that at which they used to mock, surrounded them (83)So when they saw Our punishment, they said: \"We believe in Allah Alone and reject (all) that we used to associate with Him as (His) partners. (84)Then their Faith could not avail them when they saw Our punishment. (Like) this has been the way of Allah in dealing with His servants. And there the disbelievers lost utterly (85)\nThe Lesson to be learned from what happened to Those Who Came before\nAllah tells us about the nations who rejected their Messengers in ancient times. He mentioned the severe punishment they suffered despite their great strength, He mentioned the traces which they left behind in the earth and the great wealth they amassed. None of that availed them anything and could not prevent the punishment of Allah at all. That is because when the Messengers came to them with clear signs and decisive evidence, they did not pay any attention to them. Instead, they were content with the knowledge with them, or so they claimed, and they said that they did not need what the Messengers brought them. Mujahid said, \"They said, we know better than them, we will not be resurrected and we will not be punished.\" As-Suddi said, \"In their ignorance, they rejoiced in what they had of (worldly) knowledge. So Allah sent upon them a punishment which they could not escape or resist.\"\nوَحَاقَ بِهِمْ\n(and surrounded them.) means, encompassed them.\nمَا كَانُوا بِهِ يَسْتَهْزِئُونَ\n(that at which they used to mock,) means, that which they used to disbelieve in and said would never happen,\nفَلَمَّا رَأَوْا بَأْسَنَا\n(So when they saw Our punishment,) means, when they saw with their own eyes the punishment which came upon them, they said,\nقَالُوا آمَنَّا بِاللَّهِ وَحْدَهُ وَكَفَرْنَا بِمَا كُنَّا بِهِ مُشْرِكِينَ\n(We believe in Allah Alone and reject (all) that we used to associate with Him as (His) partners.) means, they affirmed that Allah is One and denied the false gods, but this was at the time when excuses were to no avail. This is like what Fir'awn said as he was drowning:\nآمَنْتُ أَنَّهُ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا الَّذِي آمَنَتْ بِهِ بَنُو إِسْرَائِيلَ وَأَنَا مِنَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ\n(I believe that none has the right to be worshipped but He in Whom the Children of Israel believe, and I am one of the Muslims.)(10:90) But Allah said:\nآلْآنَ وَقَدْ عَصَيْتَ قَبْلُ وَكُنْتَ مِنَ الْمُفْسِدِينَ\n(Now (you believe) while you refused to believe before and you were one of the the corrupters.)(10:91) meaning, Allah did not accept this from him, because He had answered the prayer of His Prophet Musa, when he said,\nوَاشْدُدْ عَلَىٰ قُلُوبِهِمْ فَلَا يُؤْمِنُوا حَتَّىٰ يَرَوُا الْعَذَابَ الْأَلِيمَ\n(And harden their hearts, so that they will not believe until they see the painful torment)(10:88). Allah says here:\nفَلَمْ يَكُ يَنْفَعُهُمْ إِيمَانُهُمْ لَمَّا رَأَوْا بَأْسَنَا ۖ سُنَّتَ اللَّهِ الَّتِي قَدْ خَلَتْ فِي عِبَادِهِ ۖ\n(Then their Faith could not avail them when they saw Our punishment. (Like) this has been the way of Allah in dealing with His servants.) means, this is the ruling of Allah concerning all those who repent only when they actually see the punishment: He does not accept that from them. It says in the Hadith:\nإِنَّ اللهَ تَعَالَى يَقْبَلُ تَوْبَةَ الْعَبْدِ مَالَمْ يُغَرْغِرْ\n(Allah will accept the repentance of His servant so long as the death rattle is not sounding in his throat.)\nOnce the death rattle is sounding and the soul has reached the throat, and the dying person actually sees the angel (of death), then he can no longer repent. Allah says:\nوَخَسِرَ هُنَالِكَ الْكَافِرُونَ\n(And there the disbelievers lost utterly.)\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surah Ghafir. Praise and thanks be to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/40?verse=82","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:41:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 41:1–5","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nحم - تَنْزِيلٌ مِنَ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ - كِتَابٌ فُصِّلَتْ آيَاتُهُ قُرْآنًا عَرَبِيًّا لِقَوْمٍ يَعْلَمُونَ - بَشِيرًا وَنَذِيرًا فَأَعْرَضَ أَكْثَرُهُمْ فَهُمْ لَا يَسْمَعُونَ - وَقَالُوا قُلُوبُنَا فِي أَكِنَّةٍ مِمَّا تَدْعُونَا إِلَيْهِ وَفِي آذَانِنَا وَقْرٌ وَمِنْ بَيْنِنَا وَبَيْنِكَ حِجَابٌ فَاعْمَلْ إِنَّنَا عَامِلُونَ\n(1. Ha Mim.)(2. A revelation from the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.)(3. A Book whereof the Ayat are explained in detail – a Qur'an in Arabic for people who know.)(4. Giving glad tidings and warning, but most of them turn away, so they hear not.)(5. And they say: \"Our hearts are under coverings from that to which you invite us; and in our ears is deafness, and between us and you is a screen, so work you (on your way); verily, we are working (on our way).\")\nDescription of the Qur'an, and what Those Who turn away from it say\nحم - تَنْزِيلٌ مِنَ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\n(Ha Mim. A revelation from the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.) means, the Qur'an is revealed from the Most Gracious, Most Merciful. This is like the Ayat:\nقُلْ نَزَّلَهُ رُوحُ الْقُدُسِ مِنْ رَبِّكَ بِالْحَقِّ\n(Say Ruh Al-Qudus (Jibril) has brought it down from your Lord with truth)(16:102).\nوَإِنَّهُ لَتَنْزِيلُ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ - نَزَلَ بِهِ الرُّوحُ الْأَمِينُ - عَلَىٰ قَلْبِكَ لِتَكُونَ مِنَ الْمُنْذِرِينَ\n(And truly, this is a revelation from the Lord of all that exists, Which the trustworthy Ruh (Jibril) has brought down upon your heart that you may be (one) of the warners.)(26:192-194).\nكِتَابٌ فُصِّلَتْ آيَاتُهُ\n(A Book whereof the Ayat are explained in detail) means, its meanings are clear and its rulings are sound and wise.\nقُرْآنًا عَرَبِيًّا\n(a Qur'an in Arabic) means, because it is a clear Arabic Qur'an, its meanings are precise and detailed and its words are clear and not confusing. This is like the Ayah:\nكِتَابٌ أُحْكِمَتْ آيَاتُهُ ثُمَّ فُصِّلَتْ مِنْ لَدُنْ حَكِيمٍ خَبِيرٍ\n((This is) a Book, the Ayat whereof are completed, and then explained in detail from One (Allah), Who is All-Wise Well-Acquainted)(11:1). meaning, it is miraculous in its wording and in its meanings.\nلَا يَأْتِيهِ الْبَاطِلُ مِنْ بَيْنِ يَدَيْهِ وَلَا مِنْ خَلْفِهِ ۖ تَنْزِيلٌ مِنْ حَكِيمٍ حَمِيدٍ\n(Falsehood cannot come to it from before it or behind it, (it is) sent down by the All-Wise, Worthy of all praise.)(41:42).\nلِقَوْمٍ يَعْلَمُونَ\n(for people who know.) means, this clear style will be readily understood by scholars who are thoroughly versed in knowledge.\nبَشِيرًا وَنَذِيرًا\n(Giving glad tidings and warning,) means, sometimes it brings glad tidings to the believers, and sometimes it brings a warning to the disbelievers.\nفَأَعْرَضَ أَكْثَرُهُمْ فَهُمْ لَا يَسْمَعُونَ\n(but most of them turn away, so they hear not.) means, most of the Quraysh did not understand anything of it at all, despite the fact that it was so clear.\nوَقَالُوا قُلُوبُنَا فِي أَكِنَّةٍ\n(And they say: \"Our hearts are under coverings...\") meaning, they are wrapped and screened,\nمِمَّا تَدْعُونَا إِلَيْهِ وَفِي آذَانِنَا وَقْرٌ\n(from that to which you invite us; and in our ears is deafness,) means, 'we are deaf to the message you bring to us.'\nوَمِنْ بَيْنِنَا وَبَيْنِكَ حِجَابٌ\n(and between us and you is a screen,) 'so nothing of what you say reaches us.'\nفَاعْمَلْ إِنَّنَا عَامِلُونَ\n(so work you (on your way); verily, we are working) means, go your way, and we will go our way, and we will not follow you.","href":"/tafsir/41?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:41:6","title":"Ibn Kathir · 41:6–8","text":"Say: \"I am only a human being like you. It is revealed to me that your God is One God, therefore take straight path to Him and obedience to Him, and seek forgiveness of Him. And woe to the polytheists (6)Those who give not the Zakah and they are disbelievers in the Hereafter (7)Truly, those who believe and do righteous good deeds, for them will be an endless reward that will never stop (8)\nThe Call to Tawhid\nAllah says,\nقُلْ\n(Say) 'O Muhammad, to these disbelievers and idolators,'\nإِنَّمَا أَنَا بَشَرٌ مِثْلُكُمْ يُوحَىٰ إِلَيَّ أَنَّمَا إِلَٰهُكُمْ إِلَٰهٌ وَاحِدٌ\n(I am only a human being like you. It is revealed to me that your God is One God,) 'not like these idols and false gods which you worship. Allah is one God,'\nفَاسْتَقِيمُوا إِلَيْهِ\n(therefore take straight path to Him) means, 'worship Him Alone sincerely, in accordance with what He has commanded you through His Messengers.'\nوَاسْتَغْفِرُوهُ\n(and seek forgiveness of Him) means, 'for your past sins.'\nوَوَيْلٌ لِلْمُشْرِكِينَ\n(And woe to the polytheists.) means, doom and destruction is their lot.\nالَّذِينَ لَا يُؤْتُونَ الزَّكَاةَ\n(Those who give not the Zakah) 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported from Ibn 'Abbas that this means those who do not bear witness that there is no God except Allah. This was also the view of 'Ikrimah. This is like the Ayat:\nقَدْ أَفْلَحَ مَنْ زَكَّاهَا - وَقَدْ خَابَ مَنْ دَسَّاهَا\n(Indeed he succeeds who purifies himself. And indeed he fails who corrupts himself.)(91:9-10) And;\nقَدْ أَفْلَحَ مَنْ تَزَكَّىٰ - وَذَكَرَ اسْمَ رَبِّهِ فَصَلَّىٰ\n(Indeed whosoever purifies himself shall achieve success. And remembers (glorifies) the Name of his Lord, and prays.)(87:14-15) And;\nفَقُلْ هَلْ لَكَ إِلَىٰ أَنْ تَزَكَّىٰ\n(And say to him: \"Would you purify yourself?\")(79:18)\nWhat is meant by Zakah here is purification of the soul, ridding oneself of all bad qualities, the worst of which is Shirk. The Zakah paid on one's wealth is so called because it purifies wealth, and it is a means of increasing it, blessing it and making it more beneficial, and a means of assisting one to use it in doing good deeds.\nQatadah said, \"They withheld the Zakah of their wealth.\" This is the apparent meaning according to many of the scholars of Tafsir, and this is the view favored by Ibn Jarir.\nBut the matter is subject to further examination, because the obligation of Zakah was instituted during the second year after the Hijrah to Al-Madinah, according to what is stated by several scholars. Yet this Ayah was revealed in Makkah. However, it is not unlikely that the principle of giving charity and Zakah was already in place and had been enjoined at the beginning of the Prophet's mission, as Allah says:\nوَآتُوا حَقَّهُ يَوْمَ حَصَادِهِ\n(but pay the due thereof on the day of their harvest)(6:141). As for the details of Zakah and how it is to be calculated according to the Nusub, were explained in Al-Madinah. This is how we may reconcile between the two opinions. Similarly, prayer was originally enjoined before sunrise and before sunset at the beginning of the Prophet's mission; it was only on the Night of the Isra', a year and a half before the Hijrah, that Allah enjoined upon His Messenger ﷺ the five daily prayers. The conditions and essential elements of prayer were explained later, in stages. And Allah knows best. Then Allah says:\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ لَهُمْ أَجْرٌ غَيْرُ مَمْنُونٍ\n(Truly, those who believe and do righteous good deeds, for them will be an endless reward that will never stop.)\nMujahid and others said, \"It will never be cut off or decrease.\" This is like the Ayat:\nمَاكِثِينَ فِيهِ أَبَدًا\n(They shall abide therein for ever.)(18:3)\nعَطَاءً غَيْرَ مَجْذُوذٍ\n(a gift without an end)(11:108)","href":"/tafsir/41?verse=6","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:41:9","title":"Ibn Kathir · 41:9–12","text":"Say: \"Do you verily disbelieve in Him Who created the earth in two Days? And you set up rivals with Him? That is the Lord of all that exists. (9)He placed therein firm mountains from above it, and He blessed it, and measured therein its sustenance in four Days equal for all those who ask (10)Then He rose over (Istawa ila) the heaven when it was smoke, and said to it and to the earth: \"Come both of you willingly or unwillingly.\" They both said: \"We come willingly. (11)Then He completed and finished their creation (as) seven heavens in two Days and He made in each heaven its affair. And We adorned the nearest (lowest) heaven with lamps (stars) to be an adornment as well as to guard. Such is the decree of Him, the Almighty, the All-Knower (12)\nSome Details of the Creation of this Universe\nHere Allah denounces the idolators who worship other gods apart from Him although He is the Creator, Subduer and Controller of all things. He says:\nقُلْ أَئِنَّكُمْ لَتَكْفُرُونَ بِالَّذِي خَلَقَ الْأَرْضَ فِي يَوْمَيْنِ وَتَجْعَلُونَ لَهُ أَنْدَادًا ۚ\n(Say: \"Do you verily disbelieve in Him Who created the earth in two Days? And you set up rivals with Him?\") meaning, 'false gods whom you worship alongside Him?'\nذَٰلِكَ رَبُّ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(That is the Lord of the that exists.) the Creator of all things is the Lord of all the creatures. Here the Ayah;\nخَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ فِي سِتَّةِ أَيَّامٍ\n(Who created the heavens and the earth in Six Days)(7:54). is explained in more detail; the creation of the earth and the creation of the heaven are discussed separately. Allah says that He created the earth first, because it is the foundation, and the foundation should be built first, then the roof. Allah says elsewhere:\nهُوَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ لَكُمْ مَا فِي الْأَرْضِ جَمِيعًا ثُمَّ اسْتَوَىٰ إِلَى السَّمَاءِ فَسَوَّاهُنَّ سَبْعَ سَمَاوَاتٍ ۚ\n(He it is Who created for you all that is on the earth. Then He rose over (Istawa ila) the heaven and made them seven heavens)(2:29). With regard to the Ayat:\nأَأَنْتُمْ أَشَدُّ خَلْقًا أَمِ السَّمَاءُ ۚ بَنَاهَا - رَفَعَ سَمْكَهَا فَسَوَّاهَا - وَأَغْطَشَ لَيْلَهَا وَأَخْرَجَ ضُحَاهَا - وَالْأَرْضَ بَعْدَ ذَٰلِكَ دَحَاهَا - أَخْرَجَ مِنْهَا مَاءَهَا وَمَرْعَاهَا - وَالْجِبَالَ أَرْسَاهَا - مَتَاعًا لَكُمْ وَلِأَنْعَامِكُمْ\n(Are you more difficult to create or is the heaven that He constructed? He raised its height, and has perfected it. Its night He covers with darkness and its forenoon He brings out (with light). And after that He spread the earth, And brought forth therefrom its water and its pasture. And the mountains He has fixed firmly, (to be) a provision and benefit for you and your cattle.)(79:27-33)\nThis Ayah states that the spreading out of the earth came after the creation of the heavens, but the earth itself was created before the heavens according to some texts. This was the response of Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, as recorded by Al-Bukhari in his Tafsir of this Ayah in his Sahih. He recorded that Sa'id bin Jubayr said: \"A man said to Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, saying: 'I find some things in the Qur'an which confuse me:\nفَلَا أَنْسَابَ بَيْنَهُمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ وَلَا يَتَسَاءَلُونَ\n(There will be no kinship among them that Day, nor will they ask of one another)(23:101),\nوَأَقْبَلَ بَعْضُهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ يَتَسَاءَلُونَ\n(And they will turn to one another and question one another)(37:27),\nوَلَا يَكْتُمُونَ اللَّهَ حَدِيثًا\n(but they will never be able to hide a single fact from Allah)(4:42),\nوَاللَّهِ رَبِّنَا مَا كُنَّا مُشْرِكِينَ\n(By Allah, our Lord, we were not those who joined others in worship with Allah)(6:23)\nBut in this Ayah they did hide something. And Allah says:\nأَأَنْتُمْ أَشَدُّ خَلْقًا أَمِ السَّمَاءُ ۚ بَنَاهَا\n(Are you more difficult to create or is the heaven that He constructed?) until;\nوَالْأَرْضَ بَعْدَ ذَٰلِكَ دَحَاهَا\n(And after that He spread the earth.)(79:27-30)\nSo He mentioned the creation of the heavens before the earth, then He said:\nقُلْ أَئِنَّكُمْ لَتَكْفُرُونَ بِالَّذِي خَلَقَ الْأَرْضَ فِي يَوْمَيْنِ\n(Say: \"Do you verily disbelieve in Him Who created the earth in two Days?...\") until;\nطَائِعِينَ\n(We come willingly.) Here He mentioned the creation of the earth before the creation of the heavens. And He says:\nوَ كَانَ غَفُورًا رَحِيمًا\n(Verily, Allāh (Kāna) is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.)(4:96)\nعَزِيزًا حَكِيمًا\n(Most Powerful, All-Wise)(4:56).\nسَمِيعًا بَصِيرًا\n(All-Hearer, All-Seer)(4:58). It is as if He was and is no longer.'\nIbn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, replied:\nفَلَا أَنْسَابَ بَيْنَهُمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ وَلَا يَتَسَاءَلُونَ\n(There will be no kinship among them that Day, nor will they ask of one another)(23:101), this will happen when the Trumpet is blown for the first time.\nفَصَعِقَ مَنْ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَنْ فِي الْأَرْضِ إِلَّا مَنْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ\n(And all who are in the heavens and all who are on the earth will swoon away, except him whom Allah wills)(39:68), and at that time there will be no kinship among them, nor will they ask of one another. Then when the Sur will be blown again,\nوَأَقْبَلَ بَعْضُهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ يَتَسَاءَلُونَ\n(And they will turn to one another and question one another)(37:27). With regard to the Ayat,\nوَاللَّهِ رَبِّنَا مَا كُنَّا مُشْرِكِينَ\n(By Allah, our Lord, we were not those who joined others in worship with Allah)(6:23) and\nوَلَا يَكْتُمُونَ اللَّهَ حَدِيثًا\n(but they will never be able to hide a single fact from Allah)(4:42), Allah will forgive the sincere believers their sins, then the idolators will say, 'Let us say that we never joined others in worship with Allah.' Then a seal will be placed over their mouths, and their hands will speak. Then it will be known that not a single fact can be hidden from Allah, and at that point,\nيَوَدُّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا\n(those who disbelieved will wish)(4:42). Allah created the earth in two days, then He created the heavens, then He (Istawa ila) the heaven and gave it its shape in two more days. Then He spread the earth, which means that He brought forth therefrom its water and its pasture. And He created the mountains, sands, inanimate things, rocks and hills and everything in between, in two more days. This is what Allah says:\nدَحَاهَا\n((He) spread (the earth))(79:30) And Allah's saying:\nخَلَقَ الْأَرْضَ فِي يَوْمَيْنِ\n((He) created the earth in two Days) So He created the earth and everything in it in four days, and He created the heavens in two days.\nوَ كَانَ غَفُورًا رَحِيمًا\n(Verily, Allāh (Kāna) is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.)(4:96). This is how He described Himself, and this is how He still is. Whatever Allah wills comes to pass, so do not be confused about the Qur'an, for all of it comes from Allah.'\" This was recorded by Al-Bukhari.\nخَلَقَ الْأَرْضَ فِي يَوْمَيْنِ\n((He) created the earth in two Days) means, on Sunday and Monday.\nوَجَعَلَ فِيهَا رَوَاسِيَ مِنْ فَوْقِهَا وَبَارَكَ فِيهَا\n(He placed therein firm mountains from above it, and He blessed it,) means, He blessed it and gave it the potential to be planted with seeds and bring forth produce.\nوَقَدَّرَ فِيهَا أَقْوَاتَهَا\n(And measured therein its sustenance) means, what its people need of provision and places in which to plant things and grow crops. This was on Tuesday and Wednesday, which together with the two previous days add up to four days.\nفِي أَرْبَعَةِ أَيَّامٍ سَوَاءً لِلسَّائِلِينَ\n(in four Days equal for all those who ask.) meaning, for those who want to ask about that, so that they might know. 'Ikrimah and Mujahid said concerning the Ayah:\nوَقَدَّرَ فِيهَا أَقْوَاتَهَا\n(and measured therein its sustenance): \"He placed in every land that which is not suited for any other land.\" Ibn 'Abbas, Qatadah and As-Suddi said, concerning the Ayah,\nسَوَاءً لِلسَّائِلِينَ\n(equal for all those who ask): this means, \"For whoever wants to ask about that.\" Ibn Zayd said:\nوَقَدَّرَ فِيهَا أَقْوَاتَهَا فِي أَرْبَعَةِ أَيَّامٍ سَوَاءً لِلسَّائِلِينَ\n(and measured therein its sustenance in four Days equal for all those who ask.) \"According to whatever a person who is need of provision wants, Allah measures out for him what he needs.\" This is like what they said concerning the Ayah:\nوَآتَاكُمْ مِنْ كُلِّ مَا سَأَلْتُمُوهُ ۚ\n(And He gave you of all that you asked for)(14:34). And Allah knows best.\nثُمَّ اسْتَوَىٰ إِلَى السَّمَاءِ وَهِيَ دُخَانٌ\n(Then He rose over (Istawā ilā) towards the heaven when it was smoke,) i.e., steam which arose from it when the earth was created.\nفَقَالَ لَهَا وَلِلْأَرْضِ ائْتِيَا طَوْعًا أَوْ كَرْهًا\n(and said to it and to the earth: \"Come both of you willingly or unwillingly.\") meaning, 'respond to My command and be subjected to this action, willingly or unwillingly.'\nقَالَتَا أَتَيْنَا طَائِعِينَ\n(They both said: \"We come willingly.\") meaning, 'we will respond to You willingly and everything that You want to create in us – angels, Jinn and men – will all be obedient to You.'\nفَقَضَاهُنَّ سَبْعَ سَمَاوَاتٍ فِي يَوْمَيْنِ\n(Then He completed and finished their creation (as) seven heavens in two Days) means, He finished forming them as seven heavens in two more days, which were Thursday and Friday.\nوَأَوْحَىٰ فِي كُلِّ سَمَاءٍ أَمْرَهَا\n(and He decreed in each heaven its affair.) means, He placed in each heaven whatever it needs of angels and things which are known only unto Him.\nوَزَيَّنَّا السَّمَاءَ الدُّنْيَا بِمَصَابِيحَ\n(And We adorned the nearest (lowest) heaven with lamps) means, the stars and planets which shine on the people of the earth.\nوَحِفْظًا\n(as well as to guard.) means, as protection against the Shayatin, lest they listen to the angels on high.\nذَٰلِكَ تَقْدِيرُ الْعَزِيزِ الْعَلِيمِ\n(Such is the Decree of Him, the Almighty, the All-Knower) means, the Almighty Who has subjugated all things to His control, the All-Knower Who knows all the movements of His creatures.","href":"/tafsir/41?verse=9","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:41:13","title":"Ibn Kathir · 41:13–18","text":"But if they turn away, then say: \"I have warned you of a Sa'iqah like the Sa'iqah which overtook 'Ad and Thamud. (13)When the Messengers came to them, from before them and behind them (saying): \"Worship none but Allah,\" they said: \"If our Lord had so willed, He would surely have sent down the angels. So, indeed we disbelieve in that with which you have been sent. (14)As for 'Ad, they were arrogant in the land without right, and they said: \"Who is mightier than us in strength?\" See they not that Allah Who created them was mightier in strength than them. And they used to deny Our Ayat (15)So, We sent upon them a 'Sarsar' wind in days of calamity that We might give them a taste of disgracing torment in this present worldly life. But surely the torment of the Hereafter will be more disgracing, and they will never be helped (16)And as for Thamud, We showed them the path of truth but they preferred blindness to guidance; so the Sa'iqah of disgracing torment seized them because of what they used to earn (17)And We saved those who believed and had Taqwa (18)\nA Warning to the Disbelievers and a Reminder of the Story of 'Ad and Thamud\nAllah says: 'Say, O Muhammad, to these idolators who disbelieve in the message of truth that you have brought: If you turn away from that which I have brought to you from Allah, then I warn you of the punishment of Allah like the punishment that the past nations suffered for disbelieving in the Messengers.'\nصَاعِقَةً مِثْلَ صَاعِقَةِ عَادٍ وَثَمُودَ\n(a Sa'iqah like the Sa'iqah which overtook 'Ad and Thamud.) and other similar nations who did what they did,\nإِذْ جَاءَتْهُمُ الرُّسُلُ مِنْ بَيْنِ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَمِنْ خَلْفِهِمْ\n(When the Messengers came to them, from before them and behind them) This is like the Ayah:\nوَاذْكُرْ أَخَا عَادٍ إِذْ أَنْذَرَ قَوْمَهُ بِالْأَحْقَافِ وَقَدْ خَلَتِ النُّذُرُ مِنْ بَيْنِ يَدَيْهِ وَمِنْ خَلْفِهِ\n(And remember (Hud) the brother of 'Ad, when he warned his people in Al-Ahqaf. And surely, there have passed away warners before him and after him)(46:21). which means that in the neighboring towns and cities, Allah sent Messengers who commanded the people to worship Allah Alone with no partner or associate, and they brought good news as well as warnings. They saw the punishment Allah sent upon His enemies, and the blessings which He bestowed upon His friends, yet despite all of this, they did not believe in them. On the contrary, they denied them and rejected them, and said:\nلَوْ شَاءَ رَبُّنَا لَأَنْزَلَ مَلَائِكَةً\n(If our Lord had so willed, He would surely have sent down the angels.) meaning, if Allah were to send Messengers, they would be angels sent from His presence.\nفَإِنَّا بِمَا أُرْسِلْتُمْ بِهِ كَافِرُونَ\n(So, indeed we disbelieve in that with which you have been sent.) means, 'because you are a mere human; we will not follow you because you are just men like us.'\nفَأَمَّا عَادٌ فَاسْتَكْبَرُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ بِغَيْرِ الْحَقِّ\n(As for 'Ad, they were arrogant in the land without right.) means, they were arrogant, stubborn and disobedient.\nوَقَالُوا مَنْ أَشَدُّ مِنَّا قُوَّةً\n(and they said: \"Who is mightier than us in strength?\") They boasted of their physical strength, and power; they thought that this would protect them from Allah's punishment.\nأَوَلَمْ يَرَوْا أَنَّ اللَّهَ الَّذِي خَلَقَهُمْ هُوَ أَشَدُّ مِنْهُمْ قُوَّةً ۖ\n(See they not that Allah Who created them was mightier in strength than them.) means, do they not realize, when they are showing enmity, that He is the Almighty Who created all things and gave them whatever strength they have, and that His onslaught will be far greater? This is like the Ayah:\nوَالسَّمَاءَ بَنَيْنَاهَا بِأَيْدٍ وَإِنَّا لَمُوسِعُونَ\n(With Hands did We construct the heaven. Verily, We are able to extend the vastness of space thereof.)(51:47) They openly opposed the Almighty and denied His signs and disobeyed His Messenger. Allah said:\nفَأَرْسَلْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ رِيحًا صَرْصَرًا\n(So We sent upon them a 'Sarsar' wind). Some said that this was a strongly blowing wind; others said that it was a cold wind. It was also said that it is the wind that makes a noise. The truth that it was all of these things, for it was a strong wind that was an apt punishment for their being deceived by their physical strength. It was also intensely cold, as Allah says:\nبِرِيحٍ صَرْصَرٍ عَاتِيَةٍ\n(with a 'Sarsar' wind!)(69:6), meaning a very cold wind. It also made a furious sound. Additionally, there is a famous river in the east which is called 'Sarsar' because of the noise it makes as it flows.\nفِي أَيَّامٍ نَحِسَاتٍ\n(in days of calamity) means, consecutive days.\nسَبْعَ لَيَالٍ وَثَمَانِيَةَ أَيَّامٍ حُسُومًا\n(seven nights and eight days in succession)(69: 7). This is like the Ayah:\nفِي يَوْمِ نَحْسٍ مُسْتَمِرٍّ\n(on a day of calamity, continuous)(54:19) i.e., the punishment began on a day which was of evil omen for them, and this evil omen continued for them,\nسَبْعَ لَيَالٍ وَثَمَانِيَةَ أَيَّامٍ حُسُومًا\n(seven nights and eight days in succession)(69:7) until they were destroyed, every last one of them, and their humiliation in this world was joined to their punishment in the Hereafter. Allah says:\nلِنُذِيقَهُمْ عَذَابَ الْخِزْيِ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا ۖ وَلَعَذَابُ الْآخِرَةِ أَخْزَىٰ ۖ\n(that We might give them a taste of disgracing torment in this present worldly life. But surely the torment of the Hereafter will be more disgracing.) meaning, more humiliating for them.\nوَهُمْ لَا يُنْصَرُونَ\n(and they will never be helped.) means, in the Hereafter, just as they were never helped in this world, and they had no one who could protect them from Allah or save them from His punishment.\nوَأَمَّا ثَمُودُ فَهَدَيْنَاهُمْ\n(And as for Thamud, We showed them the path of truth) Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, Abu Al-Aliyah, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Qatadah, As-Suddi and Ibn Zayd said, \"We explained to them. \" Ath-Thawri said, \"We called them.\" Allah's saying;\nفَاسْتَحَبُّوا الْعَمَىٰ عَلَى الْهُدَىٰ\n(but they preferred blindness to guidance;) means, 'We showed them the truth and made it clear to them through the words of their Prophet Salih, but they opposed him and rejected him, and they slaughtered the she-camel of Allah which He had made a sign for them of the truth of their Prophet.'\nفَأَخَذَتْهُمْ صَاعِقَةُ الْعَذَابِ الْهُونِ\n(so the Sa'iqah of disgracing torment seized them) means, Allah sent upon them the Sayhah, earthquake, intense humiliation, punishment and torment.\nبِمَا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ\n(because of what they used to earn) means, because of their disbelief and rejection.\nوَنَجَّيْنَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا\n(And We saved those who believed) means, 'We saved them from among them, and no harm came to them;' Allah saved them along with His Prophet Salih, peace be upon him, because of their fear of Allah.","href":"/tafsir/41?verse=13","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:41:19","title":"Ibn Kathir · 41:19–24","text":"And (remember) the Day that the enemies of Allah will be gathered to the Fire, then they will be driven (19)Till, when they reach it, their hearing (ears) and their eyes and their skins will testify against them as to what they used to do (20)And they will say to their skins, \"Why do you testify against us?\" They will say: \"Allah has caused us to speak - as He causes all things to speak, and He created you the first time, and to Him you are made to return. (21)And you have not been hiding yourselves (in the world), lest your ears and your eyes and your skins should testify against you; but you thought that Allah knew not much of what you were doing (22)And that thought of yours which you thought about your Lord, has brought you to destruction; and you have become of those utterly lost (23)Then, if they bear the torment patiently, then the Fire is the home for them, and if they seek to please Allah, yet they are not of those who will ever be allowed to please Allah (24)\nOn the Day of Judgement, the Sinners' Limbs will testify against Them\nوَيَوْمَ يُحْشَرُ أَعْدَاءُ اللَّهِ إِلَى النَّارِ فَهُمْ يُوزَعُونَ\n(And (remember) the Day that the enemies of Allah will be gathered to the Fire, then they will be driven.) means, remind these idolators of the Day when they will be gathered to the Fire and they will be driven, i.e., the keepers of Hell will gather the first of them with the last of them, as Allah says elsewhere:\nوَنَسُوقُ الْمُجْرِمِينَ إِلَىٰ جَهَنَّمَ وِرْدًا\n(And We shall drive the criminals to Hell, in a thirsty state)(19:86). n\nحَتَّىٰ إِذَا مَا جَاءُوهَا\n(Till, when they reach it,) means, when they stand at its edge,\nشَهِدَ عَلَيْهِمْ سَمْعُهُمْ وَأَبْصَارُهُمْ وَجُلُودُهُمْ بِمَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ\n(their hearing (ears) and their eyes and their skins will testify against them as to what they used to do.) means, all their deeds, earlier and later; not a single letter will be concealed.\nوَقَالُوا لِجُلُودِهِمْ لِمَ شَهِدْتُمْ عَلَيْنَا ۖ\n(And they will say to their skins, \"Why do you testify against us?\") they will blame their limbs and their skins when they testify against them, at which point their limbs will answer:\nقَالُوا أَنْطَقَنَا اللَّهُ الَّذِي أَنْطَقَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ وَهُوَ خَلَقَكُمْ أَوَّلَ مَرَّةٍ\n(They will say: \"Allah has caused us to speak – as He causes all things to speak, and He created you the first time,) means, and He cannot be opposed or resisted, and to Him you will return. Al-Hafiz Abu Bakr Al-Bazzar narrated that Anas bin Malik, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ laughed and smiled one day, and said:\nأَلَا تَسْأَلُونِّي عَنْ أَيِّ شَيْءٍ ضَحِكْتُ؟\n(Will you not ask about why I laughed?)\" They said, \"O Messenger of Allah, why did you laugh?\" He said:\nعَجِبْتُ مِنْ مُجَادَلَةِ الْعَبْدِ رَبَّهُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ يَقُولُ: أَيْ رَبِّي أَلَيْسَ وَعَدْتَنِي أَنْ لَا تَظْلِمَنِي، قَالَ: بَلَىٰ، فَيَقُولُ: فَإِنِّي لَا أَقْبَلُ عَلَيَّ شَاهِدًا إِلَّا مِنْ نَفْسِي، فَيَقُولُ اللهُ تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَىٰ: أَوَلَيْسَ كَفَىٰ بِي شَهِيدًا وَبِالْمَلَائِكَةِ الْكِرَامِ الْكَاتِبِينَ - قال - : فَيُرَدِّدُ هٰذَا الْكَلَامَ مِرَارًا - قال - : فَيُخْتَمُ عَلىٰ فِيهِ وَتَتَكَلَّمُ أَرْكَانُهُ بِمَا كَانَ يَعْمَلُ، فَيَقُولُ: بُعْدًا لَكُنَّ وَسُحْقًا، عَنْكُنَّ كُنْتُ أُجَادِلُ\n(I was amazed at how a servant will dispute with his Lord on the Day of Resurrection. He will say, \"My Lord, did You not promise me that you would not treat me unjustly?\" Allah will say, \"Yes.\" The man will say, \"I will not accept any witness against me except from myself.\" Allah will say, \"Is it not sufficient that I and the angels, the noble scribes, are witnesses?\" These words will be repeated several times, then a seal will be placed over his mouth and his organs (or limbs) will speak about what he used to do. Then he will say, \"Away with you! It was only for your sake that I was arguing!\")\"\nIt was recorded by him and Ibn Abi Hatim. It was also recorded by Muslim and An-Nasa'i. Ibn Abi Hatim recorded that Abu Burdah said that Abu Musa said, \"The disbeliever or the hypocrite will be called to account and his Lord will show him his deeds, but he will deny them and say, 'O Lord, by Your glory, this angel has written about me something that I did not do.' The angel will say to him, 'Did you not do such and such on such and such a day in such and such a place?' He will say, 'No, by Your glory O Lord, I did not do it.' When he does that, a seal will be placed over his mouth.\" Al-Ash'ari, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"I think that the first part of his body to speak will be his right thigh.\" Allah's saying:\nوَمَا كُنْتُمْ تَسْتَتِرُونَ أَنْ يَشْهَدَ عَلَيْكُمْ سَمْعُكُمْ وَلَا أَبْصَارُكُمْ وَلَا جُلُودُكُمْ\n(And you have not been hiding yourselves (in the world), lest your ears and your eyes and your skins should testify against you;) means, their organs and skins will say to them, when they blame them for testifying against them, 'you did not hide from us what you used to do, on the contrary, you openly committed disbelief and sin, and you claimed that you did not care, because you did not believe that Allah knew about all your deeds.' Allah says:\nوَلَٰكِنْ ظَنَنْتُمْ أَنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَعْلَمُ كَثِيرًا مِمَّا تَعْمَلُونَ - وَذَٰلِكُمْ ظَنُّكُمُ الَّذِي ظَنَنْتُمْ بِرَبِّكُمْ أَرْدَاكُمْ\n(but you thought that Allah knew not much of what you were doing. And that thought of yours which you thought about your Lord, has brought you to destruction;) meaning, 'this evil thought, i.e., your belief that Allah did not know much of what you were doing, is what has caused you to be doomed and has made your losers before your Lord.'\nفَأَصْبَحْتُمْ مِنَ الْخَاسِرِينَ\n(and you have become of those utterly lost!) means, 'in the place of Resurrection, you have lost your own selves and your families.'\nImam Ahmad recorded that 'Abdullah, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"I was hiding beneath the covering of the Ka'bah, and three men came along – a man from the Quraysh and two of his brothers-in-law from Thaqif, or a man from Thaqif and two of his brothers-in-law from the Quraysh. Their bellies were very fat, and did not have much understanding. They said some words I could not hear, then one of them said, 'Do you think that Allah can hear what we are saying now?' The other said, 'If we raise our voices, He will hear it, but if we do not raise our voices, He will not hear it.' The other said, 'If He can hear one thing from us, He can hear everything.' I mentioned this to the Prophet ﷺ, then Allah revealed the words:\nوَمَا كُنْتُمْ تَسْتَتِرُونَ أَنْ يَشْهَدَ عَلَيْكُمْ سَمْعُكُمْ وَلَا أَبْصَارُكُمْ وَلَا جُلُودُكُمْ\n(And you have not been hiding yourselves (in the world), lest your ears and your eyes and your skins should testify against you) until;\nمِنَ الْخَاسِرِينَ\n(of those utterly lost!) This is how it was recorded by At-Tirmidhi. A similar report was also narrated by Ahmad (through a different chain), Muslim and At-Tirmidhi, and Al-Bukhari and Muslim also recorded (a different chain).\nفَإِنْ يَصْبِرُوا فَالنَّارُ مَثْوًى لَهُمْ ۖ وَإِنْ يَسْتَعْتِبُوا فَمَا هُمْ مِنَ الْمُعْتَبِينَ\n(Then, if they bear the torment patiently, then the Fire is the home for them, and if they seek to please Allah, yet they are not of those who will ever be allowed to please Allah.) means, whether they bear it patiently or not, they are in the Fire and they will have no escape or way out from it, and even if they try to please Allah and offer excuses, nothing of that will be accepted from them. Ibn Jarir said, \"The meaning of the Ayah,\nوَإِنْ يَسْتَعْتِبُوا\n(and if they seek to please Allah,) is: They will ask to go back to this world, but this plea will not be answered. This is like the Ayah:\nقَالُوا رَبَّنَا غَلَبَتْ عَلَيْنَا شِقْوَتُنَا وَكُنَّا قَوْمًا ضَالِّينَ - رَبَّنَا أَخْرِجْنَا مِنْهَا فَإِنْ عُدْنَا فَإِنَّا ظَالِمُونَ - قَالَ اخْسَئُوا فِيهَا وَلَا تُكَلِّمُونِ\n(They will say: \"Our Lord! Our wretchedness overcame us, and we were (an) erring people. Our Lord! Bring us out of this. If ever we return (to evil), then indeed we shall be wrongdoers.\" He will say: \"Remain you in it with ignominy! And speak you not to Me!\")\" (23:106-108).","href":"/tafsir/41?verse=19","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:41:25","title":"Ibn Kathir · 41:25–29","text":"And We have assigned for them intimate companions (in this world), who have made fair seeming to them, what was before them and what was behind them. And the Word is justified against them as it was justified against those who were among the previous generations of Jinn and men that had passed away before them. Indeed they (all) were the losers (25)And those who disbelieve say: \"Listen not to this Qur'an, and make noise in the midst of its (recitation) that you may overcome. (26)But surely, We shall cause those who disbelieve to taste a severe torment, and certainly, We shall requite them the worst of what they used to do (27)That is the recompense of the enemies of Allah: the Fire. Therein will be for them the eternal home, a recompense for that they used to deny Our Ayat (28)And those who disbelieve will say: \"Our Lord! Show us those among Jinn and men who led us astray, that we may crush them under our feet so that they become the lowest. (29)\nThe intimate Companions of the Idolators make Evil Actions attractive to Them\nAllah tells us that He is the One Who send the idolators astray,and that this happens with His will and decree.He is the All-Wise in His actions, when He appoints for them close companions from among the devils of man and jinn\nفَزَيَّنُوا لَهُمْ مَا بَيْنَ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَمَا خَلْفَهُمْ\n(who have made fair seeming to them, what was before them and what was behind them.) means, they made their deeds attractive to them in the past. As far as the future is concerned, they only see themselves as doing good, as Allah says:\nوَمَنْ يَعْشُ عَنْ ذِكْرِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ نُقَيِّضْ لَهُ شَيْطَانًا فَهُوَ لَهُ قَرِينٌ - وَإِنَّهُمْ لَيَصُدُّونَهُمْ عَنِ السَّبِيلِ وَيَحْسَبُونَ أَنَّهُمْ مُهْتَدُونَ\n(And whosoever turns away blindly from the remembrance of the Most Gracious, We appoint for him a Shaytan to be a companion for him. And verily, they hinder them from the path, but they think that they are guided aright!)(43:36-37)\nوَحَقَّ عَلَيْهِمُ الْقَوْلُ\n(And the Word is justified against them) means, the Word of torment, just as it was justified against the nations of the past who did what they did, men and Jinn alike.\nإِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا خَاسِرِينَ\n(Indeed they (all) were the losers.) means, they are all equal in terms of loss and being doomed.\nHow the disbelievers advised One Another not to listen to the Qur'an, and the Recompense for that\nوَقَالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَا تَسْمَعُوا لِهَٰذَا الْقُرْآنِ\n(And those who disbelieve say: \"Listen not to this Qur'an...\") means, they advised one another not to pay heed to the Qur'an or obey its commands.\nوَالْغَوْا فِيهِ\n(and make noise in the midst of its) means, when it is recited, do not listen to it. This was the view of Mujahid. \"And make noise in the midst of its (recitation)\" means whistling and trying to make the Messenger of Allah ﷺ confused when he recited Qur'an, which is what the Quraysh did.\nلَعَلَّكُمْ تَغْلِبُونَ\n(that you may overcome.) means, this is the practice of these ignorant disbelievers and those who follow in their footsteps, when they hear the Qur'an. Allah commanded us to be different from that, and said:\nوَإِذَا قُرِئَ الْقُرْآنُ فَاسْتَمِعُوا لَهُ وَأَنْصِتُوا لَعَلَّكُمْ تُرْحَمُونَ\n(So, when the Qur'an is recited, listen to it, and be silent that you may receive mercy.)(7:204). Then Allah says:\nفَلَنُذِيقَنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا عَذَابًا شَدِيدًا\n(But surely, We shall cause those who disbelieve to taste a severe torment,) meaning, in return for what they do when they hear the Qur'an.\nوَلَنَجْزِيَنَّهُمْ أَسْوَأَ الَّذِي كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ\n(and certainly, We shall requite them the worst of what they used to do.) means, for their evil deeds.\nذَٰلِكَ جَزَاءُ أَعْدَاءِ اللَّهِ النَّارُ ۖ لَهُمْ فِيهَا دَارُ الْخُلْدِ ۖ جَزَاءً بِمَا كَانُوا بِآيَاتِنَا يَجْحَدُونَ - وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا رَبَّنَا أَرِنَا اللَّذَيْنِ أَضَلَّانَا مِنَ الْجِنِّ وَالْإِنْسِ نَجْعَلْهُمَا تَحْتَ أَقْدَامِنَا لِيَكُونَا مِنَ الْأَسْفَلِينَ\n(That is the recompense of the enemies of Allah: the Fire. Therein will be for them the eternal home, a recompense for that they used to deny Our Ayat. And those who disbelieve will say: \"Our Lord! Show us those among Jinn and men who led us astray, that we may crush them under our feet so that they become the lowest.\") It was reported that 'Ali, may Allah be pleased with him, said, concerning the phrase,\nاللَّذَيْنِ أَضَلَّانَا\n(those who led us astray): \"Iblis and the son of Adam who killed his brother.\" As-Suddi reported that 'Ali, may Allah be pleased with him, said; \"Iblis is followed by everyone who commits Shirk and the son of Adam is followed by everyone who commits a major sin. So Iblis is the one who calls people to every evil thing, such as Shirk and lesser sins.\" As for the first son of Adam, it is as confirmed in the Hadith:\nمَا قُتِلَتْ نَفْسٌ ظُلْمًا إِلَّا كَانَ عَلَى ابْنِ آدَمَ الْأَوَّلِ كِفْلٌ مِنْ دَمِهَا،لِأَنَّهُ أَوَّلُ مَنْ سَنَّ الْقَتْلَ\n(No soul is wrongfully killed, but a share of the burden [of that sin] will be upon the first son of Adam, because he was the first one who set the precedent of killing another.)\nنَجْعَلْهُمَا تَحْتَ أَقْدَامِنَا\n(that we may crush them under our feet) means, 'make them beneath us in the torment, so that they will be punished more severely than us.'\nلِيَكُونَا مِنَ الْأَسْفَلِينَ\n(so that they become the lowest.) means, in the lowest level of Hell, as already mentioned in Al-A'raf, where the followers ask Allah to multiply the torment for their leaders:\nقَالَ لِكُلٍّ ضِعْفٌ وَلَٰكِنْ لَا تَعْلَمُونَ\n((Allah) said: \"For each one there is double (torment), but you know not.\")(7:38) i.e., Allah will give each of them the torment and punishment they deserve for their deeds. This is like the Ayah:\nالَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ وَصَدُّواْ عَن سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ زِدْنَـهُمْ عَذَابًا فَوْقَ الْعَذَابِ بِمَا كَانُواْ يُفْسِدُونَ\n(Those who disbelieved and hinder (men) from the path of Allah, for them We will add torment to the torment because they used to spread corruption.)(16:88).","href":"/tafsir/41?verse=25","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:41:30","title":"Ibn Kathir · 41:30–32","text":"Verily, those who say: \"Our Lord is Allah,\" and then they stand firm, on them the angels will descend (saying): \"Fear not, nor grieve! But receive the glad tidings of Paradise which you have been promised! (30)\"We have been your friends in the life of this world and are (so) in the Hereafter. Therein you shall have (all) that your souls desire, and therein you shall have (all) for which you ask. (31)\"An entertainment from the Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful. (32)\nGlad Tidings to Those Who believe in Allah Alone and stand firm\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ قَالُوا رَبُّنَا اللَّهُ ثُمَّ اسْتَقَامُوا\n(Verily, those who say: \"Our Lord is Allah,\" and then they stand firm,) means, they do good deeds sincerely for the sake of Allah, and they obey Allah, doing what Allah has prescribed for them. Ibn Jarir recorded that Sa'id bin 'Imran said, \"I read this Ayah to Abu Bakr As-Siddiq, may Allah be pleased with him:\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ قَالُوا رَبُّنَا اللَّهُ ثُمَّ اسْتَقَامُوا\n(Verily, those who say: \"Our Lord is Allah,\" and then they stand firm,) He said, 'Those are the ones who do not associate anything with Allah.'\" Then he reported a narration of Al-Aswad bin Hilal, who said, \"Abu Bakr As-Siddiq, may Allah be pleased with him, said, 'What do you say about this Ayah:\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ قَالُوا رَبُّنَا اللَّهُ ثُمَّ اسْتَقَامُوا\n(Verily, those who say: \"Our Lord is Allah,\" and then they stand firm,)?' They said:\nرَبُّنَا اللَّهُ ثُمَّ اسْتَقَامُوا\n(\"Our Lord is Allah,\" and then they stand firm,) 'They shun sin.' He said, 'You have not interpreted it improperly.' They say: 'Our Lord is Allah, then they stand firm and do not turn to any other god besides Him.'\" This was also the view of Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, As-Suddi and others.\nAhmad recorded that Sufyan bin 'Abdullah Ath-Thaqafi said, \"I said, 'O Messenger of Allah, tell me something that I can adhere to.' He ﷺ said:\nقُلْ: رَبِّيَ اللهُ، ثُمَّ اسْتَقِمْ\n(Say, my Lord is Allah, then stand firm.) I said, 'O Messenger of Allah, what do you fear most for me?' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ took hold of the edge of his tongue and said,\nهٰذَا\n(This is.)\" This was also recorded by At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah; At-Tirmidhi said, \"Hasan Sahih.\"\nMuslim also recorded it in his Sahih, and An-Nasa'i recorded that Sufyan bin 'Abdullah Ath-Thaqafi said, \"I said, 'O Messenger of Allah, tell me something about Islam that I will not have to ask anyone about it after you.' He ﷺ said:\nقُلْ: آمَنْتُ بِاللهِ ثُمَّ اسْتَقِمْ\n(Say: I believe in Allah, then stand firm.)\" – then he mentioned the rest of the Hadith.\nتَتَنَزَّلُ عَلَيْهِمُ الْمَلَائِكَةُ\n(on them the angels will descend). Mujahid, As-Suddi, Zayd bin Aslam and his [Zayd's] son said, \"This means, at the time of death, and they will say,\nأَلَّا تَخَافُوا\n(Fear not). \" Mujahid, 'Ikrimah and Zayd bin Aslam said, \"This means not to fear \"that which you will face in the Hereafter.\"\nوَلَا تَحْزَنُوا\n(nor grieve!) 'for what you have left behind of worldly things, children, family, wealth and debt, for we will take care of it for you.'\nوَأَبْشِرُوا بِالْجَنَّةِ الَّتِي كُنْتُمْ تُوعَدُونَ\n(But receive the glad tidings of Paradise which you have been promised!) So they give glad tidings of the end of bad things and the arrival of good things. This is like what is said in the Hadith narrated by Al-Bara', may Allah be pleased with him:\nإِنَّ الْمَلَائِكَةَ تَقُولُ لِرُوحِ الْمُؤْمِنِ: اخْرُجِي أَيَّتُهَا الرُّوحُ الطَّيِّـبَةُ فِي الْجَسَدِ الطَّيِّبِ كُنْتِ تَعْمُرِينَهُ، اخْرُجِي إِلىٰ رَوْحٍ وَرَيْحَانٍ وَرَبٍّ غَيْرِ غَضْبَانَ\n(The angels say to the soul of the believer, \"Come out, O good soul from the good body in which you used to dwell, come out to rest, and provision and a Lord Who is not angry.\") It was said that the angels will come down to them on the Day when they are brought out of their graves. Zayd bin Aslam said, \"They will give him glad tidings when he dies, in his grave, and when he is resurrected.\" This was recorded by Ibn Abi Hatim, and this view reconciles all the opinions; it is a good view and it is true.\nنَحْنُ أَوْلِيَاؤُكُمْ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَفِي الْآخِرَةِ ۖ\n(We have been your friends in the life of this world and are (so) in the Hereafter.) means, the angels will say to the believers when death approaches: \"We have been your friends, i.e., your close companions, in this world, protecting you and helping you by the command of Allah, and we will be with you in the Hereafter, keeping you from feeling lonely in your graves and when the Trumpet is blown; we will reassure you on the Day of Resurrection and will take you across the Sirat and bring you to the Gardens of delight.\"\nوَلَكُمْ فِيهَا مَا تَشْتَهِي أَنْفُسُكُمْ\n(Therein you shall have (all) that your souls desire,) means, 'in Paradise you will have all that you wish for and that will delight you.'\nوَلَكُمْ فِيهَا مَا تَدَّعُونَ\n(and therein you shall have (all) for which you ask.) means, 'whatever you ask for, it will appear before you as you wish it to be.'\nنُزُلًا مِنْ غَفُورٍ رَحِيمٍ\n(An entertainment from the Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.) means, 'a welcoming gift and a blessing from the One Who has forgiven your sins and Who is Merciful and Kind towards you, Who has forgiven you, concealed your faults and been Kind and Merciful.'","href":"/tafsir/41?verse=30","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:41:33","title":"Ibn Kathir · 41:33–36","text":"And who is better in speech than he who invites to Allah, and does righteous deeds, and says: \"I am one of the Muslims. (33)The good deed and the evil deed cannot be equal. Repel (the evil) with one which is better, then verily he, between whom and you there was enmity, (will become) as though he was a close friend (34)But none is granted it except those who are patient – and none is granted it except the owner of the great portion in this world (35)And if an evil whisper from Shaytan tries to turn you away, then seek refuge in Allah. Verily, He is the All-Hearer, the All-Knower (36)\nThe Virtue of calling Others to Allah\nوَمَنْ أَحْسَنُ قَوْلًا مِمَّنْ دَعَا إِلَى اللَّهِ\n(And who is better in speech than he who invites to Allah,) means, he calls the servants of Allah to Him.\nوَعَمِلَ صَالِحًا وَقَالَ إِنَّنِي مِنَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ\n(and does righteous deeds, and says: \"I am one of the Muslims.\") means, he himself follows that which he says, so it benefits him as well as others. He is not one of those who enjoin good but do not do it themselves, or who forbid evil yet they do it themselves. He does good and avoids doing evil, and he calls people to their Creator, may He be blessed and exalted. This is general in meaning and applies to everyone who calls people to what is good and is himself guided by what he says. The Messenger of Allah ﷺ is the foremost among people in this regard, as Muhammad bin Sirin, As-Suddi and 'Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam said.\nIt was also said that what was meant here is the righteous Mu'adhdhin, as it was mentioned in Sahih Muslim:\nالْمُؤَذِّنُونَ أَطْوَلُ النَّاسِ أَعْنَاقًا يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ\n(The Mu'adhdhins will be the ones with the longest necks on the Day of Resurrection.)\" In As-Sunan it is reported that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nالْإِمَامُ ضَامِنٌ، وَالْمُؤَذِّنُ مُؤْتَمَنٌ، فَأَرْشَدَ اللهُ الْأَئِمَّةَ وَغَفَرَ لِلْمُؤَذِّنِينَ\n(The Imam is a guarantor and the Mu'adhdhin is in a position of trust. May Allah guide the Imams and forgive the Mu'adhdhin.)\"\nThe correct view is that the Ayah is general in meaning, and includes the Mu'adhdhin and others. When this Ayah was revealed, the Adhan had not been prescribed at all. The Ayah was revealed in Makkah, and the Adhan was prescribed in Al-Madinah after the Hijrah, when it was shown to 'Abdullah bin 'Abd Rabbihi Al-Ansari in a dream. He told the Messenger of Allah ﷺ about it, and he told him to teach it to Bilal, may Allah be pleased with him, who had a more beautiful voice, as we have discussed elsewhere. So the correct view is that the Ayah is general in meaning, as 'Abdur-Razzaq said, narrating from Ma'mar, from Al-Hasan Al-Basri, who recited this Ayah:\nوَمَنْ أَحْسَنُ قَوْلًا مِمَّنْ دَعَا إِلَى اللَّهِ وَعَمِلَ صَالِحًا وَقَالَ إِنَّنِي مِنَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ\n(And who is better in speech than he who invites to Allah, and does righteous deeds, and says: \"I am one of the Muslims.\") and said, \"This is the beloved of Allah, this is the close friend of Allah, this is the chosen one of Allah, this is the most beloved of the all the people of earth to Allah. He responded to the call of Allah and called mankind to that to which he had responded. He did righteous deeds in response and said, 'I am one of the Muslims.' This is Allah's Khalifah.\"\nWisdom in Da'wah etc.\nوَلَا تَسْتَوِي الْحَسَنَةُ وَلَا السَّيِّئَةُ ۚ\n(The good deed and the evil deed cannot be equal.) means, there is a huge difference between them.\nادْفَعْ بِالَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ\n(Repel (the evil) with one which is better,) means, 'when someone does you wrong, repel him by treating him well,' as 'Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"There is no better punishment for one who has disobeyed Allah with regard to you, than your obeying Allah with regard to him.\"\nفَإِذَا الَّذِي بَيْنَكَ وَبَيْنَهُ عَدَاوَةٌ كَأَنَّهُ وَلِيٌّ حَمِيمٌ\n(then verily he, between whom and you there was enmity, (will become) as though he was a close friend.) means, 'if you treat well those who treat you badly, this good deed will lead to reconciliation, love and empathy, and it will be as if he is a close friend to you and he will feel pity for you and be kind to you.' Then Allah says:\nوَمَا يُلَقَّاهَا إِلَّا الَّذِينَ صَبَرُوا\n(But none is granted it except those who are patient) meaning, no one accepts this advice and works according to it, except for those who can be patient in doing so, for it is difficult for people to do.\nوَمَا يُلَقَّاهَا إِلَّا ذُو حَظٍّ عَظِيمٍ\n(and none is granted it except the owner of the great portion) means, the one who has a great portion of happiness in this world and in the Hereafter. 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas explained this Ayah: \"Allah commands the believers to be patient when they feel angry, to be forbearing when confronted with ignorance, and to forgive when they are mistreated. If they do this, Allah will save them from the Shaytan and subdue their enemies to them until they become like close friends.\"\nوَإِمَّا يَنْزَغَنَّكَ مِنَ الشَّيْطَانِ نَزْغٌ فَاسْتَعِذْ بِاللَّهِ ۖ\n(And if an evil whisper from Shaytan tries to turn you away, then seek refuge in Allah.) means, the devils among men may be deceived by your kind treatment of him, but the devils among the Jinn, when they insinuate their evil whispers, cannot be dealt with except by seeking refuge with the Creator Who gave him power over you. If you seek refuge with Allah and turn to Him, He will stop him from harming you and bring his efforts to naught. When the Messenger of Allah ﷺ stood up to pray, he would say:\nأَعُوذُ بِاللهِ السَّمِيعِ الْعَلِيمِ مِنَ الشَّيْطَانِ الرَّجِيمِ، مِنْ هَمْزِهِ وَنَفْخِهِ وَنَفْثِهِ\n(I seek refuge in Allah the All-Hearing, All-Knowing, from the accursed Shaytan and his evil insinuations, breath and impurity.)\" We have already stated that there is nothing like this in the Qur'an, apart from the passage in Surat Al-A'raf, where Allah says:\nخُذِ الْعَفْوَ وَأْمُرْ بِالْعُرْفِ وَأَعْرِضْ عَنِ الْجَاهِلِينَ - وَإِمَّا يَنْزَغَنَّكَ مِنَ الشَّيْطَانِ نَزْغٌ فَاسْتَعِذْ بِاللَّهِ ۚ إِنَّهُ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ\n(Show forgiveness, enjoin what is good, and turn away from the foolish. And if an evil whisper comes to you from Shaytan, then seek refuge with Allah. Verily, He is All-Hearer, All-Knower.)(7:199-200) and the passage in Surat Al-Mu'minun where Allah says:\nادْفَعْ بِالَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ السَّيِّئَةَ ۚ نَحْنُ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا يَصِفُونَ - وَقُلْ رَبِّ أَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ هَمَزَاتِ الشَّيَاطِينِ - وَأَعُوذُ بِكَ رَبِّ أَنْ يَحْضُرُونِ\n(Repel evil with that which is better. We are Best-Acquainted with the things they utter. And say: \"My Lord! I seek refuge with You from the whisperings of the Shayatin. And I seek refuge with You, My Lord! lest they should come near me.\")(23:96-98)","href":"/tafsir/41?verse=33","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:41:37","title":"Ibn Kathir · 41:37–39","text":"And from among His signs are the night and the day, and the sun and the moon. Do not prostrate yourselves to the sun nor to the moon, but prostrate yourselves to Allah Who created them, if you worship Him (37)But if they are too proud, then there are those who are with your Lord glorify Him night and day, and never are they tired (38)And among His signs; that you see the earth barren, but when We send down water to it, it is stirred to life and growth. Verily, He Who gives it life, surely is able to give life to the dead. Indeed He is Able to do all things (39)\nFrom among the Signs of Allah\nHere Allah reminds His Creation of His power, and that He is the One Who has no equal, and He is Able to do all things. Allah's saying;\nوَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ اللَّيْلُ وَالنَّهَارُ وَالشَّمْسُ وَالْقَمَرُ ۚ\n(And from among His signs are the night and the day, and the sun and the moon.) means, He created the night with its darkness and the day with its light, and they alternate without ceasing. And He created the sun with its shining light, and the moon with its reflected light. and He allotted their stages and gave them separate orbits in the heavens, so that by the variations in their movements man may know the stages of night and day, of weeks, months and years, and time periods related to people's rights, acts of worship and various transactions. Moreover, because the sun and moon are the most beautiful of the heavenly bodies that can be seen in both the upper and lower realms, Allah points out that they are created entities which are in a state of enthrallment to Him, subject to His dominion and control. So He says:\nلَا تَسْجُدُوا لِلشَّمْسِ وَلَا لِلْقَمَرِ وَاسْجُدُوا لِلَّهِ الَّذِي خَلَقَهُنَّ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ إِيَّاهُ تَعْبُدُونَ\n(Do not prostrate yourselves to the sun nor to the moon, but prostrate yourselves to Allah Who created them, if you (really) worship Him.) meaning, 'do not associate anything in worship with Him, for your worship of Him will be of no benefit to you if you worship others alongside Him, because He does not forgive the association of others in worship with Him.' He says:\nفَإِنِ اسْتَكْبَرُوا\n(But if they are too proud,) i.e., to worship Him Alone, and they insist on associating others with Him,\nفَالَّذِينَ عِنْدَ رَبِّكَ\n(then there are those who are with your Lord) i.e., the angels,\nيُسَبِّحُونَ لَهُ بِاللَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ وَهُمْ لَا يَسْأَمُونَ ۩\n(glorify Him night and day, and never are they tired.) This is like the Ayah:\nفَإِنْ يَكْفُرْ بِهَا هَٰؤُلَاءِ فَقَدْ وَكَّلْنَا بِهَا قَوْمًا لَيْسُوا بِهَا بِكَافِرِينَ\n(But if these disbelieve therein, then, indeed We have entrusted it to a people who are not disbelievers therein.)(6:89).\nوَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ\n(And among His signs) means, signs of His ability to bring the dead back to life.\nأَنَّكَ تَرَى الْأَرْضَ خَاشِعَةً\n(that you see the earth barren,) means, lifeless, with nothing growing in it; it is dead.\nفَإِذَا أَنْزَلْنَا عَلَيْهَا الْمَاءَ اهْتَزَّتْ وَرَبَتْ\n(but when We send down water (rain) to it, it is stirred to life and growth.) means, it brings forth all kinds of crops and fruits.\nإِنَّ الَّذِي أَحْيَاهَا لَمُحْيِي الْمَوْتَىٰ ۚ إِنَّهُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ\n(Verily, He Who gives it life, surely is able to give life to the dead. Indeed He is Able to do all things.)","href":"/tafsir/41?verse=37","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:41:40","title":"Ibn Kathir · 41:40–43","text":"Verily, those who 'Yulḥidūna Fī' Our Ayat are not hidden from Us. Is he who is cast into the Fire better or he who comes secure on the Day of Resurrection? Do what you will. Verily, He is All-Seer of what you do (40)Verily, those who disbelieved in the Reminder when it came to them. And verily, it is an honorable well-fortified respected Book (41)Falsehood cannot come to it from before it or behind it, (it is) sent down by the All-Wise, Worthy of all praise (42)Nothing is said to you except what was said to the Messengers before you. Verily, your Lord is the Possessor of forgiveness, and (also) the Possessor of painful punishment (43)\nThe Punishment of the Deniers and the Description of the Qur'an\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ يُلْحِدُونَ فِي آيَاتِنَا\n(Verily, 'Yulḥidūna Fī' Our Ayat) Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Al-Ilḥād means putting words in their improper places.\" Qatadah and others said, \"It means disbelief and obstinate behavior.\"\nلَا يَخْفَوْنَ عَلَيْنَا\n(are not hidden from Us.) This is a stern warning and dire threat, stating that He, may He be exalted, knows who denies His signs, Names and attributes, and He will punish them for that. He says:\nأَفَمَنْ يُلْقَىٰ فِي النَّارِ خَيْرٌ أَمْ مَنْ يَأْتِي آمِنًا يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ ۚ\n(Is he who is cast into the Fire better or he who comes secure on the Day of Resurrection?) means, are these two equal? They are not equal. Then Allah warns the disbelievers:\nاعْمَلُوا مَا شِئْتُمْ\n(Do what you will.) Mujahid, Ad-Dahhak and 'Ata' Al-Khurasani said that\nاعْمَلُوا مَا شِئْتُمْ\n(Do what you will.) is a threat. Meaning, 'do what you will of good or evil, for He knows and sees all that you do.' He says:\nإِنَّهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ بَصِيرٌ\n(Verily, He is All-Seer of what you do.)\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِالذِّكْرِ لَمَّا جَاءَهُمْ ۖ\n(Verily, those who disbelieved in the Reminder when it came to them.) Ad-Dahhak, As-Suddi and Qatadah said, \"This is the Qur'an.\"\nوَإِنَّهُ لَكِتَابٌ عَزِيزٌ\n(And verily, it is an honorable well-fortified respected Book.) means, it is protected and preserved, and nobody can produce anything like it.\nلَا يَأْتِيهِ الْبَاطِلُ مِنْ بَيْنِ يَدَيْهِ وَلَا مِنْ خَلْفِهِ ۖ\n(Falsehood cannot come to it from before it or behind it,) means, there is no way to corrupt it, because it has been sent down by the Lord of the worlds. Allah says:\nتَنْزِيلٌ مِنْ حَكِيمٍ حَمِيدٍ\n((it is) sent down by the All-Wise, Worthy of all praise.) meaning, He is Wise in all that He says and does, Praiseworthy in all that He commands and forbids; everything that He does is for praiseworthy purposes and its consequences will be good.\nمَا يُقَالُ لَكَ إِلَّا مَا قَدْ قِيلَ لِلرُّسُلِ مِنْ قَبْلِكَ ۚ\n(Nothing is said to you except what was said to the Messengers before you.) Qatadah, As-Suddi and others said, \"Nothing is said to you by way of rejection and disbelief, that was not said to the Messengers who came before you. Just as you have been rejected, they were also rejected. Just as they bore their people's insults with patience, so too you must bear your people's insults with patience.\"\nإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَذُو مَغْفِرَةٍ\n(Verily, your Lord is the Possessor of forgiveness,) means, for those who turn to Him in repentance.\nوَذُو عِقَابٍ أَلِيمٍ\n(and (also) the Possessor of painful punishment.) means, for those who persist in disbelief, transgression and stubborn opposition.","href":"/tafsir/41?verse=40","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:41:44","title":"Ibn Kathir · 41:44–45","text":"And if We had sent this as a Qur'an in a foreign language, they would have said: \"Why are not its verses explained in detail? What! Not in Arabic nor an Arab?\" Say: \"It is for those who believe, a guide and a cure. And as for those who disbelieve, there is heaviness in their ears, and it is blindness for them. They are called from a place far away. (44)And indeed We gave Musa the Scripture, but dispute arose therein. And had it not been for a Word that went forth before from your Lord, and the matter would have been settled between them. But truly, they are in grave doubt thereto (45)\nRejection of the Qur'an is pure Stubbornness\nAllah tells us that the Qur'an is so eloquent and perfect in its wording and meanings, yet despite that the idolators do not believe in it. He tells us that their disbelief is the disbelief of stubbornness, as He says elsewhere:\nوَلَوْ نَزَّلْنَاهُ عَلَىٰ بَعْضِ الْأَعْجَمِينَ - فَقَرَأَهُ عَلَيْهِمْ مَا كَانُوا بِهِ مُؤْمِنِينَ\n(And if We had revealed it unto any of the non-Arabs, and he had recited it unto them, they would not have believed in it.)(26:198-199). If the Qur'an had been revealed in the language of the non-Arabs, they would have said, because of their stubbornness:\nلَوْلَا فُصِّلَتْ آيَاتُهُ ۖ أَأَعْجَمِيٌّ وَعَرَبِيٌّ ۗ\n(Why are not its verses explained in detail? What! not in Arabic and an Arab?) meaning, why is it not revealed in detail in Arabic? And by way of denunciation they would have said, \"What! not in Arabic nor from an Arab? – i.e., how can foreign words be revealed to an Arab who does not understand them? This interpretation was reported from Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Sa'id bin Jubayr, As-Suddi and others.\nقُلْ هُوَ لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا هُدًى وَشِفَاءٌ ۖ\n(Say: \"It is for those who believe, a guide and a cure...\") means, 'say, O Muhammad: this Qur'an, for the one who believes in it, is guidance for his heart and a cure for the doubts and confusion that exists in people's hearts.'\nوَالَّذِينَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ فِي آذَانِهِمْ وَقْرٌ\n(And as for those who disbelieve, there is heaviness in their ears,) means, they do not understand what is in it.\nوَهُوَ عَلَيْهِمْ عَمًى\n(and it is blindness for them.) means they are not guided to the explanations contained therein. This is like the Ayah:\nوَنُنَزِّلُ مِنَ الْقُرْآنِ مَا هُوَ شِفَاءٌ وَرَحْمَةٌ لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ ۙ وَلَا يَزِيدُ الظَّالِمِينَ إِلَّا خَسَارًا\n(And We send down of the Qur'an that which is a healing and a mercy to those who believe, and it increases the wrongdoers nothing but loss.)(17:82).\nأُولَٰئِكَ يُنَادَوْنَ مِنْ مَكَانٍ بَعِيدٍ\n(They are called from a place far away.) Mujahid said, \"Far away from their hearts.\" Ibn Jarir said, \"It is as if the one who is addressing them is calling to them from a distant place, and they cannot understand what he is saying.\" This is like the Ayah:\nوَمَثَلُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا كَمَثَلِ الَّذِي يَنْعِقُ بِمَا لَا يَسْمَعُ إِلَّا دُعَاءً وَنِدَاءً ۚ صُمٌّ بُكْمٌ عُمْيٌ فَهُمْ لَا يَعْقِلُونَ\n(And the example of those who disbelieve is as that of him who shouts to those (flock of sheep) that hears nothing but calls and cries. (They are) deaf, dumb and blind. So they do not understand.)(2:171)\nTaking Musa as an Example\nوَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَا مُوسَى الْكِتَابَ فَاخْتُلِفَ فِيهِ ۗ\n(And indeed We gave Musa the Scripture, but dispute arose therein.) means, they disbelieved in him and did not show him any respect.\nفَاصْبِرْ كَمَا صَبَرَ أُولُو الْعَزْمِ مِنَ الرُّسُلِ\n(Therefore be patient as did the Messengers of strong will)(46:35).\nوَلَوْلَا كَلِمَةٌ سَبَقَتْ مِن رَّبِّكَ إِلَىٰ أَجَلٍ مُّسَمًّى\n(And had it not been for a Word that went forth before from your Lord for an appointed term,)(42:14) i.e., to delay the Reckoning until the Day of Resurrection,\nلَقُضِيَ بَيْنَهُمْ\n(the matter would have been settled between them.) means, the punishment would have been hastened for them. But they have an appointed time, beyond which they will find no escape.\nوَإِنَّهُمْ لَفِي شَكٍّ مِنْهُ مُرِيبٍ\n(But truly, they are in grave doubt thereto.) means, their words of disbelief are not due to any wisdom or insight on their part; rather they spoke without any attempt at examining it thoroughly. This was also the interpretation of Ibn Jarir, and it is a plausible interpretation. And Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/41?verse=44","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:41:46","title":"Ibn Kathir · 41:46–48","text":"Whosoever does righteous good deed, it is for himself; and whosoever does evil, it is against himself. And your Lord is not at all unjust to (His) servants (46)To Him is referred the knowledge of the Hour. No fruit comes out of its sheath, nor does a female conceive nor brings forth (young), except by His knowledge. And on the Day when He will call unto them (saying): \"Where are My (so-called) partners?\" They will say: \"We inform You that none of us bears witness to it! (47)And those whom they used to invoke before (in this world) shall disappear from them, and they will perceive that they have no place of refuge (48)\nEveryone will be requited according to His Deeds\nمَنْ عَمِلَ صَالِحًا فَلِنَفْسِهِ ۖ\n(Whosoever does righteous good deed, it is for himself;) means, the benefit of which will come to him.\nوَمَنْ أَسَاءَ فَعَلَيْهَا ۗ\n(and whosoever does evil, it is against himself.) means, the consequences of that will come back on him.\nوَمَا رَبُّكَ بِظَلَّامٍ لِلْعَبِيدِ\n(And your Lord is not at all unjust to (His) servants) means, He only punishes people for their sins, and He does not punish anyone except after establishing proof against him and sending a Messenger to him.\nKnowledge of the Hour is with Allah Alone\nThen Allah says:\nإِلَيْهِ يُرَدُّ عِلْمُ السَّاعَةِ ۚ\n(To Him is referred the knowledge of the Hour.) meaning, no one knows about that apart from Him. Muhammad ﷺ, the leader of mankind, said to Jibril, who is one of the leading angels, when he asked him about the Hour:\nمَا الْمَسْؤُولُ عَنْهَا بِأَعْلَمَ مِنَ السَّائِلِ\n(The one who is asked about it does not know more than the one who is asking.)\" And Allah says:\nإِلَىٰ رَبِّكَ مُنْتَهَاهَا\n(To your Lord belongs the term thereof.)(79:44)\nلَا يُجَلِّيهَا لِوَقْتِهَا إِلَّا هُوَ ۚ\n(None can reveal its time but He)(7:187).\nوَمَا تَخْرُجُ مِنْ ثَمَرَاتٍ مِنْ أَكْمَامِهَا وَمَا تَحْمِلُ مِنْ أُنْثَىٰ وَلَا تَضَعُ إِلَّا بِعِلْمِهِ ۚ\n(No fruit comes out of its sheath, nor does a female conceive nor brings forth (young), except by His knowledge.) means, all of that is known to Him, and nothing is hidden from your Lord the weight of a speck of dust on the earth or in the heaven. Allah says:\nوَمَا تَسْقُطُ مِنْ وَرَقَةٍ إِلَّا يَعْلَمُهَا\n(not a leaf falls, but He knows it)(6:59).\nاللَّهُ يَعْلَمُ مَا تَحْمِلُ كُلُّ أُنْثَىٰ وَمَا تَغِيضُ الْأَرْحَامُ وَمَا تَزْدَادُ ۖ وَكُلُّ شَيْءٍ عِنْدَهُ بِمِقْدَارٍ\n(Allah knows what every female bears, and by how much the wombs fall short or exceed. Everything with Him is in (due) proportion)(13:8).\nوَمَا يُعَمَّرُ مِنْ مُعَمَّرٍ وَلَا يُنْقَصُ مِنْ عُمُرِهِ إِلَّا فِي كِتَابٍ ۚ إِنَّ ذَٰلِكَ عَلَى اللَّهِ يَسِيرٌ\n(And no aged man is granted a length of life nor is a part cut off from his life, but is in a Book. Surely, that is easy for Allah.)(35:11)\nوَيَوْمَ يُنَادِيهِمْ أَيْنَ شُرَكَائِي\n(And on the Day when He will call unto them (saying): \"Where are My (so-called) partners?\") means, on the Day of Resurrection, Allah will call out to the idolators before all of creation and say, \"Where are My partners whom you worshipped besides Me?\"\nقَالُوا آذَنَّاكَ\n(They will say: \"We inform You...\") means, 'we tell You,'\nمَا مِنَّا مِنْ شَهِيدٍ\n(that none of us bears witness to it.) means, 'not one of us will bear witness today that You have any partner.'\nوَضَلَّ عَنْهُمْ مَا كَانُوا يَدْعُونَ مِنْ قَبْلُ ۖ\n(And those whom they used to invoke before (in this world) shall disappear from them,) means, they will go away, and will be of no benefit to them.\nوَظَنُّوا مَا لَهُمْ مِنْ مَحِيصٍ\n(and they will perceive that they have no place of refuge) means, they will have no way of escaping from the punishment of Allah. This is like the Ayah:\nوَرَأَى الْمُجْرِمُونَ النَّارَ فَظَنُّوا أَنَّهُمْ مُوَاقِعُوهَا وَلَمْ يَجِدُوا عَنْهَا مَصْرِفًا\n(And the criminals shall see the Fire and apprehend that they have to fall therein. And they will find no way of escape from there.)(18:53)","href":"/tafsir/41?verse=46","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:41:49","title":"Ibn Kathir · 41:49–51","text":"Man does not get tired of asking for good; but if an evil touches him, then he gives up all hope and is lost in despair (49)And truly, if We give him a taste of mercy from Us, after some adversity has touched him, he is sure to say: \"This is due to my (merit); I think not that the Hour will be established. But if I am brought back to my Lord, surely there will be for me the best with Him. \"Then, We verily will show to the disbelievers what they have done, and We shall make them taste a severe torment (50)And when We show favor to man, he turns away and becomes arrogant; but when evil touches him, then he has recourse to long supplications (51)\nMan is fickle when Ease comes to Him after Difficulty\nAllah tells us that man never gets bored of asking his Lord for good things, such as wealth, physical health, etc., but if evil touches him – i.e., trials and difficulties or poverty –\nفَيَئُوسٌ قَنُوطٌ\n(then he gives up all hope and is lost in despair.), i.e., he thinks that he will never experience anything good again.\nوَلَئِنْ أَذَقْنَاهُ رَحْمَةً مِنَّا مِنْ بَعْدِ ضَرَّاءَ مَسَّتْهُ لَيَقُولَنَّ هَٰذَا لِي\n(And truly, if We give him a taste of mercy from Us, after some adversity has touched him, he is sure to say: \"This is due to my (merit)...\") means, if something good happens to him or some provision comes to him after a period of difficulty, he says, 'this is because of me, because I deserve this from my Lord.'\nوَمَا أَظُنُّ السَّاعَةَ قَائِمَةً\n(I think not that the Hour will be established.) means, he does not believe that the Hour will come. So when he is given some blessing, he becomes careless, arrogant and ungrateful, as Allah says:\nكَلَّا إِنَّ الْإِنْسَانَ لَيَطْغَىٰ - أَنْ رَآهُ اسْتَغْنَىٰ\n(Nay! Verily, man does transgress. Because he considers himself self-sufficient.)(96:6-7)\nوَلَئِنْ رُجِعْتُ إِلَىٰ رَبِّي إِنَّ لِي عِنْدَهُ لَلْحُسْنَىٰ\n(But if I am brought back to my Lord, surely there will be for me the best with Him.) means, 'if there is a Hereafter after all, then my Lord will be generous and kind to me just as He was in this world.' So he expects Allah to do him favors in spite of his bad deeds and lack of certain faith. Allah says:\nفَلَنُنَبِّئَنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِمَا عَمِلُوا وَلَنُذِيقَنَّهُمْ مِنْ عَذَابٍ غَلِيظٍ\n(Then, We verily will show to the disbelievers what they have done, and We shall make them taste a severe torment.) Thus Allah threatens punishment and vengeance to those whose conduct and belief is like that.\nوَإِذَا أَنْعَمْنَا عَلَى الْإِنْسَانِ أَعْرَضَ وَنَأَىٰ بِجَانِبِهِ\n(And when We show favor to man, he turns away and becomes arrogant;) means, he turns away from doing acts of obedience and is too proud to obey the commands of Allah. This is like the Ayah:\nفَتَوَلَّىٰ بِرُكْنِهِ\n(But [Fir'awn] turned away along with his hosts)(51:39).\nوَإِذَا مَسَّهُ الشَّرُّ\n(but when evil touches him,) means, difficulties,\nفَذُو دُعَاءٍ عَرِيضٍ\n(then he has recourse to long supplications.) means, he asks at length for one thing. Long supplications are those which are long on words and short on meaning. The opposite is concise speech which is brief but full of meaning. And Allah says:\nوَإِذَا مَسَّ الْإِنْسَانَ الضُّرُّ دَعَانَا لِجَنْبِهِ أَوْ قَاعِدًا أَوْ قَائِمًا فَلَمَّا كَشَفْنَا عَنْهُ ضُرَّهُ مَرَّ كَأَنْ لَمْ يَدْعُنَا إِلَىٰ ضُرٍّ مَسَّهُ ۚ\n(And when harm touches man, he invokes Us, lying on his side, or sitting or standing. But when We have removed his harm from him, he passes on as if he had never invoked Us for a harm that touched him!)(10:12)","href":"/tafsir/41?verse=49","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:41:52","title":"Ibn Kathir · 41:52–54","text":"Say: \"Tell me, if it is from Allah, and you disbelieve in it Who is more astray than one who is in opposition far away. (52)We will show them Our signs in the universes, and within themselves, until it becomes manifest to them that this is the truth. Is it not sufficient in regard to your Lord that He is a Witness over all things (53)Lo, Verily, they are in doubt concerning the meeting with their Lord. Verily, He is surrounding all things (54)\nThe Qur'an and the Proofs of its Truth\nAllah says:\nقُلْ\n(Say) – 'O Muhammad, to these idolators who disbelieve in the Qur'an'–\nأَرَأَيْتُمْ إِنْ كَانَ\n(Tell me, if it) – this Qur'an –\nمِنْ عِنْدِ اللَّهِ ثُمَّ كَفَرْتُمْ بِهِ\n(is from Allah, and you disbelieve in it?) means, 'what do you think your position is before the One Who revealed it to His Messenger?' Allah says:\nمَنْ أَضَلُّ مِمَّنْ هُوَ فِي شِقَاقٍ بَعِيدٍ\n(Who is more astray than one who is in opposition far away.) means, he is in a state of disbelief, stubbornness and opposition to the truth, and is following a path that leads far away from guidance. Then Allah says:\nسَنُرِيهِمْ آيَاتِنَا فِي الْآفَاقِ وَفِي أَنْفُسِهِمْ\n(We will show them Our signs in the universe, and within themselves,) meaning, 'We will show them Our evidence and proof that the Qur'an is true and has indeed been sent down from Allah to the Messenger of Allah, through external signs,\nفِي الْآفَاقِ\n(in the universe), ' such as conquests and the advent of Islam over various regions and over all other religions. Mujahid, Al-Hasan and As-Suddi said, \"And signs within themselves means, the battle of Badr, the conquest of Makkah, and other events which befell them, where Allah granted victory to Muhammad ﷺ and his Companions, and inflicted a humiliating defeat on falsehood and its followers.\" It may also be that what is meant here is man and his physical composition. As detailed in the science of anatomy, which indicates the wisdom of the Creator – may He be blessed and exalted – and the different inclinations and opposite natures that people have, good and bad, etc., and the (divine) decrees to which man is subjected, having no power to change and over which he has no control.\nحَتَّىٰ يَتَبَيَّنَ لَهُمْ أَنَّهُ الْحَقُّ ۗ أَوَلَمْ يَكْفِ بِرَبِّكَ أَنَّهُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ شَهِيدٌ\n(until it becomes manifest to them that this (the Qur'an) is the truth. Is it not sufficient in regard to your Lord that He is a Witness over all things?) means, sufficient is Allah as a Witness over the words and deeds of His servants, and He bears witness that Muhammad ﷺ is telling the truth in what he says, as Allah says:\nلَٰكِنِ اللَّهُ يَشْهَدُ بِمَا أَنْزَلَ إِلَيْكَ ۖ أَنْزَلَهُ بِعِلْمِهِ ۖ\n(But Allah bears witness to that which He has sent down unto you; He has sent it down with His knowledge)(4:166).\nأَلَا إِنَّهُمْ فِي مِرْيَةٍ مِنْ لِقَاءِ رَبِّهِمْ ۗ\n(Lo, Verily, they are in doubt concerning the meeting with their Lord.) means, they doubt that the Hour will come, they do not think about it or strive for it or pay heed to it; on the contrary, they regard it as irrelevant and do not care about it. But it will undoubtedly come to pass. Then Allah states that He is Able to do all things and He encompasses all things, and it is very easy for Him to bring about the Hour:\nأَلَا إِنَّهُ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ مُحِيطٌ\n(Verily, He is surrounding all things!) means, all of creation is subject to His control, dominion and knowledge; He is controlling all things by His power, so whatever He wills happens, and whatever He does not will does not happen, and there is no god worthy of worship apart from Him.\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surah Fussilat. To Allah be praise and blessings.","href":"/tafsir/41?verse=52","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:42:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 42:1–6","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nحم - عسق - كَذَٰلِكَ يُوحِي إِلَيْكَ وَإِلَى الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِكَ اللَّهُ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ  - لَهُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ ۖ وَهُوَ الْعَلِيُّ الْعَظِيمُ - تَكَادُ السَّمَاوَاتُ يَتَفَطَّرْنَ مِنْ فَوْقِهِنَّ ۚ وَالْمَلَائِكَةُ يُسَبِّحُونَ بِحَمْدِ رَبِّهِمْ وَيَسْتَغْفِرُونَ لِمَنْ فِي الْأَرْضِ ۗ أَلَا إِنَّ اللَّهَ هُوَ الْغَفُورُ الرَّحِيمُ - وَالَّذِينَ اتَّخَذُوا مِنْ دُونِهِ أَوْلِيَاءَ اللَّهُ حَفِيظٌ عَلَيْهِمْ وَمَا أَنْتَ عَلَيْهِمْ بِوَكِيلٍ\n(1. Ha Mim.)(2. 'Ain Sin Qaf.)(3. Likewise Allah, the Almighty, the All-Wise sends revelation to you as to those before you.)(4. To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is on the earth, and He is the Most High, the Most Great.)(5. Nearly the heavens might be rent asunder from above them, and the angels glorify the praises of their Lord, and ask for forgiveness for those on the earth. Lo, Verily, Allah is the Oft-Forgiving, the Most Merciful.)(6. And as for those who take as protecting friends others besides Him – Allah is Hafiz over them, and you are not a trustee over them.)\nThe Revelation and Allah's Might\nWe have previously discussed the individual letters.\nكَذَٰلِكَ يُوحِي إِلَيْكَ وَإِلَى الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِكَ اللَّهُ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ\n(Likewise Allah, the Almighty, the All-Wise sends revelation to you as to those before you.) means, 'just as this Qur'an has been revealed to you, so too the Books and Scriptures were revealed to the Prophets who came before you.'\nاللَّهُ الْعَزِيزُ\n(Allah, the Almighty) means, in His vengeance\nالْحَكِيمُ\n(the All-Wise) means, in all that He says and does. Imam Malik, may Allah have mercy on him, narrated that 'A'ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, said, \"Al-Harith bin Hisham asked the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, 'O Messenger of Allah, how does the revelation come to you?' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nأَحْيَانًا يَأْتِينِي مِثْلَ صَلْصَلَةِ الْجَرَسِ، وَهُوَ أَشَدُّهُ عَلَيَّ فَيَفْصِمُ عَنِّي وَقَدْ وَعَيْتُ مَا قَالَ، وَأَحْيَانًا يَأْتِينِي الْمَلَكُ رَجُلًا فَيُكَلِّمُنِي فَأَعِي مَا يَقُولُ\n(Sometimes it comes to me like the ringing of a bell, which is the most difficult for me; then it goes away, and I understand what was said. And sometimes the angel comes to me in the image of a man, and he speaks to me and I understand what he says.)\"\nA'ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, said, \"I saw him receiving the revelation on a very cold day, and when it departed from him, there were beads of sweat on his forehead.\" It was also reported in the Two Sahihs, and the version quoted here is that recorded by Al-Bukhari.\nلَهُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ ۖ\n(To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is on the earth,) means, everything is subject to His dominion and control.\nوَهُوَ الْعَلِيُّ الْعَظِيمُ\n(and He is the Most High, the Most Great.) This is like the Ayat:\nالْكَبِيرُ الْمُتَعَالِ\n(the Most Great, the Most High)(13:9), and\nهُوَ الْعَلِيُّ الْكَبِيرُ\n(He is the Most High, the Most Great)(22:62). And there are many similar Ayat.\nتَكَادُ السَّمَاوَاتُ يَتَفَطَّرْنَ مِنْ فَوْقِهِنَّ ۚ\n(Nearly the heavens might be rent asunder from above them,) Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, Ad-Dahhak, Qatadah, As-Suddi and Ka'b Al-Ahbar said, \"Out of fear of His might.\"\nوَالْمَلَائِكَةُ يُسَبِّحُونَ بِحَمْدِ رَبِّهِمْ وَيَسْتَغْفِرُونَ لِمَنْ فِي الْأَرْضِ ۗ\n(and the angels glorify the praises of their Lord, and ask for forgiveness for those on the earth.) This is like the Ayah:\nالَّذِينَ يَحْمِلُونَ الْعَرْشَ وَمَنْ حَوْلَهُ يُسَبِّحُونَ بِحَمْدِ رَبِّهِمْ وَيُؤْمِنُونَ بِهِ وَيَسْتَغْفِرُونَ لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا رَبَّنَا وَسِعْتَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ رَحْمَةً وَعِلْمًا\n(Those who bear the Throne and those around it glorify the praises of their Lord, and believe in Him, and ask forgiveness for those who believe (saying): \"Our Lord! You comprehend all things in mercy and knowledge,\")(40:7)\nأَلَا إِنَّ اللَّهَ هُوَ الْغَفُورُ الرَّحِيمُ\n(Lo! Verily, Allah is the Oft-Forgiving, the Most Merciful.) This is a reminder, to take heed of this fact.\nوَالَّذِينَ اتَّخَذُوا مِنْ دُونِهِ أَوْلِيَاءَ\n(And as for those who take as protecting friends others besides Him) This refers to the idolators,\nاللَّهُ حَفِيظٌ عَلَيْهِمْ\n(Allah is Hafiz over them.) meaning, He is Witness to their deeds, recording and enumerating them precisely, and He will requite them for them in full.\nوَمَا أَنْتَ عَلَيْهِمْ بِوَكِيلٍ\n(and you are not a trustee over them.) meaning, 'you are just a warner, and Allah is the Trustee of all affairs.'","href":"/tafsir/42?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:42:7","title":"Ibn Kathir · 42:7–8","text":"And thus We have revealed to you a Qur'an in Arabic that you may warn the Mother of the Towns and all around it, and warn (them) of the Day of Assembling of which there is no doubt, a party will be in Paradise and a party in the blazing Fire (7)And if Allah had willed, He could have made them one nation, but He admits whom He wills to His mercy. And the wrongdoers will have neither a protector nor a helper (8)\nThe Qur'an was revealed to serve as a Warning\nAllah says, 'just as We sent revelation to the Prophets before you,'\nأَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْكَ قُرْآنًا عَرَبِيًّا\n(thus We have revealed to you a Qur'an in Arabic) meaning, plain, clear, and manifest\nلِتُنْذِرَ أُمَّ الْقُرَىٰ\n(that you may warn the Mother of the Towns), i.e., Makkah,\nوَمَنْ حَوْلَهَا\n(and all around it,) means, all the lands, east and west. Makkah is called Umm Al-Qura (the Mother of the Towns) because it is nobler than all other lands, as indicated by much evidence that has been discussed elsewhere. Among the most concise and clear proofs of that is the report recorded by Imam Ahmad from 'Abdullah bin 'Adi bin Al-Hamra' Az-Zuhri, who heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ say, as he was standing in the market place of Makkah;\nوَاللهِ إِنَّكِ لَخَيْرُ أَرْضِ اللهِ وَأَحَبُّ أَرْضِ اللهِ إِلَى اللهِ، وَلَوْلَا أَنِّي أُخْرِجْتُ مِنْكِ مَا خَرَجْتُ\n(By Allah, you are the best land of Allah, the most beloved land to Allah; were it not for the fact that I was driven out from you, I would never have left you.) This was also recorded by At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa'i and Ibn Majah; At-Tirmidhi said, \"Hasan Sahih. \"\nوَتُنْذِرَ يَوْمَ الْجَمْعِ\n(and warn (them) of the Day of Assembling) i.e., the Day of Resurrection, when Allah will assemble the first and the last in one plain.\nلَا رَيْبَ فِيهِ\n(of which there is no doubt,) means, there is no doubt that it will happen and will most certainly come to pass.\nفَرِيقٌ فِي الْجَنَّةِ وَفَرِيقٌ فِي السَّعِيرِ\n(a party will be in Paradise and a party in the blazing Fire.) This is like the Ayah:\nيَوْمَ يَجْمَعُكُمْ لِيَوْمِ الْجَمْعِ ۖ ذَٰلِكَ يَوْمُ التَّغَابُنِ ۗ\n((And remember) the Day when He will gather you (all) on the Day of Gathering, – that will be the Day of mutual loss and gain)(64:9). which means that the people of Paradise and the people of Hell will gain and lose, respectively. And it is like the Ayah:\nإِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً لِمَنْ خَافَ عَذَابَ الْآخِرَةِ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ يَوْمٌ مَجْمُوعٌ لَهُ النَّاسُ وَذَٰلِكَ يَوْمٌ مَشْهُودٌ - وَمَا نُؤَخِّرُهُ إِلَّا لِأَجَلٍ مَعْدُودٍ - يَوْمَ يَأْتِ لَا تَكَلَّمُ نَفْسٌ إِلَّا بِإِذْنِهِ ۚ فَمِنْهُمْ شَقِيٌّ وَسَعِيدٌ\n(Indeed in that (there) is a sure lesson for those who fear the torment of the Hereafter. That is a Day whereon will be gathered together, and that is a Day when all (the dwellers of the heavens and the earth) will be present. And We delay it only for a term fixed. On the Day when it comes, no person shall speak except by His leave. Some among them will be wretched and (others) blessed.)(11:103-105) Imam Ahmad recorded that 'Abdullah bin 'Amr, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ came out to us, holding two books in his hand. He said,\nأَتَدْرُونَ مَا هٰذَانِ الْكِتَابَانِ؟\n(Do you know what these two books are?) We said, \"We do not know unless you tell us, O Messenger of Allah.\" Concerning the book in his right hand, He ﷺ said:\nهَذَا كِتَابٌ مِنْ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ بِأَسْمَاءِ أَهْلِ الْجَنَّةِ وَأَسْمَاءِ آبَائِهِمْ وَقَبَائِلِهِمْ، ثُمَّ أُجْمِلَ عَلىٰ آخِرِهِمْ، لَا يُزَادُ فِيهِمْ وَلَا يُنْقَصُ مِنْهُمْ أبدًا\n(This is a book from the Lord of the worlds, containing the names of the people of Paradise and of their fathers and tribes; all of them are detailed, down to the last one of them, and nothing will be added or taken away from it.) Then concerning the book in his left hand, he ﷺ said:\nهَذَا كِتَابُ أَهْلِ النَّارِ بِأَسْمَائِهِمْ وَأَسْمَاءِ آبَائِهِمْ وَقَبَائِلِهِمْ، ثُمَّ أُجْمِلَ عَلىٰ آخِرِهِمْ، لَا يُزَادُ فِيهِمْ وَلَا يُنْقَصُ مِنْهُمْ أَبَدًا\n(This is the book of the people of Hell, containing their names and the names of their fathers and tribes, all of them are detailed down to the last one of them, and nothing will be added or taken away from it.) The Companions of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said, \"Why should we strive if it is something that is already cut and dried\" The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nسَدِّدُوا وَقَارِبُوا فَإِنَّ صَاحِبَ الْجَنَّةِ يُخْتَمُ لَهُ بِعَمَلِ أَهْلِ الْجَنَّةِ، وَإِنْ عَمِلَ أَيَّ عَمَلٍ،وَإِنَّ صَاحِبَ النَّارِ يُخْتَمُ لَهُ بِعَمَلِ أَهْلِ النَّارِ، وَإِنْ عَمِلَ أَيَّ عَمَلٍ\n(Strive with your deeds as hard as you can for middle course or close to it, for the person who is destined for Paradise will die doing the deeds of the people of Paradise, regardless of what he did before, and the person who is destined for Hell will die doing the deeds of the people of Hell, regardless of what he did before.) Then he ﷺ made a gesture with his fist and said,\nفَرَغَ رَبُّكُمْ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ مِنَ الْعِبَادِ\n(Your Lord has settled the matter of His servants) and he opened his right hand as if throwing something;\nفَرِيقٌ فِي الْجَنَّةِ\n(A party in Paradise.) and he made a similar gesture with his left hand;\nفَرِيقٌ فِي السَّعِيرِ\n(And a party in the blazing Fire.)\" This was also recorded by At-Tirmidhi, and An-Nasa'i; At-Tirmidhi said, \"Hasan Sahih Gharib.\"\nImam Ahmad recorded that Abu Nadrah said, \"One of the Companions of the Prophet ﷺ, whose name was Abu Abdullah, was visited by some of his friends, and they found him weeping. They asked him, 'What has caused you to weep? Didn't the Messenger of Allah ﷺ say to you,\nخُذْ مِنْ شَارِبِكَ ثُمَّ أَقِرَّهُ حَتَّى تَلْقَانِي\n(Trim your moustache and adhere to that practice until you meet me)' He said, 'Yes, but I heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ say;\nإِنَّ اللهَ تَعَالَىٰ قَبَضَ بِيَمِينِهِ قَبْضَةً وَأُخْرَىٰ بِالْيَدِ الْأُخْرَىٰ، قَالَ: هٰذِهِ لِهٰذِهِ، وَهٰذِهِ لِهٰذِهِ، وَلَا أُبَالِي\n(Allah picked up a handful in His Right Hand and another in His other Hand, and said, \"This is for this and this is for this, and I do not care.\") 'And I do not know in which of the two handfuls I am.'\" There are several Hadiths about Al-Qadr (the Divine Decree) in the books of Sahih, Sunan and Musnad. Including those narrated by 'Ali, Ibn Mas'ud, 'A'ishah and a large number of Companions, may Allah be pleased with them all.\nوَلَوْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ لَجَعَلَهُمْ أُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً\n(And if Allah had willed, He could have made them one nation,) means, either all following guidance or all following misguidance, but He made them all different, and He guides whomsoever He wills to the truth and He sends astray whomsoever He wills, and He has complete wisdom and perfect proof. Allah says:\nوَلَٰكِنْ يُدْخِلُ مَنْ يَشَاءُ فِي رَحْمَتِهِ ۚ وَالظَّالِمُونَ مَا لَهُمْ مِنْ وَلِيٍّ وَلَا نَصِيرٍ\n(but He admits whom He wills to His mercy. And the wrongdoers will have neither a protector nor a helper.)","href":"/tafsir/42?verse=7","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:42:9","title":"Ibn Kathir · 42:9–12","text":"Or have they taken protecting friends besides Him? But Allah – He Alone is the protector. And He Who gives life to the dead, and He is Able to do all things (9)And in whatsoever you differ, the decision thereof is with Allah. Such is Allah, my Lord in Whom I put my trust, and to Him I turn in repentance (10)The Creator of the heavens and the earth. He has made for you mates from yourselves, and for the cattle (also) mates. By this means He creates you. There is nothing like Him, and He is the All-Hearer, the All-Seer (11)To Him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth. He enlarges provision for whom He wills, and straitens. Verily, He is the All-Knower of everything (12)\nAllah is the Protector, Ruler and Creator\nHere Allah denounces the idolators for taking other gods instead of Allah, and declares that He is the True God, and it is not right to worship anyone except Him Alone. He is the One Who is able to bring the dead back to life and He is Able to do all things. Then He says:\nوَمَا اخْتَلَفْتُمْ فِيهِ مِنْ شَيْءٍ فَحُكْمُهُ إِلَى اللَّهِ ۚ\n(And in whatsoever you differ, the decision thereof is with Allah.) means, in whatever issue you differ. This is general in meaning and applies to all things.\nفَحُكْمُهُ إِلَى اللَّهِ\n(the decision thereof is with Allah.) means, He is the Judge of that, according to His Book and the Sunnah of His Prophet ﷺ. This is like the Ayah:\nفَإِنْ تَنَازَعْتُمْ فِي شَيْءٍ فَرُدُّوهُ إِلَى اللَّهِ وَالرَّسُولِ\n((And) if you differ in anything amongst yourselves, refer it to Allah and His Messenger)(4:59).\nذَٰلِكُمُ اللَّهُ رَبِّي\n(Such is Allah, my Lord) means, (He is) the Judge of all things.\nعَلَيْهِ تَوَكَّلْتُ وَإِلَيْهِ أُنِيبُ\n(in Whom I put my trust, and to Him I turn in repentance.) means, 'I refer all matters to Him.'\nفَاطِرُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ ۚ\n(The Creator of the heavens and the earth.) means, the Maker of them both and everything in between.\nجَعَلَ لَكُمْ مِنْ أَنْفُسِكُمْ أَزْوَاجًا\n(He has made for you mates from yourselves,) means, of your own kind. As a blessing and a favor from Him, He has made your kind male and female.\nوَمِنَ الْأَنْعَامِ أَزْوَاجًا\n(and for the cattle (also) mates.) means, and He has created for you eight pairs of cattle.\nيَذْرَؤُكُمْ فِيهِ ۚ\n(By this means He creates you.) means, in this manner He creates you, male and female, generation after generation of men and cattle.\nلَيْسَ كَمِثْلِهِ شَيْءٌ ۖ\n(There is nothing like Him,) means, there is nothing like the Creator of these pairs, for He is the Unique, the Self-Sufficient Master, Who has no peer or equal.\nوَهُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْبَصِيرُ\n(He is the All-Hearer, the All-Seer.)\nلَهُ مَقَالِيدُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ ۖ\n(To Him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth.) We have already discussed the interpretation of this phrase in Surat Az-Zumar (39:63), the conclusion of which is that He is the One Who is controlling and governing them.\nيَبْسُطُ الرِّزْقَ لِمَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَقْدِرُ ۚ\n(He expands provision for whom He wills, and straitens.) means, He gives plentiful provision to whomsoever He wills and He reduces it for whomsoever He wills, and He is perfectly Wise and Just.\nإِنَّهُ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ عَلِيمٌ\n(Verily, He is the All-Knower of everything.)","href":"/tafsir/42?verse=9","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:42:13","title":"Ibn Kathir · 42:13–14","text":"He (Allah) has ordained for you the same religion which He ordained for Nuh, and that which We have revealed to you, and that which We ordained for Ibrahim, Musa and 'Isa saying you should establish religion and make no divisions in it. Intolerable for the idolators is that to which you call them. Allah chooses for Himself whom He wills, and guides unto Himself who turns to Him in repentance (13)And they divided not till after knowledge had come to them, through transgression between themselves. And had it not been for a Word that went forth before from your Lord for an appointed term, the matter would have been settled between them. And verily, those who were made to inherit the Scripture after them, are in grave doubt concerning it (14)\nThe Religion of the Messengers is One\nAllah says to this Ummah:\nشَرَعَ لَكُمْ مِنَ الدِّينِ مَا وَصَّىٰ بِهِ نُوحًا وَالَّذِي أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْكَ\n(He (Allah) has ordained for you the same religion which He ordained for Nuh, and that which We have revealed to you,)\nAllah mentions the first Messenger who was sent after Adam, that is, Nuh, peace be upon them, and the last of them is Muhammad ﷺ. Then He mentions those who came in between them who were the Messengers of strong will, namely Ibrahim, Musa and 'Isa bin Maryam. This Ayah mentions all five, just as they are also mentioned in the Ayah in Surat Al-Ahzab, where Allah says:\nوَإِذْ أَخَذْنَا مِنَ النَّبِيِّينَ مِيثَاقَهُمْ وَمِنْكَ وَمِنْ نُوحٍ وَإِبْرَاهِيمَ وَمُوسَىٰ وَعِيسَى ابْنِ مَرْيَمَ ۖ\n(And (remember) when We took from the Prophets their covenant, and from you, and from Nuh, Ibrahim, Musa, and 'Isa son of Maryam.)(33:7). The Message which all the Messengers brought was to worship Allah Alone, with no partner or associate, as Allah says:\nوَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ قَبْلِكَ مِنْ رَسُولٍ إِلَّا نُوحِي إِلَيْهِ أَنَّهُ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا أَنَا فَاعْبُدُونِ\n(And We did not send any Messenger before you but We revealed to him (saying): None has the right to be worshipped but I, so worship Me.)(21:25). And according to a Hadith (the Prophet ﷺ said):\nنَحْنُ مَعْشَرَ الْأَنْبِيَاءِ أَوْلَادُ عَلَّاتٍ، دِينُنَا وَاحِدٌ\n(We Prophets are brothers and our religion is one.) In other words, the common bond between them is that Allah Alone is to be worshipped, with no partner or associate, even though their laws and ways may differ, as Allah says.\nلِكُلٍّ جَعَلْنَا مِنْكُمْ شِرْعَةً وَمِنْهَاجًا ۚ\n(To each among you, We have prescribed a law and a clear way)(5:48). Allah says here:\nأَنْ أَقِيمُوا الدِّينَ وَلَا تَتَفَرَّقُوا فِيهِ ۚ\n(saying you should establish religion and make no divisions in it.) meaning, Allah enjoined all the Prophets (peace and blessings of Allah be upon them all) to be as one and He forbade them to differ and be divided.\nكَبُرَ عَلَى الْمُشْرِكِينَ مَا تَدْعُوهُمْ إِلَيْهِ ۚ\n(Intolerable for the idolators is that to which you call them.) means, 'it is too much for them to bear, and they hate that to which you call them, O Muhammad, i.e., Tawhid.'\nاللَّهُ يَجْتَبِي إِلَيْهِ مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَهْدِي إِلَيْهِ مَنْ يُنِيبُ\n(Allah chooses for Himself whom He wills, and guides unto Himself who turns to Him in repentance.) means, He is the One Who decrees guidance for those who deserve it, and decrees misguidance for those who prefer it to the right path. Allah says here;\nوَمَا تَفَرَّقُوا إِلَّا مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا جَاءَهُمُ الْعِلْمُ\n(And they divided not till after knowledge had come to them,) means, their opposition to the truth arose after it had come to them and proof had been established against them. Nothing made them resist in this manner except their transgression and stubbornness.\nوَلَوْلَا كَلِمَةٌ سَبَقَتْ مِنْ رَبِّكَ إِلَىٰ أَجَلٍ مُسَمًّى\n(And had it not been for a Word that went forth before from your Lord for an appointed term,) means, were it not for the fact that Allah had already decreed that He would delay the reckoning of His servants until the Day of Resurrection, the punishment would have been hastened for them in this world.\nوَإِنَّ الَّذِينَ أُورِثُوا الْكِتَابَ مِنْ بَعْدِهِمْ\n(And verily, those who were made to inherit the Scripture after them,) means, the later generation which came after the earlier generation which had rejected the truth.\nلَفِي شَكٍّ مِنْهُ مُرِيبٍ\n(are in grave doubt concerning it.) means, they do not have any firm conviction in matters of religion; they merely imitate their forefathers, without any evidence or proof. So they are very confused and doubtful.","href":"/tafsir/42?verse=13","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:42:15","title":"Ibn Kathir · 42:15","text":"So unto this then invite (people), and stand firm as you are commanded, and follow not their desires but say: \"I believe in whatsoever Allah has sent down of the Book and I am commanded to do justice among you. Allah is our Lord and your Lord. For us our deeds and for you your deeds. There is no dispute between us and you. Allah will assemble us (all), and to Him is the final return. (15)\nThis Ayah includes ten separate and independent ideas, each of which is a ruling on its own. They (the scholars) said that there is nothing else like it in the Qur'an, apart from Ayat Al-Kursi [2:255], which also includes ten ideas.\nفَلِذَٰلِكَ فَادْعُ ۖ\n(So unto this then invite (people),) means, 'so call people to this which We have revealed to you and which We enjoined upon all the Prophets before you,' the Prophets of major ways [of Shari'ah] that were followed, such as the Messengers of strong will, and others.\nوَاسْتَقِمْ كَمَا أُمِرْتَ ۖ\n(and stand firm as you are commanded,) means, 'adhere firmly, you and those who follow you, to the worship of Allah as He has commanded you.'\nوَلَا تَتَّبِعْ أَهْوَاءَهُمْ ۖ\n(and follow not their desires) means, the desires of the idolators, in the falsehoods that they have invented and fabricated by worshipping idols.\nوَقُلْ آمَنْتُ بِمَا أَنْزَلَ اللَّهُ مِنْ كِتَابٍ ۖ\n(but say: \"I believe in whatsoever Allah has sent down of the Book...\") means, 'I believe in all the Books that have been revealed from heaven to the Prophets; we do not differentiate between any of them.'\nوَأُمِرْتُ لِأَعْدِلَ بَيْنَكُمُ ۖ\n(and I am commanded to do justice among you.) means, when judging according to the commands of Allah.\nاللَّهُ رَبُّنَا وَرَبُّكُمْ ۖ\n(Allah is our Lord and your Lord.) means, 'He is the One Who is to be worshipped, and there is no true God but He. We affirm this willingly, and even though you do not do so willingly, everyone in the universe prostrates to Him obediently and willingly.'\nلَنَا أَعْمَالُنَا وَلَكُمْ أَعْمَالُكُمْ ۖ\n(For us our deeds and for you your deeds.) means, 'we have nothing to do with you. ' This is like the Ayah:\nوَإِنْ كَذَّبُوكَ فَقُلْ لِي عَمَلِي وَلَكُمْ عَمَلُكُمْ ۖ أَنْتُمْ بَرِيئُونَ مِمَّا أَعْمَلُ وَأَنَا بَرِيءٌ مِمَّا تَعْمَلُونَ\n(And if they demy you, say: \"For me are my deeds and for you are your deeds! You are innocent of what I do, and I am innocent of what you do!\")(10:41)\nلَا حُجَّةَ بَيْنَنَا وَبَيْنَكُمُ ۖ\n(There is no dispute between us and you.) Mujahid said, \"This means, no argument.\" As-Suddi said, \"This was before Ayah of the sword was revealed.\" This fits the context, because this Ayah was revealed in Makkah, and Ayah of the sword [22:39-40] was revealed after the Hijrah.\nاللَّهُ يَجْمَعُ بَيْنَنَا ۖ\n(Allah will assemble us (all),) means, on the Day of Resurrection. This is like the Ayah:\nقُلْ يَجْمَعُ بَيْنَنَا رَبُّنَا ثُمَّ يَفْتَحُ بَيْنَنَا بِالْحَقِّ وَهُوَ الْفَتَّاحُ الْعَلِيمُ\n(Say: \"Our Lord will assemble us all together, then He will judge between us with truth. And He is the Just Judge, the All-Knower of the true state of affairs.\")(34:26).\nوَإِلَيْهِ الْمَصِيرُ\n(and to Him is the final return.) means, the final return on the Day of Reckoning.","href":"/tafsir/42?verse=15","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:42:16","title":"Ibn Kathir · 42:16–18","text":"And those who dispute concerning Allah, after it has been accepted, of no use is their dispute before their Lord and on them is wrath, and for them will be a severe torment (16)It is Allah Who has sent down the Book in truth, and the Balance. And what can make you know that perhaps the Hour is close at hand (17)Those who believe not therein seek to hasten it, while those who believe are fearful of it, and know that it is the very truth. Verily, those who dispute concerning the Hour are certainly in error far away (18)\nA Warning to Those Who dispute concerning Matters of Religion\nHere Allah warns those who try to hinder those who believe in Allah, from following His path.\nوَالَّذِينَ يُحَاجُّونَ فِي اللَّهِ مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا اسْتُجِيبَ لَهُ\n(And those who dispute concerning Allah, after it has been accepted,) means, those who dispute with the believers who have responded to Allah and His Messenger, and try to stop them from following the path of guidance.\nحُجَّتُهُمْ دَاحِضَةٌ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِمْ\n(no use is their dispute before their Lord) means, it is futile before Allah.\nوَعَلَيْهِمْ غَضَبٌ\n(and on them is wrath,) means, from Him.\nوَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ شَدِيدٌ\n(and for them will be a severe torment.) means, on the Day of Resurrection. Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, and Mujahid said, \"They disputed with the believers after they responded to Allah and His Messenger, and tried to prevent them from following the path of guidance, hoping that they would return to Jahiliyyah.\" Qatadah said, \"These were the Jews and Christians who said to them, 'Our religion is better than your religion, our Prophet came before your Prophet, and we are better than you and closer to Allah than you.'\" This was nothing but lies. Then Allah says:\nاللَّهُ الَّذِي أَنْزَلَ الْكِتَابَ بِالْحَقِّ\n(It is Allah Who has sent down the Book in truth,) referring to all the Books which were revealed from Him to His Prophets.\nوَالْمِيزَانَ\n(and the Balance.) means, justice and fairness. This was the view of Mujahid and Qatadah. This is like the Ayat:\nلَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا رُسُلَنَا بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ وَأَنْزَلْنَا مَعَهُمُ الْكِتَابَ وَالْمِيزَانَ لِيَقُومَ النَّاسُ بِالْقِسْطِ ۖ\n(Indeed We have sent Our Messengers with clear proofs, and revealed with them the Scripture and the Balance that mankind may keep up justice)(57:25).\nوَالسَّمَاءَ رَفَعَهَا وَوَضَعَ الْمِيزَانَ - أَلَّا تَطْغَوْا فِي الْمِيزَانِ - وَأَقِيمُوا الْوَزْنَ بِالْقِسْطِ وَلَا تُخْسِرُوا الْمِيزَانَ\n(And the heaven He has raised high, and He has set up the Balance. In order that you may not transgress (due) balance. And observe the weight with equity and do not make the balance deficient.)(55:7-9)\nوَمَا يُدْرِيكَ لَعَلَّ السَّاعَةَ قَرِيبٌ\n(And what can make you know that perhaps the Hour is close at hand?) This is encouragement (to strive) for its sake, a terrifying warning, and advice to think little of this world.\nيَسْتَعْجِلُ بِهَا الَّذِينَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِهَا ۖ\n(Those who believe not therein seek to hasten it,) means, they say, 'when will this promise be fulfilled, if you are telling the truth?' But they say this by way of disbelief and stubbornness, thinking that it is unlikely to happen.\nوَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مُشْفِقُونَ مِنْهَا\n(while those who believe are fearful of it) means, they are afraid of it happening.\nوَيَعْلَمُونَ أَنَّهَا الْحَقُّ\n(and know that it is the very truth.) means, that it will undoubtedly come to pass, so they prepare themselves for it and strive for its sake. It was reported through various chains of narration, a number reaching the level of being Mutawatir, in Sahih and Hasan narrations, in the Books of Sunan and Musnad.\nAccording to some versions, a man addressed the Messenger of Allah ﷺ in a loud voice, when he was on one of his journeys, calling out to him, \"O Muhammad!\" The Messenger of Allah ﷺ replied in a similar manner, \"Here I am!\" The man said, \"When will the Hour come?\" The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nوَيْحَكَ إِنَّهَا كَائِنَةٌ فَمَا أَعْدَدْتَ لَهَا؟\n(Woe to you! It will most certainly come. What have you done to prepare for it?) He said, \"Love for Allah and His Messenger.\" He ﷺ said:\nأَنْتَ مَعَ مَنْ أَحْبَبْتَ\n(You will be with those whom you love.) According to another Hadith:\nالْمَرْءُ مَعَ مَنْ أَحَبَّ\n(\"A man will be with those whom he loves.) This is Mutawatir beyond a doubt. The point is that he did not answer his question about when the Hour would happen, but he commanded him to prepare for it.\nأَلَا إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يُمَارُونَ فِي السَّاعَةِ\n(Verily, those who dispute concerning the Hour) means, who dispute whether it will happen and think it is unlikely ever to come,\nلَفِي ضَلَالٍ بَعِيدٍ\n(are certainly in error far away.) means, they are clearly ignorant, because the One Who created the heavens and the earth is even more able to give life to the dead, as Allah says:\nوَهُوَ الَّذِي يَبْدَأُ الْخَلْقَ ثُمَّ يُعِيدُهُ وَهُوَ أَهْوَنُ عَلَيْهِ ۚ\n(And He it is Who originates the creation, then He will repeat it; and this is easier for Him)(30:27).","href":"/tafsir/42?verse=16","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:42:19","title":"Ibn Kathir · 42:19–22","text":"Allah is very Gracious and Kind to His servants. He gives provisions to whom He wills. And He is the All-Strong, the Almighty (19)Whosoever desires the reward of the Hereafter, We give him increase in his reward, and whosoever desires the reward of this world, We give him thereof, and he has no portion in the Hereafter (20)Or have they partners with Allah who have instituted for them a religion which Allah has not ordained? And had it not been for a decisive Word, the matter would have been judged between them. And verily, for the wrongdoers there is a painful torment (21)You will see the wrongdoers fearful of that which they have earned, and it will surely befall them. But those who believe and do righteous deeds (will be) in the flowering meadows of the Gardens. They shall have whatsoever they desire with their Lord. That is the supreme grace (22)\nThe Provision of Allah in this World and the Hereafter\nHere Allah speaks of His kindness towards His creation, in that He provides for every last one of them and does not forget anyone. When it comes to His provision, the righteous and the sinner are alike. Allah says:\nوَمَا مِنْ دَابَّةٍ فِي الْأَرْضِ إِلَّا عَلَى اللَّهِ رِزْقُهَا وَيَعْلَمُ مُسْتَقَرَّهَا وَمُسْتَوْدَعَهَا ۚ كُلٌّ فِي كِتَابٍ مُبِينٍ\n(And no moving creature is there on the earth but its provision is due from Allah. And He knows its dwelling place and its deposit. All is in a Clear Book.)(11:6) And there are many similar Ayat.\nيَرْزُقُ مَنْ يَشَاءُ\n(He gives provisions to whom He wills.) means, He gives generously to whomsoever He wills.\nوَهُوَ الْقَوِيُّ الْعَزِيزُ\n(And He is the All-Strong, the Almighty.) means, there is nothing that can overpower Him. Then Allah says:\nمَنْ كَانَ يُرِيدُ حَرْثَ الْآخِرَةِ\n(Whosoever desires the reward of the Hereafter,) means, whoever does things for the sake of the Hereafter,\nنَزِدْ لَهُ فِي حَرْثِهِ\n(We give him increase in his reward,) meaning, 'We will give him strength and help him to do what he wants to do, and We will increase it for him. So for every good, We will multiply it and give him between ten and seven hundred good rewards,' as much as Allah wills.\nوَمَنْ كَانَ يُرِيدُ حَرْثَ الدُّنْيَا نُؤْتِهِ مِنْهَا وَمَا لَهُ فِي الْآخِرَةِ مِنْ نَصِيبٍ\n(and whosoever desires the reward of this world, We give him thereof, and he has no portion in the Hereafter.) means, whoever strives for the purpose of worldly gains, and never pays any heed to the Hereafter at all, Allah will deny him the Hereafter; and in this world, if He wills He will give to him and if He does not will, he will gain neither. So the one who strives with this intention in mind will have the worst deal in this world and in the Hereafter. The evidence for that is the fact that this Ayah is reinforced by the passage in Subhan (i.e., Surat Al-Isra') in which Allah says:\nمَنْ كَانَ يُرِيدُ الْعَاجِلَةَ عَجَّلْنَا لَهُ فِيهَا مَا نَشَاءُ لِمَنْ نُرِيدُ ثُمَّ جَعَلْنَا لَهُ جَهَنَّمَ يَصْلَاهَا مَذْمُومًا مَدْحُورًا - وَمَنْ أَرَادَ الْآخِرَةَ وَسَعَىٰ لَهَا سَعْيَهَا وَهُوَ مُؤْمِنٌ فَأُولَٰئِكَ كَانَ سَعْيُهُمْ مَشْكُورًا - كُلًّا نُمِدُّ هَٰؤُلَاءِ وَهَٰؤُلَاءِ مِنْ عَطَاءِ رَبِّكَ ۚ وَمَا كَانَ عَطَاءُ رَبِّكَ مَحْظُورًا - انْظُرْ كَيْفَ فَضَّلْنَا بَعْضَهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ ۚ وَلَلْآخِرَةُ أَكْبَرُ دَرَجَاتٍ وَأَكْبَرُ تَفْضِيلًا\n(Whoever desires the quick-passing, We readily grant him what We will for whom We like. Then, afterwards, We have appointed for him Hell; he will (enter) burn therein disgraced and rejected. And whoever desires the Hereafter and strives for it, with the necessary effort due for it while he is a believer – then such are the ones whose striving shall be appreciated. On each – these as well as those – We bestow from the bounties of your Lord. And the bounties of your Lord can never be forbidden. See how We prefer one above another (in this world), and verily, the Hereafter will be greater in degrees and greater in preferment.)(17:18-21)\nIt was reported that Ubayy bin Ka'b, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nبَشِّرْ هٰذِهِ الْأُمَّةَ بِالسَّنَاءِ وَالرِّفْعَةِ وَالنَّصْرِ وَالتَّمْكِينِ فِي الْأَرْضِ، فَمَنْ عَمِلَ مِنْهُمْ عَمَلَ الْآخِرَةِ لِلدُّنْيَا، لَمْ يَكُنْ لَهُ فِي الْاخِرَةِ مِنْ نَصِيبٍ\n(Give the glad tidings to this Ummah of sublimity, high status, victory and power in the land. But whoever among them does the deeds of the Hereafter for the sake of worldly gain, will have no portion of the Hereafter.)\"\nMaking Legislation for the Creatures is Shirk\nAllah says:\nأَمْ لَهُمْ شُرَكَاءُ شَرَعُوا لَهُمْ مِنَ الدِّينِ مَا لَمْ يَأْذَنْ بِهِ اللَّهُ ۚ\n(Or have they partners with Allah who have instituted for them a religion which Allah has not ordained?) means, they do not follow what Allah has ordained for you of upright religion; on the contrary, they follow what their devils (Shayatin), of men and Jinn, have prescribed for them. They instituted taboos, such as the Bahirah, Sa'ibah, Wasilah or Ham.\nThey also permitted eating flesh and blood of animals not slaughtered for consumption, gambling and other kinds of misguidance, ignorance and falsehood. These are things that they invented during Jahiliyyah, when they came up with all kinds of false rulings on what was permitted and what was forbidden, and false rites of worship and other corrupt ideas. It was recorded in the Sahih that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nرَأَيْتُ عَمْرَو بْنَ لُحَيِّ بْنِ قَمَعَةَ يَجُرُّ قُصْبَهُ فِي النَّارِ\n(I saw 'Amr bin Luhayy bin Qama'ah dragging his intestines in Hell) – because he had been the first one to introduce the idea of the Sa'ibah. This man was one of the kings of the Khuza'ah tribe, and he was the first one to do these things. He was the one who had made the Quraysh worship idols, may the curse of Allah be upon him. Allah said:\nوَلَوْلَا كَلِمَةُ الْفَصْلِ لَقُضِيَ بَيْنَهُمْ ۗ\n(And had it not been for a decisive Word, the matter would have been judged between them.) means, the punishment would have been hastened for them, were it not for the fact that it had already been decreed that it would be delayed until the Day of Resurrection.\nوَإِنَّ الظَّالِمِينَ لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ\n(And verily, for the wrongdoers there is a painful torment.) i.e., an agonizing torment in Hell, what a terrible destination.\nThe Terror of the Idolators in the Place of Gathering\nتَرَى الظَّالِمِينَ مُشْفِقِينَ مِمَّا كَسَبُوا\n(You will see the wrongdoers fearful of that which they have earned,) means, in the arena of Resurrection.\nوَهُوَ وَاقِعٌ بِهِمْ\n(and it will surely befall them.) means, the thing that they fear will undoubtedly happen to them. This is how they will be on the Day of Resurrection; they will be in a state of utter fear and terror.\nوَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ فِي رَوْضَاتِ الْجَنَّاتِ ۖ لَهُمْ مَا يَشَاءُونَ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِمْ ۚ\n(But those who believe and do righteous deeds (will be) in the flowering meadows of the Gardens. They shall have whatsoever they desire with their Lord.)\nWhat comparison can there be between the former and the latter? How can the one who will be in the arena of resurrection in a state of humiliation and fear, deserving it for his wrongdoing, be compared with the one who will be in the gardens of Paradise, enjoying whatever he wants of food, drink, clothing, dwellings, scenery, spouses and other delights such as no eye has seen, no ear has heard, and has never crossed the minds of men. Allah says:\nذَٰلِكَ هُوَ الْفَضْلُ الْكَبِيرُ\n(That is the supreme grace.) means, the ultimate victory and complete blessing.","href":"/tafsir/42?verse=19","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:42:23","title":"Ibn Kathir · 42:23–24","text":"That is whereof Allah gives glad tidings to His servants who believe and do righteous good deeds. Say: \"No reward do I ask of you for this except to be kind to me for my kinship with you.\" And whoever earns a good righteous deed, We shall give him an increase of good in respect thereof. Verily, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Ready to appreciate (23)Or say they: \"He has invented a lie against Allah?\" If Allah willed, He could have sealed up your heart. And Allah wipes out falsehood, and establishes the truth by His Word. Verily, He knows well what are in the breasts (24)\nGood News of the Blessings of Paradise for the People of Faith\nHaving mentioned the gardens of Paradise, Allah then says to His servants who believe and do righteous deeds:\nذَٰلِكَ الَّذِي يُبَشِّرُ اللَّهُ عِبَادَهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ ۗ\n(That is whereof Allah gives glad tidings to His servants who believe and do righteous good deeds.) meaning, this will undoubtedly come to them, because it is glad tidings from Allah to them.\nقُلْ لَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا إِلَّا الْمَوَدَّةَ فِي الْقُرْبَىٰ ۗ\n(Say: \"No reward do I ask of you for this except to be kind to me for my kinship with you.\") means, 'say, O Muhammad, to these idolators among the disbeliever of Quraysh: I do not ask you for anything in return for this message and sincere advice which I bring to you. All I ask of you is that you withhold your evil from me and let me convey the Messages of my Lord. If you will not help me, then do not disturb me, for the sake of the ties of kinship that exist between you and I.' Al-Bukhari recorded that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, was asked about the Ayah:\nإِلَّا الْمَوَدَّةَ فِي الْقُرْبَىٰ\n(except to be kind to me for my kinship with you.) Sa'id bin Jubayr said, \"To be kind to the family of Muhammad.\" Ibn 'Abbas said, \"No, you have jumped to a hasty conclusion. There was no clan among Quraysh to whom the Prophet ﷺ did not have some ties of kinship.\" Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Except that you uphold the ties of kinship that exist between me and you.\" This was recorded by Al-Bukhari. It was also recorded by Imam Ahmad with a different chain of narration.\nوَمَنْ يَقْتَرِفْ حَسَنَةً نَزِدْ لَهُ فِيهَا حُسْنًا ۚ\n(And whoever earns a good righteous deed, We shall give him an increase of good in respect thereof) means, 'whoever does a good deed, We will increase him in good for it, i.e., in reward.' This is like the Ayah:\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَظْلِمُ مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ ۖ وَإِنْ تَكُ حَسَنَةً يُضَاعِفْهَا وَيُؤْتِ مِنْ لَدُنْهُ أَجْرًا عَظِيمًا\n(Surely, Allah wrongs not even of the weight of a speck of dust, but if there is any good, He doubles it, and gives from Him a great reward.)(4:40)\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ شَكُورٌ\n(Verily, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Ready to appreciate.) means, He forgives many bad deeds and increases a small amount of good deeds; He conceals and forgives sins and He multiplies and increases the reward of good deeds.\nThe Accusation that the Prophet ﷺ fabricated the Qur'an - and the Response to that\nAllah's saying;\nأَمْ يَقُولُونَ افْتَرَىٰ عَلَى اللَّهِ كَذِبًا ۖ فَإِنْ يَشَإِ اللَّهُ يَخْتِمْ عَلَىٰ قَلْبِكَ ۗ\n(Or say they: \"He has invented a lie against Allah?\" If Allah willed, He could have sealed up your heart.) means, 'if you had invented any lies against Him, as these ignorant people claim,'\nيَخْتِمْ عَلَىٰ قَلْبِكَ\n(He could have sealed up your heart.) means, 'and thus caused you to forget what had already come to you of the Qur'an.' This is like the Ayah:\nوَلَوْ تَقَوَّلَ عَلَيْنَا بَعْضَ الْأَقَاوِيلِ - لَأَخَذْنَا مِنْهُ بِالْيَمِينِ - ثُمَّ لَقَطَعْنَا مِنْهُ الْوَتِينَ - فَمَا مِنْكُمْ مِنْ أَحَدٍ عَنْهُ حَاجِزِينَ\n(And if he had forged a false saying concerning Us (Allah), We surely would have seized him by his right hand, and then We certainly would have cut off his life artery, And none of you could have withheld Us from (punishing) him.)(69:44-47) which means, 'We would have wrought the utmost vengeance upon him, and no one among mankind would have been able to protect him.' And Allah said:\nوَيُحِقُّ الْحَقَّ بِكَلِمَاتِهِ\n(and establishes the truth by His Word.) means, He establishes it and strengthens it and makes it clear by His Words, i.e., by His evidence and signs.\nإِنَّهُ عَلِيمٌ بِذَاتِ الصُّدُورِ\n(Verily, He knows well what are in the breasts.) means, all that is hidden in the hearts of men.","href":"/tafsir/42?verse=23","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:42:25","title":"Ibn Kathir · 42:25–28","text":"And He it is Who accepts repentance from His servants, and forgives sins, and He knows what you do (25)And He answers those who believe and do righteous good deeds, and gives them increase of His bounty. And as for the disbelievers, theirs will be a severe torment (26)And if Allah were to extend the provision for His servants, they would surely rebel in the earth, but He sends down by measure as He wills. Verily, He is, in respect of His servants, the Well-Aware, the All-Seer (27)And He it is Who sends down the rain after they have despaired, and spreads His mercy. And He is the Wali, Worthy of all praise (28)\nAllah accepts Repentance and responds to Supplications\nHere Allah reminds His servants that He accepts repentance. If they turn to Him and come back to Him, then by His kindness and generosity He forgives, overlooks and conceals (their sins), as He says:\nوَمَنْ يَعْمَلْ سُوءًا أَوْ يَظْلِمْ نَفْسَهُ ثُمَّ يَسْتَغْفِرِ اللَّهَ يَجِدِ اللَّهَ غَفُورًا رَحِيمًا\n(And whoever does evil or wrongs himself but afterwards seeks Allah's forgiveness, he will find Allah Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.)(4:110) It was reported in Sahih Muslim that Anas bin Malik, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nللهُ تَعَالَىٰ أَشَدُّ فَرَحًا بِتَوْبَةِ عَبْدِهِ - حِينَ يَتُوبُ إِلَيْهِ - مِنْ أَحَدِكُمْ كَانَتْ رَاحِلَتُهُ بِأَرْضِ فَلَاةٍ، فَانْفَلَتَتْ مِنْهُ، وَعَلَيْهَا طَعَامُهُ وَشَرَابُهُ، فَأَيِسَ مِنْهَا فَأَتَىٰ شَجَرَةً فَاضْطَجَعَ فِي ظِلِّهَا، قَدْ أَيِسَ مِنْ رَاحِلَتِهِ، فَبَيْنَمَا هُوَ كَذَلِكَ إِذَا هُوَ بِهَا، قَائِمَةً عِنْدَهُ، فَأَخَذَ بِخِطَامِهَا، ثُمَّ قَالَ مِنْ شِدَّةِ الْفَرَحِ: اللّٰهُمَّ أَنْتَ عَبْدِي وَأَنَا رَبُّكَ، أَخْطَأَ مِنْ شِدَّةِ الْفَرَحِ\n(Allah is more pleased with the repentance of His servant than anyone of you who loses his riding beast in a barren land, and it was carrying his food and drink; he despairs of ever finding it, so he comes to a tree and lies down in its shade, having given up all hope of finding his riding beast; then whilst he is there like that, suddenly he sees it standing near him, so he takes hold of its reins and because of his great joy he says, \"O Allah,You are my slave and I am Your Lord!\" – i.e,. he makes a mistake because of his great joy.)\"\nA similar report was also narrated in the Sahih from 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud, may Allah be pleased with him.\nوَهُوَ الَّذِي يَقْبَلُ التَّوْبَةَ عَنْ عِبَادِهِ\n(And He it is Who accepts repentance from His servants,) It was reported that Az-Zuhri said, concerning this Ayah, that Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nللهُ أَشَدُّ فَرَحًا بِتَوْبَةِ عَبْدِهِ مِنْ أَحَدِكُمْ يَجِدُ ضَالَّتَهُ فِي الْمَكَانِ الَّذِي يَخَافُ أَنْ يَقْتُلَهُ فِيهِ الْعَطَشُ\n(Allah rejoices more over the repentance of His servant than one of you feels when he finds his lost camel in a place where he had feared that he would die of thirst.)\" Hammam bin Al-Harith said, \"Ibn Mas'ud was asked about a man who commits immoral sins with a woman and then marries her. He said, 'There is nothing wrong with that,' and recited:\nوَهُوَ الَّذِي يَقْبَلُ التَّوْبَةَ عَنْ عِبَادِهِ\n(And He it is Who accepts repentance from His servants).\"\nوَيَعْفُو عَنِ السَّيِّئَاتِ\n(and forgives sins,) means, He will accept repentance in the future, and He forgives past sins.\nوَيَعْلَمُ مَا تَفْعَلُونَ\n(and He knows what you do.) means, He knows all your deeds and actions and words, yet He still accepts the repentance of those who repent to Him.\nوَيَسْتَجِيبُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ\n(And He answers those who believe and do righteous good deeds,) As-Suddi said, \"This means, He responds to them.\" This was also the view of Ibn Jarir: \"It means that He answers their supplication for themselves, their companions and their brothers.\"\nوَيَزِيدُهُمْ مِنْ فَضْلِهِ\n(and gives them increase of His bounty.) means, He answers their supplications and gives them more besides. Qatadah said, narrating from Ibrahim An-Nakha'i Al-Lakhmi about the Ayah:\nوَيَسْتَجِيبُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ\n(And He answers those who believe and do righteous good deeds,) – (this means) they intercede for their brothers;\nوَيَزِيدُهُمْ مِنْ فَضْلِهِ\n(and gives them increase of His bounty.) – (this means) they intercede for their brothers' brothers.\nوَالْكَافِرُونَ لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ شَدِيدٌ\n(And as for the disbelievers, theirs will be a severe torment.) – having mentioned the believers and the great reward that is theirs, Allah then mentions the disbelievers and the severe, painful, agonizing torment that they will find with Him on the Day of Resurrection, the Day when they are brought to account.\nThe Reason why Provision is not Increased\nوَلَوْ بَسَطَ اللَّهُ الرِّزْقَ لِعِبَادِهِ لَبَغَوْا فِي الْأَرْضِ\n(And if Allah were to extend the provision for His servants, they would surely rebel in the earth,) means, 'if We gave them more provision than they need, this would make them rebel and transgress against one another in an arrogant and insolent manner.'\nوَلَٰكِنْ يُنَزِّلُ بِقَدَرٍ مَا يَشَاءُ ۚ إِنَّهُ بِعِبَادِهِ خَبِيرٌ بَصِيرٌ\n(but He sends down by measure as He wills. Verily, He is, in respect of His servants, the Well-Aware, the All-Seer.) means, but He gives them provision according to what is in their best interests, and He knows best about that. So He makes rich those who deserve to be rich, and He makes poor those who deserve to be poor.\nوَهُوَ الَّذِي يُنَزِّلُ الْغَيْثَ مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا قَنَطُوا\n(And He it is Who sends down the rain after they have despaired,) means, after the people have given up hope that rain will fall, He sends it down upon them at their time of need. This is like the Ayah:\nوَإِنْ كَانُوا مِنْ قَبْلِ أَنْ يُنَزَّلَ عَلَيْهِمْ مِنْ قَبْلِهِ لَمُبْلِسِينَ\n(And verily, before that (rain) – just before it was sent down upon them – they were in despair!)(30:49)\nوَيَنْشُرُ رَحْمَتَهُ\n(and spreads His mercy.) means, He bestows it upon all the people who live in that region. Qatadah said, \"We were told that a man said to 'Umar bin Al-Khattab, may Allah be pleased with him, 'O Commander of the faithful, no rain has come and the people are in despair.' 'Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, said, 'Rain will be sent upon you,' and he recited:\nوَهُوَ الَّذِي يُنَزِّلُ الْغَيْثَ مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا قَنَطُوا وَيَنْشُرُ رَحْمَتَهُ ۚ وَهُوَ الْوَلِيُّ الْحَمِيدُ\n(And He it is Who sends down the rain after they have despaired, and spreads His mercy. And He is the Protector, Worthy of all praise).\" Meaning He is the One Who is in control of His creation, taking care of what will benefit them in this world and the Hereafter, and the consequences of all His decrees and actions are good, for which He is worthy of all praise.","href":"/tafsir/42?verse=25","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:42:29","title":"Ibn Kathir · 42:29–31","text":"And among His Ayat is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and whatever moving creatures He has dispersed in them both. And He is Able to assemble them whenever He wills (29)And whatever of misfortune befalls you, it is because of what your hands have earned. And He pardons much (30)And you cannot escape from Allah in the earth, and besides Allah you have neither any protector nor any helper (31)\nAmong the Signs of Allah is the Creation of the Heavens and the Earth\nوَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ\n(And among His Ayat) the signs which point to His great might and power,\nخَلْقُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَمَا بَثَّ فِيهِمَا\n(is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and whatever moving creatures He has dispersed in them both.) means, whatever He has created in them, i.e., in the heavens and the earth.\nمِنْ دَابَّةٍ\n(and whatever moving creatures) this includes the angels, men, Jinn and all the animals with their different shapes, colors, languages, natures, kinds and types. He has distributed them throughout the various regions of the heavens and earth.\nوَهُوَ\n(And He) means, yet despite all that,\nعَلَىٰ جَمْعِهِمْ إِذَا يَشَاءُ قَدِيرٌ\n(is Able to assemble them whenever He wills.) means, on the Day of Resurrection, He will gather the first and the last of them, and bring all His creatures together in one place where they will all hear the voice of the caller and all of them will be seen clearly; then He will judge between them with justice and truth.\nThe Cause of Misfortune is Sin\nوَمَا أَصَابَكُمْ مِنْ مُصِيبَةٍ فَبِمَا كَسَبَتْ أَيْدِيكُمْ\n(And whatever of misfortune befalls you, it is because of what your hands have earned.) means, 'whatever disasters happen to you, O mankind, are because of sins that you have committed in the past.'\nوَيَعْفُو عَنْ كَثِيرٍ\n(And He pardons much.) means, of sins; 'He does not punish you for them, rather He forgives you.'\nوَلَوْ يُؤَاخِذُ اللَّهُ النَّاسَ بِمَا كَسَبُوا مَا تَرَكَ عَلَىٰ ظَهْرِهَا مِنْ دَابَّةٍ\n(And if Allah were to punish men for that which they earned, He would not leave a moving creature on the surface of the earth)(35:45). According to a Sahih Hadith:\nوَالَّذِي نَفْسِي بِيَدِهِ مَا يُصِيبُ الْمُؤْمِنَ مِنْ نَصَبٍ وَلَا وَصَبٍ وَلَا هَمٍّ وَلَا حَزَنٍ إِلَّا كَفَّرَ اللهُ عَنْهُ بِهَا مِنْ خَطَايَاهُ، حَتّٰى الشَّوْكَةِ يُشَاكُهَا\n(By the One in Whose Hand is my soul, no believer is stricken with fatigue, exhaustion, worry or grief, but Allah will forgive him for some of his sins thereby – even a thorn which pricks him.) Imam Ahmad recorded that Mu'awiyah bin Abi Sufyan, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ say:\nمَا مِنْ شَيْءٍ يُصِيبُ الْمُؤْمِنَ فِي جَسَدِهِ يُؤْذِيهِ إِلَّا كَفَّرَ اللهُ تَعَالَىٰ عَنْهُ بِهِ مِنْ سَيِّئَاتِهِ\n(No physical harm befalls a believer, but Allah will expiate for some of his sins because of it.)\" Imam Ahmad also recorded that 'A'ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nإِذَا كَثُرَتْ ذُنُوبُ الْعَبْدِ وَلَمْ يَكُنْ لَهُ مَا يُكَفِّرُهَا، ابْتَلَاهُ اللهُ تَعَالَىٰ بِالْحَزَنِ لِيُكَفِّرَهَا\n(If a person commits many sins and has nothing that will expiate for them, Allah will test him with some grief that will expiate for them.)\"","href":"/tafsir/42?verse=29","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:42:32","title":"Ibn Kathir · 42:32–35","text":"And among His signs are the ships in the sea like mountains (32)If He wills, He causes the wind to cease, then they would become motionless on the surface (of the sea). Verily, in this are signs for everyone patient and grateful (33)Or He may destroy them because of that which their (people) have earned. And He pardons much (34)And those who dispute as regards Our Ayat may know that there is no place of refuge for them (35)\nShips are also among the Signs of Allah\nAllah tells us that another sign of His great power and dominion is the fact that He has subjugated the sea so that ships may sail in it by His command, so they sail in the sea like mountains. This was the view of Mujahid, Al-Hasan, As-Suddi and Ad-Dahhak. In other words, these ships on the sea are like mountains on land.\nإِنْ يَشَأْ يُسْكِنِ الرِّيحَ\n(If He wills, He causes the wind to cease,) means, the winds that cause the ships to travel on the sea. If He willed, He could cause the winds to cease, then the ships would not move and would remain still, neither coming nor going, staying where they are on the surface of the water.\nإِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِكُلِّ صَبَّارٍ\n(Verily, in this are signs for everyone patient) means, who is patient in the face of adversity\nشَكُورٍ\n(and grateful.) means, in the fact that Allah has subjugated the sea and He sends as much wind as they need in order to travel, there are signs of His blessings to His creation for everyone who is patient, i.e., at times of difficulty, and grateful, i.e., at times of ease.\nأَوْ يُوبِقْهُنَّ بِمَا كَسَبُوا\n(Or He may destroy them because of that which their (people) have earned.) means, if He wills, He may destroy the ships and drown them, because of the sins of the people on board.\nوَيَعْفُ عَنْ كَثِيرٍ\n(And He pardons much.) means, of their sins; if He were to punish them for all of their sins, He would destroy everyone who sails on the sea. Some of the scholars interpreted the Ayah\nأَوْ يُوبِقْهُنَّ بِمَا كَسَبُوا\n(Or He may destroy them because of that which their (people) have earned.) as meaning, if He willed, He could send the wind to blow fiercely so that it would take the ships and divert them from their courses, driving them to the right or the left, so that they would be lost and would not be able to follow their intended path. This interpretation also includes the idea of their being destroyed. This also fits the first meaning, which is that if Allah willed, He could cause the wind to cease, in which case the ships would stop moving, or He could make the wind fierce, in which case the ships would be lost and destroyed. But by His grace and mercy, He sends the wind according to their needs, just as He sends rain that is sufficient. If He sent too much rain, it would destroy their houses, and if He sent too little, their crops and fruits would not grow. In the case of lands such as Egypt, He sends water from another land, because they do not need rain; if rain were to fall upon them, it would destroy their houses and cause walls to collapse.\nوَيَعْلَمَ الَّذِينَ يُجَادِلُونَ فِي آيَاتِنَا مَا لَهُمْ مِنْ مَحِيصٍ\n(And those who dispute as regards Our Ayat may know that there is no place of refuge for them.) means, they have no means of escape from Our torment and vengeance, for they are subdued by Our power.","href":"/tafsir/42?verse=32","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:42:36","title":"Ibn Kathir · 42:36–39","text":"So whatever you have been given is but (a passing) enjoyment for this worldly life, but that which is with Allah is better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their Lord (36)And those who shun the greater sins, and Al-Fawahish, and when they are angry, they forgive (37)And those who answer the Call of their Lord, and perform the Salah, and who (conduct) their affairs by mutual consultation, and who spend of what We have bestowed on them (38)And those who, when an oppressive wrong is done to them, take revenge (39)\nThe Attributes of Those Who deserve that which is with Allah\nHere Allah points out the insignificance of this worldly life and its transient adornments and luxuries.\nفَمَا أُوتِيتُمْ مِنْ شَيْءٍ فَمَتَاعُ الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا ۖ\n(So whatever you have been given is but (a passing) enjoyment for this worldly life.) means, no matter what you achieve and amass, do not be deceived by it, for it is only the enjoyment of this life, which is the lower, transient realm that will undoubtedly come to an end.\nوَمَا عِنْدَ اللَّهِ خَيْرٌ وَأَبْقَىٰ\n(but that which is with Allah is better and more lasting) means, the reward of Allah is better than this world, and it will last forever, so do not give preference to that which is transient over that which is lasting. Allah says:\nلِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا\n(for those who believe) means, for those who are patient in forgoing the pleasures of this world,\nوَعَلَىٰ رَبِّهِمْ يَتَوَكَّلُونَ\n(and put their trust in their Lord.) means, so that He will help them to be patient in doing what is obligatory and avoiding what is forbidden. Then Allah says:\nوَالَّذِينَ يَجْتَنِبُونَ كَبَائِرَ الْإِثْمِ وَالْفَوَاحِشَ\n(And those who shun the greater sins, and Al-Fawahish,) We have already discussed sin and Al-Fawahish in Surat Al-A'raf.\nوَإِذَا مَا غَضِبُوا هُمْ يَغْفِرُونَ\n(and when they are angry, they forgive.) means, their nature dictates that they should forgive people and be tolerant. Vengeance is not in their nature. It was reported in the Sahih that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ never took revenge for his own sake, only when the sacred Laws of Allah were violated.\nوَالَّذِينَ اسْتَجَابُوا لِرَبِّهِمْ\n(And those who answer the Call of their Lord,) means, they follow His Messenger ﷺ and obey His commands and avoid that which He has prohibited.\nوَأَقَامُوا الصَّلَاةَ\n(and perform As-Salah) – which is the greatest act of worship of Allah, may He be glorified.\nوَأَمْرُهُمْ شُورَىٰ بَيْنَهُمْ\n(and who (conduct) their affairs by mutual consultation,) means, they do not make a decision without consulting one another on the matter so that they can help one another by sharing their ideas concerning issues such as wars and other matters. This is like the Ayah:\nوَشَاوِرْهُمْ فِي الْأَمْرِ\n(and consult them in the affairs)(3:159). The Prophet ﷺ used to consult with them concerning wars and other matters, so that they would feel confidant. When 'Umar bin Al-Khattab, may Allah be pleased with him, was dying, after he had been stabbed, he entrusted the choice of the next Khalifah to six people who were to be consulted. They were 'Uthman, 'Ali, Talhah, Az-Zubayr, Sa'id and 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Awf, may Allah be pleased with them all. Then all of the Companions, may Allah be pleased with them, agreed to appoint 'Uthman as their leader.\nوَمِمَّا رَزَقْنَاهُمْ يُنْفِقُونَ\n(and who spend of what We have bestowed on them.) this means kindly treating the creation of Allah, starting with those who are closest, then the next closest, and so on.\nوَالَّذِينَ إِذَا أَصَابَهُمُ الْبَغْيُ هُمْ يَنْتَصِرُونَ\n(And those who, when an oppressive wrong is done to them, take revenge.) ameans, they have the strength to take revenge on those who commit aggressive wrong and hostile acts against them. They are not incapable of doing so and they are not helpless; they are able to take revenge against those who transgress against them, even though when they have the power to take revenge, they prefer to forgive, as when Yusuf, peace be upon him, said to his brothers:\nلَا تَثْرِيبَ عَلَيْكُمُ الْيَوْمَ ۖ يَغْفِرُ اللَّهُ لَكُمْ ۖ\n(No reproach on you this day; may Allah forgive you)(12: 92). even though he was in a position to take revenge on them for what they had done to him. The Messenger of Allah ﷺ forgave the eighty people who intended to do him harm during the year of Al-Hudaybiyah, camping by the mountain of At-Tan'im. When he overpowered them, he set them free, even though he was in a position to take revenge on them. He also forgave Ghawrath bin Al-Harith who wanted to kill him and unsheathed his sword while he was sleeping. The Prophet ﷺ woke up to find him pointing the sword at him. He reproached him angrily and the sword dropped. Then the Messenger of Allah ﷺ picked up the sword and called his Companions He told them what had happened, and he forgave the man. There are many similar Hadiths and reports. And Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/42?verse=36","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:42:40","title":"Ibn Kathir · 42:40–43","text":"The recompense for an evil is an evil like thereof; but whoever forgives and makes reconciliation, his reward is with Allah. Verily, He likes not the wrongdoers (40)And indeed whosoever takes revenge after he has suffered wrong, for such there is no way (of blame) against them (41)The way is only against those who oppress men and rebel in the earth without justification; for such there will be a painful torment (42)And verily, whosoever shows patience and forgives, that would truly be from the things recommended by Allah (43)\nForgiving or exacting Revenge on Wrongdoers\nوَجَزَاءُ سَيِّئَةٍ سَيِّئَةٌ مِثْلُهَا ۖ\n(The recompense for an evil is an evil like thereof). This is like the Ayat:\nفَمَنِ اعْتَدَىٰ عَلَيْكُمْ فَاعْتَدُوا عَلَيْهِ بِمِثْلِ مَا اعْتَدَىٰ عَلَيْكُمْ ۚ\n(Then whoever transgresses the prohibition against you, you transgress likewise against him)(2:194), and\nوَإِنْ عَاقَبْتُمْ فَعَاقِبُوا بِمِثْلِ مَا عُوقِبْتُمْ بِهِ ۖ\n(And if you punish, then punish them with the like of that with which you were afflicted)(16:126). Justice, has been prescribed, in the form of the prescribed laws of equality in punishment (Al-Qisas), but the better way, which means forgiving, is recommended, as Allah says:\nوَالْجُرُوحَ قِصَاصٌ ۚ فَمَنْ تَصَدَّقَ بِهِ فَهُوَ كَفَّارَةٌ لَهُ ۚ\n(and wounds equal for equal. But if anyone remits the retaliation by way of charity, it shall be for him an expiation)(5:45). Allah says here:\nفَمَنْ عَفَا وَأَصْلَحَ فَأَجْرُهُ عَلَى اللَّهِ ۚ\n(but whoever forgives and makes reconciliation, his reward is with Allah.) means, that will not be wasted with Allah. As it says in a Sahih Hadith:\nوَمَا زَادَ اللهُ تَعَالَىٰ عَبْدًا بِعَفْوٍ إِلَّا عِزًّا\n(Allah does not increase the person who forgives except in honor.)\"\nإِنَّهُ لَا يُحِبُّ الظَّالِمِينَ\n(Verily, He likes not the wrongdoers.) means, the aggressors, i.e., those who initiate the evil actions.\nوَلَمَنِ انْتَصَرَ بَعْدَ ظُلْمِهِ فَأُولَٰئِكَ مَا عَلَيْهِمْ مِنْ سَبِيلٍ\n(And indeed whosoever takes revenge after he has suffered wrong, for such there is no way (of blame) against them.) means, there is no sin on him for taking revenge against the one who wronged him.\nإِنَّمَا السَّبِيلُ\n(The way) means, the burden of sin,\nعَلَى الَّذِينَ يَظْلِمُونَ النَّاسَ وَيَبْغُونَ فِي الْأَرْضِ بِغَيْرِ الْحَقِّ\n(is only against those who oppress men and rebel in the earth without justification;) means, those who initiate wrongful actions against others, as it says in the Sahih Hadith:\nالْمُسْتَبَّانِ مَا قَالَا فَعَلَى الْبَادِىءِ، مَا لَمْ يَعْتَدِ الْمَظْلُومُ\n(When two persons indulge in abusing each other, the one who initiated the wrongful action is to blame, unless the one who was wronged oversteps the mark in retaliation.)\nأُولَٰئِكَ لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ\n(for such there will be a painful torment.) means, intense and agonizing. It was reported that Muhammad bin Wasi' said, \"I came to Makkah and there was a security out post over the trench whose guards took me to Marwan bin Al-Muhallab, who was the governor of Basrah. He said, 'What do you need, O Abu 'Abdullah' I said, 'If you can do it, I need you to be like the brother of Banu 'Adiy.' He said, 'Who is the brother of Banu 'Adiy' He said, 'Al-'Ala' bin Ziyad; he once appointed a friend of his to a position of authority, and he wrote to him: If you can, only go to sleep after you make sure that there is nothing on your back [i.e., you do not owe anything to anyone], your stomach is empty and your hands are untainted by the blood or wealth of the Muslims. If you do that, then there will be no way (of blame) against you –\nإِنَّمَا السَّبِيلُ عَلَى الَّذِينَ يَظْلِمُونَ النَّاسَ وَيَبْغُونَ فِي الْأَرْضِ بِغَيْرِ الْحَقِّ ۚ أُولَٰئِكَ لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ\n(The way is only against those who oppress men and rebel in the earth without justification; for such there will be a painful torment.)' Marwan said, 'He spoke the truth, by Allah, and gave sincere advice. ' Then he said, 'What do you need, O Abu 'Abdullah' I said, 'I need you to let me join my family.' He said, 'Yes [I will do that].'\" This was recorded by Ibn Abi Hatim. When Allah condemned wrongdoing and the people who do it, and prescribed Al-Qisas, He encouraged forgiveness:\nوَلَمَنْ صَبَرَ وَغَفَرَ\n(And verily, whosoever shows patience and forgives,) meaning, whoever bears the insult with patience and conceals the evil action,\nإِنَّ ذَٰلِكَ لَمِنْ عَزْمِ الْأُمُورِ\n(that would truly be from the things recommended by Allah.) Sa'id bin Jubayr said, \"This means, one of the things enjoined by Allah,\" i.e., good actions for which there will be a great reward and much praise.","href":"/tafsir/42?verse=40","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:42:44","title":"Ibn Kathir · 42:44–46","text":"And whomsoever Allah sends astray, for him there is no protector after Him. And you will see the wrongdoers, when they behold the torment, they will say: \"Is there any way of return? (44)And you will see them brought forward to it (Hell) made humble by disgrace, (and) looking with stealthy glance. And those who believe will say: \"Verily, the losers are they who lose themselves and their families on the Day of Resurrection.\" Verily, the wrongdoers will be in a lasting torment (45)And they will have no protectors to help them other than Allah. And he whom Allah sends astray, for him there is no way (46)\nThe State of the Wrongdoers on the Day of Resurrection\nAllah tells us that whatever He wills happens and whatever He does not will does not happen, and no one can make it happen. Whomever He guides, none can lead astray, and whomever He leads astray, none can guide, as He says:\nوَمَنْ يُضْلِلْ فَلَنْ تَجِدَ لَهُ وَلِيًّا مُرْشِدًا\n(but he whom He sends astray, for him you will find no protecting to lead him.)(18:17). Then Allah tells us about the wrongdoers, i.e., the idolators who associate others in worship with Allah:\nلَمَّا رَأَوُا الْعَذَابَ\n(when they behold the torment,) i.e., on the Day of Resurrection, they will wish that they could go back to this world.\nيَقُولُونَ هَلْ إِلَىٰ مَرَدٍّ مِنْ سَبِيلٍ\n(they will say: \"Is there any way of return?\") This is like the Ayah:\nوَلَوْ تَرَىٰ إِذْ وُقِفُوا عَلَى النَّارِ فَقَالُوا يَا لَيْتَنَا نُرَدُّ وَلَا نُكَذِّبَ بِآيَاتِ رَبِّنَا وَنَكُونَ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ - بَلْ بَدَا لَهُمْ مَا كَانُوا يُخْفُونَ مِنْ قَبْلُ ۖ وَلَوْ رُدُّوا لَعَادُوا لِمَا نُهُوا عَنْهُ وَإِنَّهُمْ لَكَاذِبُونَ\n(If you could but see when they will be held over the (Hell) Fire! They will say: \"Would that we were but sent back! Then we would not deny the Ayat of our Lord, and we would be of the believers!\" Nay, it has become manifest to them what they had been concealing before. But if they were returned, they would certainly revert to that which they were forbidden. And indeed they are liars.)(6:27-28)\nوَتَرَاهُمْ يُعْرَضُونَ عَلَيْهَا\n(And you will see them brought forward to it) means, to the Fire.\nخَاشِعِينَ مِنَ الذُّلِّ\n(made humble by disgrace,) means, in a befitting manner, because of their previous disobedience towards Allah.\nيَنْظُرُونَ مِنْ طَرْفٍ خَفِيٍّ\n((and) looking with stealthy glance.) Mujahid said, \"In a humiliated manner.\" That is, they will steal glances at it, because they will be afraid of it. But the thing that they are afraid of will undoubtedly happen, and worse than that – may Allah save us from that.\nوَقَالَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا\n(And those who believe will say) means, on the Day of Resurrection they will say:\nإِنَّ الْخَاسِرِينَ\n(Verily, the losers...) means, the greatest losers.\nالَّذِينَ خَسِرُوا أَنْفُسَهُمْ وَأَهْلِيهِمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ\n(are they who lose themselves and their families on the Day of Resurrection.) means, they will be taken to the Fire and deprived of any pleasures in the Hereafter. They will lose themselves, and they will be separated from their loved ones, companions, families and relatives, and they will lose them.\nأَلَا إِنَّ الظَّالِمِينَ فِي عَذَابٍ مُقِيمٍ\n(Verily, the wrongdoers will be in a lasting torment.) means, everlasting and eternal, with no way out and no escape.\nوَمَا كَانَ لَهُمْ مِنْ أَوْلِيَاءَ يَنْصُرُونَهُمْ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ ۗ\n(And they will have no protectors to help them other than Allah.) means, no one to save them from the punishment and torment which they are suffering.\nوَمَنْ يُضْلِلِ اللَّهُ فَمَا لَهُ مِنْ سَبِيلٍ\n(And he whom Allah sends astray, for him there is no way.) means, no salvation.","href":"/tafsir/42?verse=44","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:42:47","title":"Ibn Kathir · 42:47–48","text":"Answer the Call of your Lord before there comes from Allah a Day which cannot be averted. You will have no refuge on that Day nor there will be for you any denying (47)But if they turn away, We have not sent you as a Hafiz over them. Your duty is to convey. And verily, when We cause man to taste of mercy from Us, he rejoices there at; but when some evil befalls them because of the deeds which their hands have sent forth, then verily, man (becomes) ingrate (48)\nEncouragement to obey Allah before the Day of Resurrection\nWhen Allah tells us about the horrors and terrifying events of the Day of Resurrection, He warns us about it and commands us to prepare for it:\nاسْتَجِيبُوا لِرَبِّكُمْ مِنْ قَبْلِ أَنْ يَأْتِيَ يَوْمٌ لَا مَرَدَّ لَهُ مِنَ اللَّهِ ۚ\n(Answer the Call of your Lord before there comes from Allah a Day which cannot be averted.) means, once He issues the command, it will come to pass within the blinking of an eye, and no one will be able to avert it or prevent it.\nمَا لَكُمْ مِنْ مَلْجَإٍ يَوْمَئِذٍ وَمَا لَكُمْ مِنْ نَكِيرٍ\n(You will have no refuge on that Day nor there will be for you any denying.) means, you will have no stronghold in which to take refuge, no place in which to hide from Allah, for He will encompass you with His knowledge and power, and you will have no refuge from Him except with Him.\nيَقُولُ الْإِنْسَانُ يَوْمَئِذٍ أَيْنَ الْمَفَرُّ - كَلَّا لَا وَزَرَ - إِلَىٰ رَبِّكَ يَوْمَئِذٍ الْمُسْتَقَرُّ\n(On that Day man will say: \"Where (is the refuge) to flee?\" No! There is no refuge! Unto your Lord will be the place of rest that Day.)(75:10-12)\nفَإِنْ أَعْرَضُوا\n(But if they turn away,) refers to the idolators,\nفَمَا أَرْسَلْنَاكَ عَلَيْهِمْ حَفِيظًا\n(We have not sent you as a Hafiz over them.) means, 'you have no power over them.' And Allah says elsewhere:\nلَيْسَ عَلَيْكَ هُدَاهُمْ وَلَٰكِنَّ اللَّهَ يَهْدِي مَنْ يَشَاءُ ۗ\n(Not upon you is their guidance, but Allah guides whom He wills)(2:272).\nفَإِنَّمَا عَلَيْكَ الْبَلَاغُ وَعَلَيْنَا الْحِسَابُ\n(your duty is only to convey (the Message) and on Us is the reckoning)(13:40). And Allah says here:\nإِنْ عَلَيْكَ إِلَّا الْبَلَاغُ ۗ\n(Your duty is to convey.) meaning, 'all that We require you to do is to convey the Message of Allah to them.'\nوَإِنَّا إِذَا أَذَقْنَا الْإِنْسَانَ مِنَّا رَحْمَةً فَرِحَ بِهَا ۖ\n(And verily, when We cause man to taste of mercy from Us, he rejoices there at;) means, when a time of ease and comfort comes to him, he is happy about it.\nوَإِنْ تُصِبْهُمْ\n(but when befalls them) means mankind.\nسَيِّئَةٌ\n(some evil) means, drought, punishment, tribulation or difficulty,\nفَإِنَّ الْإِنْسَانَ كَفُورٌ\n(then verily, man (becomes) ingrate!) means, he forgets the previous times of ease and blessings and acknowledges nothing but the present moment. If times of ease come to him, he becomes arrogant and transgresses, but if any difficulty befalls him, he loses hope and is filled with despair. This is like what the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said to the women:\nيَا مَعْشَرَ النِّسَاءِ، تَصَدَّقْنَ، فَإِنِّي رَأَيْتُكُنَّ أَكْثَرَ أَهْلِ النَّارِ\n(O women, give in charity, for I have seen that you form the majority of the people of Hell.) A woman asked, \"Why is that, O Messenger of Allah?\" He said:\nلِأَنَّكُنَّ تُكْثِرْنَ الشِّكَايَةَ وَتَكْفُرْنَ الْعَشِيرَ، لَوْ أَحْسَنْتَ إِلىٰ إِحْدَاهُنَّ الدَّهْرَ ثُمَّ تَرَكْتَ يَوْمًا، قَالَتْ: مَا رَأَيْتُ مِنْكَ خَيْرًا قَطُّ\n(Because you complain too much, and you are ungrateful to (your) husbands. If one of you were to be treated kindly for an entire lifetime, then that kindness was lacking for one day, she would say, 'I have never seen anything good from you!') This is the case with most women, except for those whom Allah guides and who are among the people who believe and do righteous deeds. As the Prophet ﷺ said, the believer is the one who:\nإِنْ أَصَابَتْهُ سَرَّاءُ شَكَرَ، فَكَانَ خَيْرًا لَهُ، وَإِنْ أَصَابَتْهُ ضَرَّاءُ صَبَرَ، فَكَانَ خَيْرًا لَهُ، وَلَيْسَ ذَلِكَ لِأَحَدٍ إِلَّا لِلْمُؤْمِنِ\n(...if something good happens to him, he is thankful, and that is good for him. If something bad happens to him, he bears it with patience, and that is good for him. This does not happen to anyone except the believer.)","href":"/tafsir/42?verse=47","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:42:49","title":"Ibn Kathir · 42:49–50","text":"To Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He creates what He wills. He bestows female upon whom He wills, and bestows male upon whom He wills (49)Or He bestows both males and females, and He renders barren whom He wills. Verily, He is the All-Knower and is Able (to do all things)(50)\nAllah tells us that He is the Creator, Sovereign and Controller of the heavens and the earth. Whatever he wills happens, and whatever He does not will does not happen. He gives to whomsoever He wills and withholds from whomsoever he wills; none can withhold what He gives, and none can give what He withholds, and He creates whatever He wills.\nيَهَبُ لِمَنْ يَشَاءُ إِنَاثًا\n(He bestows female upon whom He wills.) means, He gives them daughters only. Al-Baghawi said, \"And among them (those who were given daughters only) was Lut, peace be upon him.\"\nوَيَهَبُ لِمَنْ يَشَاءُ الذُّكُورَ\n(and bestows male upon whom He wills.) means, He gives them sons only. Al-Baghawi said, \"Like Ibrahim Al-Khalil, peace be upon him, who did not have any daughters.\"\nأَوْ يُزَوِّجُهُمْ ذُكْرَانًا وَإِنَاثًا ۖ\n(Or He bestows both males and females,) means, He gives to whomsoever He wills both males and females, sons and daughters. Al-Baghawi said, \"Like Muhammad ﷺ.\"\nوَيَجْعَلُ مَنْ يَشَاءُ عَقِيمًا ۚ\n(and He renders barren whom He wills.) means, so that he has no children at all. Al-Baghawi said, \"Like Yahya and 'Isa, peace be upon them.\" So people are divided into four categories: some are given daughters, some are given sons, some are given both sons and daughters, and some are not given either sons or daughters, but they are rendered barren, with no offspring.\nإِنَّهُ عَلِيمٌ\n(Verily, He is the All-Knower) means, He knows who deserves to be in which of these categories.\nقَدِيرٌ\n(and is Able (to do all things).) means, to do whatever He wills and to differentiate between people in this manner. This issue is similar to that referred to in the Ayah where Allah says of 'Isa, peace be upon him:\nوَلِنَجْعَلَهُ آيَةً لِلنَّاسِ\n(And (We wish) to appoint him as a sign to mankind)(19:21): i.e., proof for them of His power, for He created people in four different ways. Adam, peace be upon him, was created from clay, from neither a male nor a female. Hawwa', peace be upon her, was created from a male without a female. All other people, besides 'Isa, peace be upon him, were created from male and female, and this sign of Allah was completed with the creation of 'Isa bin Maryam, may peace be upon them both, who was created from a female without a male. Allah says:\nوَلِنَجْعَلَهُ آيَةً لِلنَّاسِ\n(And (We wish) to appoint him as a sign to mankind)(19: 21). This issue has to do with parents, whilst the previous issue has to do with children, and in each case there are four categories. Glory be to the All-Knower Who is Able to do all things.","href":"/tafsir/42?verse=49","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:42:51","title":"Ibn Kathir · 42:51–53","text":"It is not given to any human being that Allah should speak to him unless (it be) by revelation, or from behind a veil, or (that) He sends a Messenger to reveal what He wills by His leave. Verily, He is Most High, Most Wise (51)And thus We have sent to you Ruh of Our command. You knew not what is the Book, nor what is Faith. But We have made it a light wherewith We guide whosoever of Our servants We will. And verily, you are indeed guiding to a straight path (52)The path of Allah to Whom belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is on the earth. Verily, all matters at the end go to Allah (53)\nHow the Revelation comes down\nThis refers to how Allah sends revelation. Sometimes He casts something into the heart of the Prophet ﷺ, and he has no doubt that it is from Allah, as it was reported in Sahih Ibn Hibban that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nإِنَّ رُوْحَ الْقُدُسِ نَفَثَ فِي رُوعِي أَنَّ نَفْسًا لَنْ تَمُوتَ حَتّٰى تَسْتَكْمِلَ رِزْقَهَا وَأَجَلَهَا، فَاتَّقُوا اللهَ وَأَجْمِلُوا فِي الطَّلَبِ\n(Ar-Ruh Al-Qudus [i.e., Jibril] breathed into my heart that no soul will die until its allotted provision and time have expired, so have Taqwa of Allah and keep seeking in a good (and lawful) way.)\nأَوْ مِنْ وَرَاءِ حِجَابٍ\n(or from behind a veil) – as He spoke to Musa, peace be upon him. He asked to see Him after He had spoken to him, but this was not granted to him.\nIn the Sahih, it recorded that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said to Jabir bin 'Abdullah, may Allah be pleased with him:\nمَا كَلَّمَ اللهُ أَحَدًا إِلَّا مِنْ وَرَاءِ حِجَابٍ، وَإِنَّهُ كَلَّمَ أَبَاكَ كِفَاحًا\n(Allah never speaks to anyone except from behind a veil, but He spoke to your father directly.) This is how it was stated in the Hadith. He [Jabir's father] was killed on the day of Uhud, but this refers to the realm of Al-Barzakh, whereas the Ayah speaks of this earthly realm.\nأَوْ يُرْسِلَ رَسُولًا فَيُوحِيَ بِإِذْنِهِ مَا يَشَاءُ\n(or (that) He sends a Messenger to reveal what He wills by His leave.) as Jibril, peace be upon him, and other angels came down to the Prophets, peace be upon them.\nإِنَّهُ عَلِيٌّ حَكِيمٌ\n(Verily, He is Most High, Most Wise.) He is Most High, All-Knowing, Most Wise.\nوَكَذَٰلِكَ أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْكَ رُوحًا مِنْ أَمْرِنَا ۚ\n(And thus We have sent to you Ruh of Our command.) means, the Qur'an.\nمَا كُنْتَ تَدْرِي مَا الْكِتَابُ وَلَا الْإِيمَانُ\n(You knew not what is the Book, nor what is Faith.) means, 'in the details which were given to you in the Qur'an.'\nوَلَٰكِنْ جَعَلْنَاهُ\n(But We have made it) means, the Qur'an,\nنُورًا نَهْدِي بِهِ مَنْ نَشَاءُ مِنْ عِبَادِنَا\n(a light wherewith We guide whosoever of Our servants We will.) This is like the Ayah:\nقُلْ هُوَ لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا هُدًى وَشِفَاءٌ ۖ وَالَّذِينَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ فِي آذَانِهِمْ وَقْرٌ وَهُوَ عَلَيْهِمْ عَمًى ۚ\n(Say: \"It is for those who believe, a guide and a healing. And as for those who disbelieve, there is heaviness (deafness) in their ears, and it (the Qur'an) is blindness for them.\")(41:44).\nوَإِنَّكَ\n(And verily, you) means, 'O Muhammad,'\nلَتَهْدِي إِلَىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ\n(are indeed guiding to a straight path.) means, the correct behavior. Then Allah explains this further by saying:\nصِرَاطِ اللَّهِ\n(The path of Allah) meaning, His Laws which He enjoins.\nالَّذِي لَهُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ\n(to Whom belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is on the earth.) means, their Lord and Sovereign, the One Who is controlling and ruling them, Whose decree cannot be overturned.\nأَلَا إِلَى اللَّهِ تَصِيرُ الْأُمُورُ\n(Verily, all matters at the end go to Allah.) means, all matters come back to Him and He issues judgement concerning them. Glorified and exalted be He far above all that the evildoers and deniers say.\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Ash-Shura.","href":"/tafsir/42?verse=51","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:43:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 43:1–8","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.)\nحم - وَالْكِتَابِ الْمُبِينِ - إِنَّا جَعَلْنَاهُ قُرْآنًا عَرَبِيًّا لَعَلَّكُمْ تَعْقِلُونَ - وَإِنَّهُ فِي أُمِّ الْكِتَابِ لَدَيْنَا لَعَلِيٌّ حَكِيمٌ - أَفَنَضْرِبُ عَنْكُمُ الذِّكْرَ صَفْحًا أَنْ كُنْتُمْ قَوْمًا مُسْرِفِينَ - وَكَمْ أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ نَبِيٍّ فِي الْأَوَّلِينَ - وَمَا يَأْتِيهِمْ مِنْ نَبِيٍّ إِلَّا كَانُوا بِهِ يَسْتَهْزِئُونَ - فَأَهْلَكْنَا أَشَدَّ مِنْهُمْ بَطْشًا وَمَضَىٰ مَثَلُ الْأَوَّلِينَ\n(1. Ha Mim.)(2. By the manifest Book.)(3. Verily, We have made it a Qur'an in Arabic that you may be able to understand.)(4. And verily, it is in the Mother of the Book with Us, indeed exalted, full of wisdom.)(5. Shall We then take away the Reminder from you, because you are a people excessive.)(6. And how many a Prophet have We sent amongst the men of old.)(7. And never came there a Prophet to them but they used to mock at him.)(8. Then We destroyed men stronger (in power) than these and the example of the ancients has passed away.)\nحم - وَالْكِتَابِ الْمُبِينِ\n(Ha-Mim. By the manifest Book.) means, plain and clear in both wording and meaning, because it was revealed in the language of the Arabs, which is the most eloquent language for communication among people. Allah says:\nإِنَّا جَعَلْنَاهُ\n(Verily, We have made it) meaning, revealed it,\nقُرْآنًا عَرَبِيًّا\n(a Qur'an in Arabic) meaning, in the language of the Arabs, eloquent and clear;\nلَعَلَّكُمْ تَعْقِلُونَ\n(that you may be able to understand.) means, that you may understand it and ponder its meanings. This is like the Ayah:\nبِلِسَانٍ عَرَبِيٍّ مُبِينٍ\n(In the plain Arabic language.)(26:195)\nوَإِنَّهُ فِي أُمِّ الْكِتَابِ لَدَيْنَا لَعَلِيٌّ حَكِيمٌ\n(And verily, it is in the Mother of the Book with Us, indeed exalted, full of wisdom.) This explains the high status of the Qur'an among the hosts on high (the angels), so that the people of earth will respect it, venerate it and obey it.\nوَإِنَّهُ\n(And verily, it) means, the Qur'an,\nفِي أُمِّ الْكِتَابِ\n(is in the Mother of the Book) meaning, Al-Lawh Al-Mahfuz (the Preserved Tablet). This was the view of Ibn 'Abbas and Mujahid.\nلَدَيْنَا\n(with Us,) means, in Our presence. This was the view of Qatadah and others.\nلَعَلِيٌّ\n(indeed exalted) means, occupying a position of honor and virtue. This was the view of Qatadah.\nحَكِيمٌ\n(full of wisdom.) means, clear, with no confusion or deviation. All of this indicates its noble status and virtue, as Allah says elsewhere:\nإِنَّهُ لَقُرْآنٌ كَرِيمٌ - فِي كِتَابٍ مَكْنُونٍ - لَا يَمَسُّهُ إِلَّا الْمُطَهَّرُونَ - تَنْزِيلٌ مِنْ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(That (this) is indeed an honorable recitation. In a Book well-guarded. Which none can touch but the pure. A revelation from the Lord of the all that exists.)(56:77-80)\nكَلَّا إِنَّهَا تَذْكِرَةٌ - فَمَنْ شَاءَ ذَكَرَهُ - فِي صُحُفٍ مُكَرَّمَةٍ - مَرْفُوعَةٍ مُطَهَّرَةٍ - بِأَيْدِي سَفَرَةٍ - كِرَامٍ بَرَرَةٍ\n(Nay, indeed it is an admonition. So whoever wills, let him pay attention to it. (It is) in Records held (greatly) in honor, exalted, purified, in the hands of scribes (angels), honorable and obedient.)(80:11-16)\nأَفَنَضْرِبُ عَنْكُمُ الذِّكْرَ صَفْحًا أَنْ كُنْتُمْ قَوْمًا مُسْرِفِينَ\n(Shall We then take away the Reminder (this Qur'an) from you, because you are a people excessive.) means, 'do you think that We will forgive you and not punish you, when you do not do as you have been commanded?' This was the view of Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, Abu Salih, Mujahid and As-Suddi, and was the view favored by Ibn Jarir.\nأَفَنَضْرِبُ عَنْكُمُ الذِّكْرَ صَفْحًا\n(Shall We then take away the Reminder (this Qur'an) from you,) Qatadah said, \"By Allah, if this Qur'an had been taken away when the first generations of this Ummah rejected it, they would have been doomed, but Allah by His mercy persisted in sending it and calling them to it for twenty years, or for as long as He willed.\" What Qatadah said is very good, and his point is that Allah, by His grace and mercy towards His creation, did not stop calling them to the truth and to the wise Reminder, i.e., the Qur'an, even though they were heedless and turned away from it. Indeed, He sent it so that those who were decreed to be guided might be guided by it, and so that proof might be established against those who were decreed to be.\nConsolation to the Prophet ﷺ for the Disbelief of Quraysh\nThen Allah consoles His Prophet ﷺ for the disbelief of his people, and commands him to bear it with patience.\nوَكَمْ أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ نَبِيٍّ فِي الْأَوَّلِينَ\n(And how many a Prophet have We sent amongst the men of old.) meaning, among the sects (communities) of old.\nوَمَا يَأْتِيهِمْ مِنْ نَبِيٍّ إِلَّا كَانُوا بِهِ يَسْتَهْزِئُونَ\n(And never came there a Prophet to them but they used to mock at him.) means, they disbelieved him and mock at him.\nفَأَهْلَكْنَا أَشَدَّ مِنْهُمْ بَطْشًا\n(Then We destroyed men stronger than these) means, 'We destroyed those who disbelieved in the Messengers, and they were stronger in power than these who disbelieve in you, O Muhammad.' This is like the Ayah:\nأَفَلَمْ يَسِيرُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ فَيَنْظُرُوا كَيْفَ كَانَ عَاقِبَةُ الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ ۚ كَانُوا أَكْثَرَ مِنْهُمْ وَأَشَدَّ قُوَّةً\n(Have they not traveled through the earth and seen what was the end of those before them? They were more in number than them and mightier in strength)(40:82). And there are many similar Ayat.\nوَمَضَىٰ مَثَلُ الْأَوَّلِينَ\n(and the example of the ancients has passed away.) Mujahid said, \"The way of their life.\" Qatadah said, \"Their punishment.\" Others said, \"Their lesson,\" i.e., 'We made them a lesson for those disbelievers who came after them, that they would suffer the same end as them,' as in the Ayah at the end of this Surah:\nفَجَعَلْنَاهُمْ سَلَفًا وَمَثَلًا لِلْآخِرِينَ\n(And We made them a precedent, and an example to later generations.)(43:56);\nسُنَّتَ اللَّهِ الَّتِي قَدْ خَلَتْ فِي عِبَادِهِ ۖ\n(this has been the way of Allah in dealing with His servants)(40:85).\nوَلَنْ تَجِدَ لِسُنَّةِ اللَّهِ تَبْدِيلًا\n(and you will not find any change in the way of Allah.)(33:62)","href":"/tafsir/43?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:43:9","title":"Ibn Kathir · 43:9–14","text":"And indeed if you ask them: \"Who has created the heavens and the earth?\" They will surely say: \"The All-Mighty, the All-Knower created them. (9)Who has made for you the earth like a bed, and has made for you roads therein, in order that you may find your way (10)And Who sends down water from the sky in due measure, then We revive a dead land therewith, and even so you will be brought forth (11)And Who has created all the pairs and has appointed for you ships and cattle on which you ride (12)In order that you may mount on their backs, and then may remember the favor of your Lord when you mount thereon, and say: \"Glory to Him Who has subjected this to us, and we could have never had it. (13)And verily, to Our Lord we indeed are to return! (14)\nThe Idolators' admission that Allah is the Sole Creator, and Further Evidence of that\nAllah says: 'If you, O Muhammad, were to ask these idolators who associate others with Allah and worship others besides Him,'\nمَنْ خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ لَيَقُولُنَّ خَلَقَهُنَّ الْعَزِيزُ الْعَلِيمُ\n(\"Who has created the heavens and the earth?\" They will surely say: \"The All-Mighty, the All-Knower created them.\") In other words, they will admit that the Creator of all that is Allah Alone, with no partner or associate, yet they still worship others – idols and false gods – alongside Him.\nالَّذِي جَعَلَ لَكُمُ الْأَرْضَ مَهْدًا\n(Who has made for you the earth like a bed,) means, smooth, stable and firm, so that you can travel about in it, and stand on it and sleep and walk about, even though it is created above water, but He has strengthened it with the mountains, lest it should shake.\nوَجَعَلَ لَكُمْ فِيهَا سُبُلًا\n(and has made for you roads therein,) means, paths between the mountains and the valleys.\nلَعَلَّكُمْ تَهْتَدُونَ\n(in order that you may find your way.) means, in your journeys from city to city, region to region, land to land.\nوَالَّذِي نَزَّلَ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مَاءً بِقَدَرٍ\n(And Who sends down water from the sky in due measure,) means, according to what is sufficient for your crops, fruits and drinking water for yourselves and your cattle.\nفَأَنْشَرْنَا بِهِ بَلْدَةً مَيْتًا\n(then We revive a dead land therewith,) means, a barren land, for when the water comes to it, it is stirred (to life), and it swells and puts forth every lovely kind (of growth). By referring to the revival of the earth, Allah draws attention to how He will bring bodies back to life on the Day of Resurrection, after they have been dead.\nكَذَٰلِكَ تُخْرَجُونَ\n(and even so you will be brought forth.) Then Allah says:\nوَالَّذِي خَلَقَ الْأَزْوَاجَ كُلَّهَا\n(And Who has created all the pairs) meaning, of everything that grows in the earth, all kinds of plants, crops, fruits, flowers, etc., and all different kinds of animals.\nوَجَعَلَ لَكُمْ مِنَ الْفُلْكِ\n(and has appointed for you ships) or vessels,\nوَالْأَنْعَامِ مَا تَرْكَبُونَ\n(and cattle on which you ride.) means, He has subjugated them to you and made it easy for you to eat their meat, drink their milk and ride on their backs. Allah says:\nلِتَسْتَوُوا عَلَىٰ ظُهُورِهِ\n(In order that you may mount on their backs,) meaning, sit comfortably and securely,\nعَلَىٰ ظُهُورِهِ\n(on their backs) means, on the backs of these kinds of animals.\nثُمَّ تَذْكُرُوا نِعْمَةَ رَبِّكُمْ\n(and then may remember the favor of your Lord) means, whereby these animals are subjugated to you.\nإِذَا اسْتَوَيْتُمْ عَلَيْهِ وَتَقُولُوا سُبْحَانَ الَّذِي سَخَّرَ لَنَا هَٰذَا وَمَا كُنَّا لَهُ مُقْرِنِينَ\n(when you mount thereon, and say: \"Glory to Him Who has subjected this to us, and we could have never had it.\") means, if it were not for the fact that Allah has subjugated these things to us, we could never have done this by our own strength.' Ibn 'Abbas, Qatadah, As-Suddi and Ibn Zayd said: \"We could not have done this ourselves.\"\nوَإِنَّا إِلَىٰ رَبِّنَا لَمُنْقَلِبُونَ\n(And verily, to Our Lord we indeed are to return.) means, 'We will return to Him after our death, and our ultimate destination is with Him.' In this Ayah, mention of earthly journeys draws attention to the journey of the Hereafter, just as elsewhere, mention of earthly provision draws attention to the importance of ensuring provision for the Hereafter, as Allah says:\nوَتَزَوَّدُوا فَإِنَّ خَيْرَ الزَّادِ التَّقْوَىٰ ۚ\n(And take a provision (with you) for the journey, but the best provision is the Taqwa)(2:197). And mention of earthly garments is also used to draw attention to the raiment of the Hereafter:\nوَرِيشًا ۖ وَلِبَاسُ التَّقْوَىٰ ذَٰلِكَ خَيْرٌ\n(and as an adornment; and the raiment of the Taqwa, that is better)(7:26).","href":"/tafsir/43?verse=9","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:43:15","title":"Ibn Kathir · 43:15–20","text":"Yet, they assign to some of His servants a share with Him. Verily, man is indeed a manifest ingrate (15)Or has He taken daughters out of what He has created, and He has selected for you sons (16)And if one of them is informed of the news of that which he sets forth as a parable to the Most Gracious, his face becomes dark, and he is filled with grief (17)A creature who is brought up in adornments, and who in dispute cannot make itself clear (18)And they make females the angels who themselves are servants of the Most Gracious. Did they witness their creation Their testimony will be recorded, and they will be questioned (19)And they said: \"If it had been the will of the Most Gracious, we should not have worshipped them.\" They have no knowledge whatsoever of that. They do nothing but lie (20)\nCondemnation of the Idolators' attribution of Offspring to Allah\nHere Allah speaks of the lies and fabrications of the idolators, when they devoted some of their cattle to their false gods and some to Allah, as He described in Surat Al-An'am where He said:\nوَجَعَلُوا لِلَّهِ مِمَّا ذَرَأَ مِنَ الْحَرْثِ وَالْأَنْعَامِ نَصِيبًا فَقَالُوا هَٰذَا لِلَّهِ بِزَعْمِهِمْ وَهَٰذَا لِشُرَكَائِنَا ۖ فَمَا كَانَ لِشُرَكَائِهِمْ فَلَا يَصِلُ إِلَى اللَّهِ ۖ وَمَا كَانَ لِلَّهِ فَهُوَ يَصِلُ إِلَىٰ شُرَكَائِهِمْ ۗ سَاءَ مَا يَحْكُمُونَ\n(And they assign to Allah share of the tilth and cattle which He has created, and they say: \"This is for Allah\" according to their claim, \"and this is for our partners.\" But the share of their partners reaches not Allah, while the share of Allah reaches their partners! Evil is the way they judge!)(6:136).\nSimilarly, out of the two kinds of offspring, sons and daughters, they assigned to Him the worst and least valuable (in their eyes), i.e., daughters, as Allah says:\nأَلَكُمُ الذَّكَرُ وَلَهُ الْأُنْثَىٰ - تِلْكَ إِذًا قِسْمَةٌ ضِيزَىٰ\n(Is it for you the males and for Him the females? That indeed is a division most unfair!)(53:21-22) And Allah says here:\nوَجَعَلُوا لَهُ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ جُزْءًا ۚ إِنَّ الْإِنْسَانَ لَكَفُورٌ مُبِينٌ\n(Yet, they assign to some of His servants a share with Him. Verily, man is indeed a manifest ingrate!) Then He says:\nأَمِ اتَّخَذَ مِمَّا يَخْلُقُ بَنَاتٍ وَأَصْفَاكُمْ بِالْبَنِينَ\n(Or has He taken daughters out of what He has created, and He has selected for you sons?) This is a denunciation of them in the strongest terms, as He goes on to say:\nوَإِذَا بُشِّرَ أَحَدُهُمْ بِمَا ضَرَبَ لِلرَّحْمَٰنِ مَثَلًا ظَلَّ وَجْهُهُ مُسْوَدًّا وَهُوَ كَظِيمٌ\n(And if one of them is informed of the news of that which he sets forth as a parable to the Most Gracious, his face becomes dark, and he is filled with grief!) means, if one of these people is given the news that there has been born to him one of those which he attributes to Allah, i.e., a daughter, he hates this news and it depresses and overwhelms him so much that he keeps away from people because he feels so ashamed. Allah says, so how can they dislike that so much and yet they attribute it to Allah?\nأَوَمَنْ يُنَشَّأُ فِي الْحِلْيَةِ وَهُوَ فِي الْخِصَامِ غَيْرُ مُبِينٍ\n(A creature who is brought up in adornments, and who in dispute cannot make itself clear?) means, women are regarded as lacking something, which they make up for with jewelry and adornments from the time of childhood onwards, and when there is a dispute, they cannot speak up and defend themselves clearly, so how can this be attributed to Allah?\nوَجَعَلُوا الْمَلَائِكَةَ الَّذِينَ هُمْ عِبَادُ الرَّحْمَٰنِ إِنَاثًا ۚ\n(And they make females the angels who themselves are servants of the Most Gracious.) means, that is what they believe about them, but Allah denounces them for that and says:\nأَشَهِدُوا خَلْقَهُمْ ۚ\n(Did they witness their creation?) meaning, did they see Allah creating them as females?\nسَتُكْتَبُ شَهَادَتُهُمْ\n(Their testimony will be recorded,) means, concerning that,\nوَيُسْأَلُونَ\n(and they will be questioned!) means, about that, on the Day of Resurrection. This is a stern warning and a serious threat.\nوَقَالُوا لَوْ شَاءَ الرَّحْمَٰنُ مَا عَبَدْنَاهُمْ ۗ\n(And they said: \"If it had been the will of the Most Gracious, we should not have worshipped them.\") means, (they said:) 'if Allah had willed, He would have prevented us from worshipping these idols which are images of the angels who are the daughters of Allah; He knows about this and He approves of it.'\nBy saying this, they combined several types of error: First: They attributed offspring to Allah – exalted and sanctified be He far above that. Second: They claimed that He chose daughters rather than sons, and they made the angels, who are the servants of the Most Gracious, female. Third: They worshipped them with no proof, evidence or permission from Allah. This was based on mere opinion, whims and desires, imitation of their elders and forefathers, and pure ignorance. They used Allah's decree as an excuse, and this reasoning betrayed their ignorance. Fourth: Allah denounced them for this in the strongest terms, for from the time He first sent Messengers and revealed Books, the command was to worship Him Alone with no partner or associate, and it was forbidden to worship anything other than Him. Allah says:\nوَلَقَدْ بَعَثْنَا فِي كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ رَسُولًا أَنِ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ وَاجْتَنِبُوا الطَّاغُوتَ ۖ فَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ هَدَى اللَّهُ وَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ حَقَّتْ عَلَيْهِ الضَّلَالَةُ ۚ فَسِيرُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ فَانْظُرُوا كَيْفَ كَانَ عَاقِبَةُ الْمُكَذِّبِينَ\n(And verily, We have sent among every Ummah a Messenger (proclaiming): \"Worship Allah, and avoid all false deities.\" Then of them were some whom Allah guided and of them were some upon whom the straying was justified. So travel through the land and see what was the end of those who denied.)(16:36)\nوَاسْأَلْ مَنْ أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ قَبْلِكَ مِنْ رُسُلِنَا أَجَعَلْنَا مِنْ دُونِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ آلِهَةً يُعْبَدُونَ\n(And ask those of Our Messengers whom We sent before you: \"Did We ever appoint gods to be worshipped besides the Most Gracious?\")(43:45)\nAnd Allah says in this Ayah, after mentioning this argument of theirs:\nمَا لَهُمْ بِذَٰلِكَ مِنْ عِلْمٍ ۖ\n(They have no knowledge whatsoever of that.) meaning, of the truth of what they say and the arguments they put forward.\nإِنْ هُمْ إِلَّا يَخْرُصُونَ\n(They do nothing but lie!) means, they tell lies and fabricate untruths.\nمَا لَهُمْ بِذَٰلِكَ مِنْ عِلْمٍ ۖ إِنْ هُمْ إِلَّا يَخْرُصُونَ\n(They have no knowledge whatsoever of that. They do nothing but lie!) Mujahid said, \"They do not appreciate the power of Allah.\"","href":"/tafsir/43?verse=15","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:43:21","title":"Ibn Kathir · 43:21–25","text":"Or have We given them any Book before this (the Qur'an) to which they are holding fast (21)Nay! They say: \"We found our fathers following a certain way and religion, and we guide ourselves by their footsteps. (22)And similarly, We sent not a warner before you to any town (people) but the luxurious ones among them said: \"We found our fathers following a certain way and religion, and we will indeed follow their footsteps. (23)He said: \"Even if I bring you better guidance than that which you found your fathers following?\" They said: \"Verily, we disbelieve in that with which you have been sent. (24)So We took revenge on them, then see what was the end of those who denied (25)\nThe Idolators have no Proof\nAllah condemns the idolators for worshipping others instead of Allah with no evidence or proof for doing so.\nأَمْ آتَيْنَاهُمْ كِتَابًا مِنْ قَبْلِهِ\n(Or have We given them any Book before this) means, before their idolatry.\nفَهُمْ بِهِ مُسْتَمْسِكُونَ\n(to which they are holding fast?) means, with regard to what they are doing. This is not the case. This is like the Ayah:\nأَمْ أَنْزَلْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ سُلْطَانًا فَهُوَ يَتَكَلَّمُ بِمَا كَانُوا بِهِ يُشْرِكُونَ\n(Or have We revealed to them an authority (a Scripture), which speaks of that which they have been associating with Him?)(30:35) meaning, that did not happen. Then Allah says:\nبَلْ قَالُوا إِنَّا وَجَدْنَا آبَاءَنَا عَلَىٰ أُمَّةٍ وَإِنَّا عَلَىٰ آثَارِهِمْ مُهْتَدُونَ\n(Nay! They say: \"we found our fathers following a certain way and religion (Ummah), and we guide ourselves by their footsteps.\") meaning, they have no grounds for their belief in idolatry apart from the fact that they are imitating their fathers and forefathers who were following a certain Ummah or way, i.e., religion. The word Ummah is used in a similar manner elsewhere, where Allah says:\nإِنَّ هَٰذِهِ أُمَّتُكُمْ أُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً\n(And verily, this your religion (Ummah) is one religion)(23:52), and they said;\nوَإِنَّا عَلَىٰ آثَارِهِمْ\n(and we by their footsteps) means, behind them\nمُهْتَدُونَ\n(We guide ourselves) This is their claim with no evidence. Then Allah points out that what these people say was already said by those who were like them among the nations of the past who disbelieved in the Messengers. Their hearts and their words are similar.\nكَذَٰلِكَ مَا أَتَى الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ مِنْ رَسُولٍ إِلَّا قَالُوا سَاحِرٌ أَوْ مَجْنُونٌ - أَتَوَاصَوْا بِهِ ۚ بَلْ هُمْ قَوْمٌ طَاغُونَ\n(Likewise, no Messenger came to those before them but they said: \"A sorcerer or a madman!\" Have they transmitted this saying to these? Nay, they are themselves a people transgressing beyond bounds!)(51:52-53) And Allah says here:\nوَكَذَٰلِكَ مَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ قَبْلِكَ فِي قَرْيَةٍ مِنْ نَذِيرٍ إِلَّا قَالَ مُتْرَفُوهَا إِنَّا وَجَدْنَا آبَاءَنَا عَلَىٰ أُمَّةٍ وَإِنَّا عَلَىٰ آثَارِهِمْ مُقْتَدُونَ\n(And similarly, We sent not a warner before you to any town (people) but the luxurious ones among them said: \"We found our fathers following a certain way and religion, and we will indeed follow their footsteps.\") Then He says:\nقُلْ\n(Say) – 'O Muhammad, to these idolators' –\nأَوَلَوْ جِئْتُكُمْ بِأَهْدَىٰ مِمَّا وَجَدْتُمْ عَلَيْهِ آبَاءَكُمْ ۖ قَالُوا إِنَّا بِمَا أُرْسِلْتُمْ بِهِ كَافِرُونَ\n(\"Even if I bring you better guidance than that which you found your fathers following?\" They said: \"Verily, we disbelieve in that with which you have been sent.\") 'Even if they were convinced of the truth of what you have brought to them, they will not follow it, because of their evil intentions and their arrogance towards the truth and its people.'\nفَانْتَقَمْنَا مِنْهُمْ ۖ\n(So We took revenge on them) means, on the disbelieving nations, by inflicting various kinds of punishments, as Allah has described in the stories of those nations.\nفَانْظُرْ كَيْفَ كَانَ عَاقِبَةُ الْمُكَذِّبِينَ\n(then see what was the end of those who denied) means, see what became of them, how they were destroyed and how Allah saved the believers.","href":"/tafsir/43?verse=21","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:43:26","title":"Ibn Kathir · 43:26–35","text":"And (remember) when Ibrahim said to his father and his people: \"Verily, I am innocent of what you worship, (26)\"Except Him Who created me; and verily, He will guide me. (27)And he made it a word lasting among his offspring, that they may turn back (28)Nay, but I gave to these and their fathers to enjoy, till there came to them the truth, and a Messenger making things clear (29)And when the truth came to them, they said: \"This is magic, and we disbelieve therein. (30)And they say: \"Why is not this Qur'an sent down to some great man of the two towns? (31)Is it they who would portion out the mercy of your Lord? It is We Who portion out between them their livelihood in this world, and We raised some of them above others in ranks, so that some may employ others in their work. But the mercy of your Lord is better than what they amass (32)And were it not that mankind would have become of one community, We would have provided for those who disbelieve in the Most Gracious, silver roofs for their houses, and elevators whereby they ascend (33)And for their houses, doors, and thrones on which they could recline (34)And adornments of gold. Yet all this would have been nothing but an enjoyment of this world. And the Hereafter with your Lord is for those who have Taqwa (35)\nIbrahim's Declaration of Tawhid\nHere Allah tells us about His servant, Messenger and close Friend, the leader of the monotheists and the father of all subsequent Prophets, from whom Quraysh were descended and claimed to have taken their religion. He disowned his father's and his people's worship of idols and said:\nإِنَّنِي بَرَاءٌ مِمَّا تَعْبُدُونَ - إِلَّا الَّذِي فَطَرَنِي فَإِنَّهُ سَيَهْدِينِ - وَجَعَلَهَا كَلِمَةً بَاقِيَةً فِي عَقِبِهِ\n(\"Verily, I am innocent of what you worship, except Him Who created me; and verily, He will guide me.\" And he made it a Word lasting among his offspring,) The Word means the worship of Allah Alone with no partner or associate, and the denunciation of all gods apart from Him, i.e., La ilaha illallah. He left this word as an example to be followed by those of his progeny who were guided by Allah.\nلَعَلَّهُمْ يَرْجِعُونَ\n(that they may turn back.) means, come back to this word. 'Ikrimah, Mujahid, Ad-Dahhak, Qatadah, As-Suddi and others commented on the Ayah:\nوَجَعَلَهَا كَلِمَةً بَاقِيَةً فِي عَقِبِهِ\n(And he made it a Word lasting among his offspring,) \"This means, La ilaha illallah, and there are still those among his offspring who say it.\" A similar view was narrated from Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him. Ibn Zayd said, \"The word of Islam,\" which refers to the same thing suggested by the group.\nHow the People of Makkah turned away from the Messenger ﷺ and opposed Him, and His Response\nAllah further says:\nبَلْ مَتَّعْتُ هَٰؤُلَاءِ\n(Nay, but I gave to these) means, the idolators,\nوَآبَاءَهُمْ\n(and their fathers) means, they lived a long life in their misguidance.\nحَتَّىٰ جَاءَهُمُ الْحَقُّ وَرَسُولٌ مُبِينٌ\n(till there came to them the truth, and a Messenger making things clear.) means, his message is clear and his warning is clear.\nوَلَمَّا جَاءَهُمُ الْحَقُّ قَالُوا هَٰذَا سِحْرٌ وَإِنَّا بِهِ كَافِرُونَ\n(And when the truth came to them, they said: \"This is magic, and we disbelieve therein.\") means, they were arrogant and stubborn, and they pushed him away out of disbelief, envy and transgression.\nوَقَالُوا\n(And they say) means, objecting to that which Allah has revealed to him,\nلَوْلَا نُزِّلَ هَٰذَا الْقُرْآنُ عَلَىٰ رَجُلٍ مِنَ الْقَرْيَتَيْنِ عَظِيمٍ\n(Why is not this Qur'an sent down to some great man of the two towns?) meaning, why was this Qur'an not revealed to some man who was great and prominent in their eyes, from the two towns, i.e., Makkah and At-Ta'if? This was the view of Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, 'Ikrimah, Muhammad bin Ka'b Al-Qurazi, Qatadah, As-Suddi and Ibn Zayd.\nSeveral scholars of Tafsir stated that by this, the Quraysh meant Al-Walid bin Al-Mughirah and 'Urwah bin Mas'ud Ath-Thaqafi. The apparent meaning is that what they meant was a great man from either of the two towns. Allah responded to their rejection by saying:\nأَهُمْ يَقْسِمُونَ رَحْمَتَ رَبِّكَ ۚ\n(Is it they who would portion out the mercy of your Lord?) meaning, the matter has nothing to do with them; it is for Allah to decide. Allah knows best where to direct His Message, and He does not reveal it except to the one who is the purest in heart and soul, and of the noblest descent.\nThen Allah points out that He differentiates among His creation in terms of what He gives them of wealth, provision, intellect, understanding and other visible and hidden strengths:\nنَحْنُ قَسَمْنَا بَيْنَهُمْ مَعِيشَتَهُمْ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا ۚ\n(It is We Who portion out between them their livelihood in this world,)\nلِيَتَّخِذَ بَعْضُهُمْ بَعْضًا سُخْرِيًّا ۗ\n(so that some may employ others in their work.) It was said that this means that some employ others in their work, because one needs the other, and vice versa. This was the view of As-Suddi and others.\nوَرَحْمَتُ رَبِّكَ خَيْرٌ مِمَّا يَجْمَعُونَ\n(But the mercy of your Lord is better than which they amass.) means, the mercy of Allah towards His creation is better for them than the wealth and conveniences of this world which they possess.\nWealth is not a Sign of Divine Pleasure\nوَلَوْلَا أَنْ يَكُونَ النَّاسُ أُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً\n(And were it not that mankind would have become of one community,) means, 'were it not for the fact that many ignorant people would think that Our giving them wealth was a sign that We love the person to whom We give it, and thus they would have agreed upon disbelief for the sake of wealth.' This is the view of Ibn 'Abbas, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, As-Suddi and others.\nلَجَعَلْنَا لِمَنْ يَكْفُرُ بِالرَّحْمَٰنِ لِبُيُوتِهِمْ سُقُفًا مِنْ فِضَّةٍ وَمَعَارِجَ\n(We would have provided for those who disbelieve in the Most Gracious, silver roofs for their houses, and elevators) means, ladders and staircases of silver. This was the view of Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, Qatadah, As-Suddi, Ibn Zayd and others.\nعَلَيْهَا يَظْهَرُونَ\n(whereby they ascend,) means, go up. And their houses would have doors, i.e., locks on their doors,\nوَسُرُرًا عَلَيْهَا يَتَّكِئُونَ\n(and thrones on which they could recline,) means, all of that would be made of silver.\nوَزُخْرُفًا ۚ\n(And adornments) means, and gold. This was the view of Ibn 'Abbas, Qatadah, As-Suddi and Ibn Zayd.\nوَإِنْ كُلُّ ذَٰلِكَ لَمَّا مَتَاعُ الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا ۚ\n(Yet all this would have been nothing but an enjoyment of this world.) means, all that belongs to this transient world which is insignificant before Allah. He hastens their reward for good deeds in the form of luxuries in this world, so that when they reach the Hereafter, they will have no good merits with Allah for which they may be rewarded, as was reported in the Sahih Hadith. It was reported in another Hadith:\nلَوْ أَنَّ الدُّنْيَا تَزِنُ عِنْدَ اللهِ جَنَاحَ بَعُوضَةٍ مَا سَقَىٰ مِنْهَا كَافِرًا شَرْبَةَ مَاءٍ\n(If this world were worth a gnat's wing before Allah, He would not give a disbeliever a drink of water.) Al-Baghawi narrated its chain of narration.\nوَالْآخِرَةُ عِنْدَ رَبِّكَ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ\n(And the Hereafter with your Lord is (only) for those who have Taqwa.) means, it is exclusively for them, and no one else will share it with them. When 'Umar bin Al-Khattab, may Allah be pleased with him, visited the Messenger of Allah ﷺ in seclusion, when he was keeping away from his wives, and he saw him resting on a rough mat which had left marks on his side, his eyes filled with tears and he said, \"O Messenger of Allah, look at this Chosroes and this Caesar with all that they have, and you are the best of Allah's creation. \" The Messenger of Allah ﷺ was reclining, but he sat up and said:\nأَوَ فِي شَكٍّ أَنْتَ يَا ابْنَ الْخَطَّابِ؟\n(Are you in doubt, O son of Al-Khattab?) Then he ﷺ said:\nأُولٰئِكَ قَوْمٌ عُجِّلَتْ لَهُمْ طَـيِّـبَاتُهُمْ فِي حَيَاتِهِمُ الدُّنْيَا\n(Those are people for whom the enjoyments are hastened in this world.) According to another report:\nأَمَا تَرْضَىٰ أَنْ تَــكُونَ لَهُمُ الدُّنْيَا وَلَنَا الْآخِرَةُ\n(Does it not please you that this world is for them and the Hereafter is for us?)\nIn as the Two Sahihs and elsewhere, it is reported that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nلَا تَشْرَبُوا فِي آنِيَةِ الذَّهَبِ وَالْفِضَّةِ، وَلَا تَأْكُلُوا فِي صِحَافِهَا، فَإِنَّهَا لَهُمْ فِي الدُّنْيَا وَلَنَا فِي الْآخِرَةِ\n(Do not drink from vessels of gold and silver, and do not eat from plates of the same, for these things are for them in this world and for us in the Hereafter.)\nAllah has granted these things to them in this world because it is insignificant, as was reported by At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah via Abu Hazim from Sahl bin Sa'd, who said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nلَوْ كَانَتِ الدُّنْيَا تَزِنُ عِنْدَ اللهِ جَنَاحَ بَعُوضَةٍ مَا سَقَىٰ مِنْهَا كَافِرًا شَرْبَةَ مَاءٍ أَبَدًا\n(If this world were worth a gnat's wing before Allah, He would never give a disbeliever a drink of water.)\" At-Tirmidhi said: \"Hasan Sahih.\"","href":"/tafsir/43?verse=26","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:43:36","title":"Ibn Kathir · 43:36–45","text":"And whosoever Ya'shu (turns away blindly) from the remembrance of the Most Gracious, We appoint for him Shaytan to be a Qarin (a companion) to him (36)And verily, they hinder them from the path, but they think that they are guided aright (37)Till, when (such a one) comes to Us, he says, \"Would that between me and you were the distance of the two easts (or the east and west) a worst companion (indeed)! (38)It will profit you not this Day as you did wrong, (and) that you will be sharers in the punishment (39)Can you make the deaf to hear, or can you guide the blind or him who is in manifest error (40)And even if We take you away, We shall indeed take vengeance on them (41)Or (if) We show you that wherewith We threaten them, then verily, We have perfect command over them (42)So hold you fast to that which is revealed to you. Verily, you are on the straight path (43)And verily, this is indeed a Dhikr for you and your people, and you will be questioned (44)And ask whom We sent before you of Our Messengers: \"Did We ever appoint gods to be worshipped besides the Most Gracious? (45)\nThe Shaytan is the Companion of the One Who turns away from Ar-Rahman\nوَمَنْ يَعْشُ\n(And whosoever Ya'shu (turns away blindly)) means, whoever willfully ignores and turns away\nعَنْ ذِكْرِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ\n(from the remembrance of the Most Gracious,) Al-'Asha (the root of Ya'sh) refers to weakness of vision; what is meant here is weakness of insight.\nنُقَيِّضْ لَهُ شَيْطَانًا فَهُوَ لَهُ قَرِينٌ\n(We appoint for him Shaytan to be a Qarin (a companion) to him.) This is like the Ayat:\nوَمَنْ يُشَاقِقِ الرَّسُولَ مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا تَبَيَّنَ لَهُ الْهُدَىٰ\n(And whoever contradicts and opposes the Messenger after the right path has been shown clearly to him)(4:115),\nفَلَمَّا زَاغُوا أَزَاغَ اللَّهُ قُلُوبَهُمْ ۚ\n(So when they turned away, Allah turned their hearts away)(61:5), and\nوَقَيَّضْنَا لَهُمْ قُرَنَاءَ فَزَيَّنُوا لَهُمْ مَا بَيْنَ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَمَا خَلْفَهُمْ\n(And We have assigned for them intimate companions, who have made fair seeming to them, what was before them and what was behind them)(41:25). Allah says here:\nوَإِنَّهُمْ لَيَصُدُّونَهُمْ عَنِ السَّبِيلِ وَيَحْسَبُونَ أَنَّهُمْ مُهْتَدُونَ - حَتَّىٰ إِذَا جَاءَنَا\n(And verily, they hinder them from the path, but they think that they are guided aright! Until, when he comes to Us,) meaning, for this person who willfully neglects true guidance, We send to him a Shaytan to lead him astray and show him the path to Hell. When he comes before Allah on the Day of Resurrection, he will complain about the Shaytan who was appointed to accompany him.\nقَالَ يَا لَيْتَ بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَكَ بُعْدَ الْمَشْرِقَيْنِ فَبِئْسَ الْقَرِينُ\n(he says, \"Would that between me and you were the distance of the two easts – a worst companion (indeed)!\") Some of them recited it;\n(حَتّٰى إِذَا جَاءَانَا)\n(Till, when they both come to Us.) referring to the companion Shaytan and the one whom he accompanies. Then Allah says:\nوَلَنْ يَنْفَعَكُمُ الْيَوْمَ إِذْ ظَلَمْتُمْ أَنَّكُمْ فِي الْعَذَابِ مُشْتَرِكُونَ\n(It will profit you not this Day as you did wrong, (and) that you will be sharers in the punishment.) means, 'your being together in the Fire will not help you in the slightest, and you will both partake of the painful punishment.' Allah says:\nأَفَأَنْتَ تُسْمِعُ الصُّمَّ أَوْ تَهْدِي الْعُمْيَ وَمَنْ كَانَ فِي ضَلَالٍ مُبِينٍ\n(Can you make the deaf to hear, or can you guide the blind or him who is in manifest error?) means, 'that is not up to you. All you have to do is convey the Message, but you do not have to guide them. Allah guides whomsoever He wills and sends astray whomsoever He wills, and He is Wise and Just in doing so.'\nAllah's Vengeance upon the Enemies of His Messenger ﷺ will surely come to pass\nAllah further says:\nفَإِمَّا نَذْهَبَنَّ بِكَ فَإِنَّا مِنْهُمْ مُنْتَقِمُونَ\n(And even if We take you away, We shall indeed take vengeance on them.) means, 'We will inevitably wreak vengeance upon them and punish them, even if you pass away.'\nأَوْ نُرِيَنَّكَ الَّذِي وَعَدْنَاهُمْ فَإِنَّا عَلَيْهِمْ مُقْتَدِرُونَ\n(Or (if) We show you that wherewith We threaten them, then verily, We have perfect command over them.) means, 'We are able to do both,' but Allah will not take His Messenger ﷺ (in death) until He gives him the joy of seeing his enemies brought low and gives him power and authority over them and their wealth. This was the view of As-Suddi and was the opinion favored by Ibn Jarir.\nEncouragement to adhere to the Qur'an\nAllah then says;\nفَاسْتَمْسِكْ بِالَّذِي أُوحِيَ إِلَيْكَ ۖ إِنَّكَ عَلَىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ\n(So hold you fast to that which is revealed to you. Verily, you are on the straight path.) means, hold fast to the Qur'an which has been sent down to your heart, for it is truth and what it leads to is truth that shows the way to the straight path that leads to Gardens of Delight and eternal, everlasting goodness.\nوَإِنَّهُ لَذِكْرٌ لَكَ وَلِقَوْمِكَ ۖ\n(And verily, this is a Dhikr for you and your people,) It was said that this means, 'it is an honor for you and your people;' this was the view of Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, Mujahid, Qatadah, As-Suddi and Ibn Zayd.\nThis means that it is an honor for them in that it was revealed in their language, so they are the people who have the best understanding of it among mankind and hence are obliged to be the most steadfast in adhering to its commandments. This is how the best of them were, the first immigrants and those who emulated them and followed them. It was also said that the meaning of the phrase;\nوَإِنَّهُ لَذِكْرٌ لَكَ وَلِقَوْمِكَ ۖ\n(And verily, this is indeed a Dhikr for you and your people,) was that 'it was sent to remind you and your people.' The fact that they are singled out does not exclude others. This is like the Ayat:\nلَقَدْ أَنْزَلْنَا إِلَيْكُمْ كِتَابًا فِيهِ ذِكْرُكُمْ ۖ أَفَلَا تَعْقِلُونَ\n(Indeed, We have sent down for you (O mankind) a Book in which there is Dhikrukum (your Reminder). Will you not then understand?)(21:10)\nوَأَنْذِرْ عَشِيرَتَكَ الْأَقْرَبِينَ\n(And warn your tribe of near kindred)(26:214)\nوَسَوْفَ تُسْأَلُونَ\n(and you will be questioned.) means, 'about this Qur'an, and how you acted upon it and what your response to it was.'\nوَاسْأَلْ مَنْ أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ قَبْلِكَ مِنْ رُسُلِنَا أَجَعَلْنَا مِنْ دُونِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ آلِهَةً يُعْبَدُونَ\n(And ask whom We sent before you of Our Messengers: \"Did We ever appoint gods to be worshipped besides the Most Gracious?\") means, 'all the Messengers called their people to the same as that to which you are calling mankind, namely the worship of Allah Alone with no partner or associate, and they forbade the worship of idols and false gods.' This is like the Ayah:\nوَلَقَدْ بَعَثْنَا فِي كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ رَسُولًا أَنِ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ وَاجْتَنِبُوا الطَّاغُوتَ ۖ\n(And verily, We have sent among every Ummah (nation) a Messenger (proclaiming): \"Worship Allah, and avoid all false deities.\")(16:36) Mujahid said that 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud recited it:\n(وَاسْأَلِ الَّذِينَ أَرْسَلْنَا إِلَيْهِمْ قَبْلَكَ (مِنْ) رُسُلِنَا)\n(And ask those whom We sent before you of Our Messengers.)\nThis was narrated by Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak and As-Suddi from Ibn Mas'ud, may Allah be pleased with him. Yet this appears to be an explanation rather than an alternate version of recitation. And Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/43?verse=36","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:43:46","title":"Ibn Kathir · 43:46–50","text":"And indeed We did send Musa with Our Ayat to Fir'awn and his chiefs. He said: \"Verily, I am a Messenger of the Lord of all that exists. (46)But when he came to them with Our Ayat, behold, they laughed at them (47)And not an Ayah We showed them but it was greater than its fellow preceding it, and We seized them with torment, in order that they might turn (48)And they said (to Musa): \"O you sorcerer! Invoke your Lord for us acc