een reported in the narrations and well-known, legislated supplications. Then, he said,\nوَلَا تَزِدِ الظَّالِمِينَ إِلَّا تَبَارًا\n(And to the wrongdoers, grant You no increase but destruction!)\nAs-Suddi said, \"But destruction.\" Mujahid said, \"But loss.\" This means in both this life and in the Hereafter.\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Nuh. And all praise and thanks are due to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/71?verse=25","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:72:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 72:1–7","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\n(In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nقُلْ أُوحِيَ إِلَيَّ أَنَّهُ اسْتَمَعَ نَفَرٌ مِنَ الْجِنِّ فَقَالُوا إِنَّا سَمِعْنَا قُرْآنًا عَجَبًا - يَهْدِي إِلَى الرُّشْدِ فَآمَنَّا بِهِ ۖ وَلَنْ نُشْرِكَ بِرَبِّنَا أَحَدًا - وَأَنَّهُ تَعَالَىٰ جَدُّ رَبِّنَا مَا اتَّخَذَ صَاحِبَةً وَلَا وَلَدًا - وَأَنَّهُ كَانَ يَقُولُ سَفِيهُنَا عَلَى اللَّهِ شَطَطًا - وَأَنَّا ظَنَنَّا أَنْ لَنْ تَقُولَ الْإِنْسُ وَالْجِنُّ عَلَى اللَّهِ كَذِبًا - وَأَنَّهُ كَانَ رِجَالٌ مِنَ الْإِنْسِ يَعُوذُونَ بِرِجَالٍ مِنَ الْجِنِّ فَزَادُوهُمْ رَهَقًا - وَأَنَّهُمْ ظَنُّوا كَمَا ظَنَنْتُمْ أَنْ لَنْ يَبْعَثَ اللَّهُ أَحَدًا\n(1. Say: \"It has been revealed to me that a group of Jinn listened. They said: 'Verily, we have heard a wonderful Recitation!')(2. 'It guides to the right path, and we have believed therein, and we shall never join anything with our Lord.')(3. 'And He, exalted be the Jadd of our Lord, has taken neither a wife nor a son.')(4. 'And that the foolish among us used to utter against Allah that which was an enormity in falsehood.')(5. 'And verily, we thought that men and Jinn would not utter a lie against Allah.')(6. 'And verily, there were men among mankind who took shelter with the males among the Jinn, but they increased them in Rahaq.')(7. 'And they thought as you thought, that Allah will not send any Messenger.')\nThe Jinns listening to the Qur'an and Their Belief in It\nAllah commands His Messenger ﷺ to inform his people that the Jinns listened to the Qur'an, believed in it, affirmed its truthfulness and adhered to it. So Allah says,\nقُلْ أُوحِيَ إِلَيَّ أَنَّهُ اسْتَمَعَ نَفَرٌ مِنَ الْجِنِّ فَقَالُوا إِنَّا سَمِعْنَا قُرْآنًا عَجَبًا - يَهْدِي إِلَى الرُّشْدِ\n(Say: \"It has been revealed to me that a group of Jinn listened. They said: 'Verily, we have heard a wonderful Recitation! It guides to the right path'\") meaning, to what is correct and success.\nفَآمَنَّا بِهِ ۖ وَلَنْ نُشْرِكَ بِرَبِّنَا أَحَدًا\n(and we have believed therein, and we shall never join anything with our Lord.) This position (that they took) is similar to what Allah said,\nوَإِذْ صَرَفْنَا إِلَيْكَ نَفَرًا مِنَ الْجِنِّ يَسْتَمِعُونَ الْقُرْآنَ\n(And when We sent towards you a group of the Jinns listening to the Qur'an.)(46:29) We have already presented the Hadiths that have been narrated concerning this, so there is no need to repeat them here. Concerning Allah's statement,\nوَأَنَّهُ تَعَالَىٰ جَدُّ رَبِّنَا\n(And He, exalted be the Jadd of our Lord,) 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported from Ibn 'Abbas that he said concerning Allah's statement,\nجَدُّ رَبِّنَا\n(the Jadd of our Lord,) \"This means, His actions, His commands and His power.\" Ad-Dahhak reported from Ibn 'Abbas that he said, \"Allah's Jadd is His blessings, His power and His favor upon His creation.\" It has been reported from Mujahid and 'Ikrimah that they said, \"It (Jadd) is the magnificence of our Lord.\" Qatadah said, \"Exalted is His magnificence, His greatness and His command.\" As-Suddi said, \"Exalted is the command of our Lord.\" It has been reported from Abu Ad-Darda', Mujahid and Ibn Jurayj that they said, \"Exalted is His remembrance (Dhikr).\"\nThe Jinns Affirmation that Allah does not have a Wife and Children\nAllah says,\nمَا اتَّخَذَ صَاحِبَةً وَلَا وَلَدًا\n(He has taken neither a wife nor a son.) meaning, far exalted is He above taking a mate and having children. This means that when the Jinns accepted Islam and believed in the Qur'an they professed Allah's magnificence above having taken a spouse and a child (or a son). Then they said,\nوَأَنَّهُ كَانَ يَقُولُ سَفِيهُنَا عَلَى اللَّهِ شَطَطًا\n(And that the foolish among us used to utter against Allah that which was an enormity in falsehood.) Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Qatadah and As-Suddi, all said,\nسَفِيهُنَا\n(the foolish among us) \"They were referring to Iblis.\"\nشَطَطًا\n(that which was an enormity in falsehood.) As-Suddi reported from Abu Malik that he said, \"This means a transgression.\" Ibn Zayd said, \"A great injustice.\" The foolish (Safih) also carries the meaning of everyone in the category who claims that Allah has a spouse or a son. This is why Allah says here,\nوَأَنَّهُ كَانَ يَقُولُ سَفِيهُنَا\n(And that the foolish among us used to utter) meaning, before his acceptance of Islam.\nعَلَى اللَّهِ شَطَطًا\n(against Allah that which was an enormity in falsehood.) meaning, falsehood and a lie. Thus, Allah says,\nوَأَنَّا ظَنَنَّا أَنْ لَنْ تَقُولَ الْإِنْسُ وَالْجِنُّ عَلَى اللَّهِ كَذِبًا\n(And verily, we thought that men and Jinn would not utter a lie against Allah.) meaning, 'we did not think that humans and Jinns would join each other in lying about Allah by attributing a spouse and a son to Him. So when we heard this Qur'an we believed in it and we knew that they (Jinns and men) had been lying about Allah in this matter.'\nAmong the Causes of the Transgression of the Jinns were that Humans sought Refuge with Them\nAllah says,\nوَأَنَّهُ كَانَ رِجَالٌ مِنَ الْإِنْسِ يَعُوذُونَ بِرِجَالٍ مِنَ الْجِنِّ فَزَادُوهُمْ رَهَقًا\n(And verily, there were men among mankind who took shelter with the males among the Jinn, but they increased them in Rahaq.) meaning, 'we used to think that we had some virtuous status over mankind because they used to seek refuge with us whenever they (men) would settle in a valley or any place in the wilderness, the open country steppes and other places.' This was the custom of the Arabs in the pre-Islamic days of ignorance. They used to seek refuge with the greatest Jinn of a particular place so that no harm or evil would afflict them. Like one would do if he entered into the land of his enemies, in the vicinity of a great and powerful man, he would seek the protection and guardianship of that man. So when the Jinns saw that the humans were seeking refuge with them due to their fear of them, they increased them in Rahaq which means fear, terror and fright. They did this so that the people would be more afraid of them and seek refuge with them even more. As Qatadah said concerning this Ayah,\nفَزَادُوهُمْ رَهَقًا\n(but they increased them in Rahaq.) \"meaning, in sin, and that the Jinns become more bold and daring against them.\"\nAth-Thawri said from Mansur, from Ibrahim, concerning the Ayah:\nفَزَادُوهُمْ رَهَقًا\n(but they increased them in Rahaq.) means, \"the Jinns were courageous and increased in insolence against them.\"\nAs-Suddi said, \"A man used to set out with his family (on a journey) until he came to a piece of land where he would settle. Then he would say, 'I seek refuge with the master (Jinn) of this valley from the Jinns, or that myself, my wealth, my child or my animals are harmed in it.'\" Qatadah said, \"When they sought refuge with them instead of Allah, the Jinns would overcome them with harm because of that.\"\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded from 'Ikrimah that he said, \"The Jinns used to fear humans just like humans fear them, or even worse. So whenever humans would come to a valley the Jinns would flee. So the leader of the people would say, 'We seek refuge with the leader of the inhabitants of this valley.' So the Jinns said, 'We see these people fleeing from us just like we flee from them.' Thus, the Jinns started coming near the humans and afflicting them with insanity and madness.\" Thus, Allah said\nوَأَنَّهُ كَانَ رِجَالٌ مِنَ الْإِنْسِ يَعُوذُونَ بِرِجَالٍ مِنَ الْجِنِّ فَزَادُوهُمْ رَهَقًا\n(And verily, there were men among mankind who took shelter with the males among the Jinn, but they increased them in Rahaq.) meaning, in sin. Abu 'Aliyah, Ar-Rabi' and Zayd bin Aslam, all said,\nرَهَقًا\n(in Rahaq) \"This means in fear.\" Mujahid said, \"The disbelievers would increase in transgression.\" Concerning Allah's statement,\nوَأَنَّهُمْ ظَنُّوا كَمَا ظَنَنْتُمْ أَنْ لَنْ يَبْعَثَ اللَّهُ أَحَدًا\n(And they thought as you thought, that Allah will not send any Messenger.) meaning, Allah would never send a Messenger after this long period of time. This was said by Al-Kalbi and Ibn Jarir.","href":"/tafsir/72?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:72:8","title":"Ibn Kathir · 72:8–10","text":"'And we have sought to reach the heaven; but we found it filled with stern guards and flaming fires. (8)'And verily, we used to sit there in stations, to (steal) a hearing, but any who listens now will find a flaming fire watching him in ambush. (9)'And we know not whether evil is intended for those on the earth, or whether their Lord intends for them guidance. (10)\nThe Jinns stealing Information from the Sky before  the Messenger (ﷺ) was sent and striking Them with flaming Fire after His coming\nAllah informs about the Jinns when He sent His Messenger Muhammad ﷺ and revealed the Qur'an to him. Among the ways He protected it (the Qur'an) was by filling sky with stern guards guarding it from all of its sides. The devils were then expelled from the places where they used to sit prior to that. This was so that they could not steal anything from the Qur'an and tell it to the soothsayers, thereby causing matters to be confused and mixed up. If this happened it would not be known who was being truthful. Allah did this out of His kindness to His creation, His mercy upon His servants and His protection of His Mighty Book (the Qur'an). This is why the Jinns said,\nوَأَنَّا لَمَسْنَا السَّمَاءَ فَوَجَدْنَاهَا مُلِئَتْ حَرَسًا شَدِيدًا وَشُهُبًا - وَأَنَّا كُنَّا نَقْعُدُ مِنْهَا مَقَاعِدَ لِلسَّمْعِ ۖ فَمَنْ يَسْتَمِعِ الْآنَ يَجِدْ لَهُ شِهَابًا رَصَدًا\n(And we have sought to reach the heaven; but found it filled with stern guards and flaming fires. And verily, we used to sit there in stations, to (steal) a hearing, but any who listens now will find a flaming fire watching him in ambush.) meaning, whoever would like to steal some information by listening, he will find a flaming fire waiting in ambush for him. It will not pass him or miss him, but it will wipe him out and destroy him completely.\nوَأَنَّا لَا نَدْرِي أَشَرٌّ أُرِيدَ بِمَنْ فِي الْأَرْضِ أَمْ أَرَادَ بِهِمْ رَبُّهُمْ رَشَدًا\n(And we know not whether evil is intended for those on earth, or whether their Lord intends for them guidance.) meaning, 'we do not know if this – the matter which has occurred in the sky – is intended for those who are in the earth or if their Lord intends some guidance for them.' They stated this in such a manner out of their etiquette in phrasing their speech, because they did not attribute the doing of evil to anyone and they attributed the good to Allah. Verily, it has been recorded in the Sahih,\nوَالشَّرُّ لَيْسَ إِلَيْكَ\n(And evil is not attributed to You (Allah).) It used to be that shooting stars (meteors) occurred before this, however it did not happen much, rather only occasionally. As was reported in the Hadith of Ibn 'Abbas when he said, \"While we were sitting with the Messenger of Allah ﷺ a shooting star flashed in the sky. So the Prophet ﷺ said,\nمَا كُنْتُمْ تَقُولُونَ فِي هَذَا؟\n(What did you all used to say about this?) We replied, \"We used to say that a great person has been born and a great person has died.\" The Prophet ﷺ said,\nلَيْسَ كَذَلِكَ، وَلَكِنَّ اللهَ إِذَا قَضَى الْأَمْرَ فِي السَّمَاءِ\n(This is not so, rather whenever Allah decrees a matter in the heaven...)\" and then he went on to narrate the rest of the Hadith which we have already mentioned in its entirety in Surah Saba'.\nThis is what caused them to seek the reason for this occurrence. So they set out searching in the east and the west. Then they found the Messenger of Allah ﷺ reciting (the Qur'an) while leading his Companions in prayer. Thus, they knew that this Qur'an was the reason for the sky being guarded. Therefore, some among them believed in it and the others became more rebellious in their transgression. A discussion of this has preceded in a Hadith of Ibn 'Abbas concerning Allah's statement in Surat Al-Ahqaf,\nوَإِذْ صَرَفْنَا إِلَيْكَ نَفَرًا مِنَ الْجِنِّ يَسْتَمِعُونَ الْقُرْآنَ\n(And (remember) when We sent towards you (Muhammad) a group of the Jinn (quietly) listening to the Qur'an.)(46:29)\nThere is no doubt that when so many shooting stars began appearing in the sky, it horrified humans and Jinns alike. They were very disturbed and alarmed by it. They thought that it was the destruction of the world. As-Suddi said, \"The sky was never guarded except if there was a Prophet in the earth or the religion of Allah was victorious and dominant in the earth.\"\nSo the devils before the time of Muhammad ﷺ had taken sitting stations for themselves in the heaven of this world and they would listen to the matters that occurred in the heaven. But when Allah sent Muhammad ﷺ as a Prophet and Messenger, they were suddenly pelted one night (with the flaming, shooting stars). So the people of Ta'if were frightened because of this and they began to say, 'The dwellers of the sky have been destroyed.' This was because they saw the severe fires in the sky and the shooting flames. They began freeing their servants and abandoning their luxuries. So 'Abd Yalayl bin 'Amr bin 'Umayr said to them and he was referred to for judgement among them \"Woe to you O people of Ta'if! Hold on to your wealth and look at these guiding stars in the sky.If you see them remaining in their place, then the dwellers of the sky have not been destroyed, rather this has happened because of Ibn Abi Kabshah (– meaning Muhammad ﷺ). And if you look and see that you can no longer see these stars, then verily the dwellers of the sky have been destroyed.\"\nSo, they looked and saw that the stars still remained, and thus, they kept their wealth. The devils also were frightened during that night. They went to Iblis and informed him of what happened to them. So he (Iblis) said, \"Bring me a handful of dirt from every land so that I may smell it.\" So they brought it and he smelled it and said, \"It is your friend in Makkah.\" Then he sent a group of seven Jinns to Makkah, and they found the Prophet of Allah ﷺ standing in prayer in Al-Masjid Al-Haram while reciting the Qur'an. They drew near to him eager to hear the Qur'an, until their chests almost pressed against him. Then they accepted Islam and Allah revealed their matter to His Messenger ﷺ. We have mentioned this chapter in its entirety in the first section of the Kitab As-Sirah with lengthy discussion. Allah knows best and unto Him is all praise and blessings.","href":"/tafsir/72?verse=8","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:72:11","title":"Ibn Kathir · 72:11–17","text":"'There are among us some that are righteous, and some the contrary; we are groups having different ways. (11)'And we think that we cannot escape Allah in the earth, nor can we escape Him by flight. (12)'And indeed when we heard the Guidance, we believed therein, and whosoever believes in his Lord shall have no fear, either of a decrease in the reward of his good deeds or an increase in the punishment for his sins. (13)'And of us some are Muslims, and of us some are Al-Qasitun. And whosoever has embraced Islam, then such have sought the right path.' (14)And as for the Qasitun, they shall be firewood for Hell (15)If they had believed in Allah, and went on the way, We would surely have bestowed on them water in abundance (16)That We might try them thereby. And whosoever turns away from the Reminder of his Lord, He will cause him to enter in a Sa'ad torment (17)\nThe Jinns testify that among Them there are Believers, Disbelievers, Misguided and Guided\nAllah says that the Jinns said about themselves,\nوَأَنَّا مِنَّا الصَّالِحُونَ وَمِنَّا دُونَ ذَٰلِكَ ۖ\n(There are among us some that are righteous, and some the contrary;) meaning, other than that.\nكُنَّا طَرَائِقَ قِدَدًا\n(We are groups having different ways.) meaning, on numerous differing paths and having different thoughts and opinions. Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid and others have said,\nكُنَّا طَرَائِقَ قِدَدًا\n(We are groups having different ways.) \"This means among us are believers and among us are disbelievers.\"\nAhmad bin Sulayman An-Najjad reported in his (book of) Amali that he heard Al-A'mash saying, \"A Jinn came to us, so I said to him, 'What is the most beloved food to your kind?' He replied, 'Rice.' So we brought them some rice and I saw the morsels being lifted but I did not see a hand lifting it. So I asked him, 'Do you have these desires (religious innovations) among your kind as we have among ours?' He replied, 'Yes.' Then I said, 'Who are the Rafidah among you?' He said, 'They are the worst of us.'\" I presented this chain of narration to our Shaykh, Al-Hafiz Abi Al-Hajjaj Al-Mizzi and he said its chain is authentic to Al-A'mash.\nThe Jinns confess to Allah's Perfect Power\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nوَأَنَّا ظَنَنَّا أَنْ لَنْ نُعْجِزَ اللَّهَ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَلَنْ نُعْجِزَهُ هَرَبًا\n(And we think that we cannot escape Allah in the earth, nor can we escape Him by flight.) meaning, 'we know that the power of Allah is decisive over us and that we cannot escape Him in the earth. Even if we try to flee, we know that He has complete control over us and that none of us can escape Him.'\nوَأَنَّا لَمَّا سَمِعْنَا الْهُدَىٰ آمَنَّا بِهِ ۖ\n(And indeed when we heard the Guidance, we believed therein,) They were proud of this, and it is something for them to be proud of, as well as a great honor for them and a good characteristic. Concerning their statement,\nفَمَنْ يُؤْمِنْ بِرَبِّهِ فَلَا يَخَافُ بَخْسًا وَلَا رَهَقًا\n(and whosoever believes in his Lord shall have no fear, either of a decrease in the reward of his good deeds or an increase in the punishment for his sins.)\nIbn 'Abbas, Qatadah and others said, \"This means, he should not fear that the reward for his good deeds will be decreased or that he will be burdened with anything other than his sins.\" This is as Allah says,\nفَلَا يَخَافُ ظُلْمًا وَلَا هَضْمًا\n(Then he will have no fear of injustice, nor of any curtailment.)(20:112)\nوَأَنَّا مِنَّا الْمُسْلِمُونَ وَمِنَّا الْقَاسِطُونَ ۖ\n(And of us some are Muslims, and of us some are Al-Qasitun.) meaning, 'among us there is the Muslim and the Qasit.' The Qasit is he who behaves unjustly with the truth and deviates from it. This is the opposite of the Muqsit, the one who is just.\nفَمَنْ أَسْلَمَ فَأُولَٰئِكَ تَحَرَّوْا رَشَدًا\n(And whosoever has embraced Islam, then such have sought the right path.) meaning, they sought salvation for themselves.\nوَأَمَّا الْقَاسِطُونَ فَكَانُوا لِجَهَنَّمَ حَطَبًا\n(And as for the Qasitun, they shall be firewood for Hell.) meaning, fuel, for they will be used to kindle it (the Fire). Concerning Allah's statement,\nوَأَنْ لَوِ اسْتَقَامُوا عَلَى الطَّرِيقَةِ لَأَسْقَيْنَاهُمْ مَاءً غَدَقًا - لِنَفْتِنَهُمْ فِيهِ ۚ\n(If they had believed in Allah, and went on the way, We would surely have bestowed on them water in abundance. That We might try them thereby.) The commentators have differed over the explanation of this. There are two views concerning it.\nThe First View\nThat if the deviant ones would stand firmly upon the path of Islam, being just upon it and remaining upon it,\nلَأَسْقَيْنَاهُمْ مَاءً غَدَقًا\n(We would surely have bestowed on them water in abundance.) meaning, a lot. The intent behind this is to say that they would be given an abundance of sustenance. With this, the meaning of Allah's statement,\nلِنَفْتِنَهُمْ فِيهِ ۚ\n(That We might try them thereby.) is that, 'We will test them.' As Malik reported from Zayd bin Aslam, he said, \"That We might try them - means, so that We may test them to see who will remain upon the guidance from those who will turn back to sin.\"\nMentioning Those Who held this View\nAl-'Awfi reported similar to this from Ibn 'Abbas, and likewise said Mujahid, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Sa'id bin Al-Musayyib, 'Ata, As-Suddi, Muhammad bin Ka'b Al-Qurazi, Qatadah and Ad-Dahhak. Muqatil said, \"This Ayah was revealed about the disbelievers of the Quraysh when they were deprived of rain for seven years.\"\nThe Second View\nوَأَنْ لَوِ اسْتَقَامُوا عَلَى الطَّرِيقَةِ\n(If they had believed in Allah, and went on the way,) meaning, of misguidance.\nلَأَسْقَيْنَاهُمْ مَاءً غَدَقًا\n(We would surely have bestowed on them water in abundance.) meaning, 'then We would have increased their sustenance to allow a gradual respite.' As Allah says,\nفَلَمَّا نَسُوا مَا ذُكِّرُوا بِهِ فَتَحْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ أَبْوَابَ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ حَتَّىٰ إِذَا فَرِحُوا بِمَا أُوتُوا أَخَذْنَاهُمْ بَغْتَةً فَإِذَا هُمْ مُبْلِسُونَ\n(So, when they forgot that with which they had been reminded, We opened for them the gates of everything, until in the midst of their enjoyment in that which they were given, all of a sudden, We took them, and lo! They were plunged into destruction with deep regrets and sorrows. )(6:44) Allah also says,\nأَيَحْسَبُونَ أَنَّمَا نُمِدُّهُمْ بِهِ مِنْ مَالٍ وَبَنِينَ - نُسَارِعُ لَهُمْ فِي الْخَيْرَاتِ ۚ بَلْ لَا يَشْعُرُونَ\n(Do they think that in wealth and children with which We expand them. We hasten unto them with good things. Nay, but they percieve not.)(23:55,56) This is the view of Abu Mijlaz and it agrees with the opinion of Ibn Humayd. For verily, he (Ibn Humayd) said concerning Allah's statement,\nوَأَنْ لَوِ اسْتَقَامُوا عَلَى الطَّرِيقَةِ\n(If they had believed in Allah, and went on the way,) \"This means the path of misguidance.\" Ibn Jarir and Ibn Abi Hatim both recorded this. Al-Baghawi also mentioned it from Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, Zayd bin Aslam, Al-Kalbi and Ibn Kaysan. It seems that he (Al-Baghawi) took this position. And it is supported by Allah's saying, \"That We might try them thereby.\" Concerning Allah's statement,\nوَمَنْ يُعْرِضْ عَنْ ذِكْرِ رَبِّهِ يَسْلُكْهُ عَذَابًا صَعَدًا\n(And whosoever turns away from the Reminder of his Lord, He will cause him to enter in a Sa'ad torment.) meaning, a harsh, severe, agonizing and painful punishment. Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Qatadah and Ibn Zayd, all said,\nعَذَابًا صَعَدًا\n(in a Sa'ad torment.) \"This means harsh having no relaxation in it.\" It has also been reported from Ibn 'Abbas that he said, \"It is a mountain in Hell.\" It has been related from Sa'id bin Jubayr that he said, \"It is a well in Hell.\"","href":"/tafsir/72?verse=11","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:72:18","title":"Ibn Kathir · 72:18–24","text":"And the Masjids are for Allah, so invoke not anyone along with Allah (18)And when the servant of Allah stood up invoking Him in prayer they just made round him a dense crowd as if sticking one over the other (19)Say: \"I invoke only my Lord, and I associate none as partners along with Him. (20)Say: \"It is not in my power to cause you harm, or to bring you to the right path. (21)Say: \"None can protect me from Allah's punishment, nor can I find refuge except in Him. (22)\"(Mine is) but conveyance from Allah and His Messages, and whosoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger, then verily, for him is the fire of Hell, he shall dwell therein forever. (23)Till, when they see that which they are promised, then they will know who it is that is weaker concerning helpers and less important concerning numbers (24)\nThe Command to worship Allah Alone and shun Shirk\nAllah commands His servants to single Him out alone for worship and that none should be supplicated to along with Him, nor should any partners be associated with Him. As Qatadah said concerning Allah's statement,\nوَأَنَّ الْمَسَاجِدَ لِلَّهِ فَلَا تَدْعُوا مَعَ اللَّهِ أَحَدًا\n(And the Masjids are for Allah, so invoke not anyone along with Allah.) \"Whenever the Jews and Christians used to enter their churches and synagogues, they would associate partners with Allah. Thus, Allah commanded His Prophet ﷺ to tell them that they should single Him out alone for worship.\" Ibn Jarir recorded from Sa'id bin Jubayr that he said concerning this verse,\nوَأَنَّ الْمَسَاجِدَ لِلَّهِ فَلَا تَدْعُوا مَعَ اللَّهِ أَحَدًا\n(And the Masjids are for Allah, so invoke not anyone along with Allah.) \"The Jinns said to the Prophet of Allah ﷺ, 'How can we come to the Masjid while we are distant - meaning very far away - from you? And how can we be present for the prayer while we are far away from you?' So Allah revealed this Ayah,\nوَأَنَّ الْمَسَاجِدَ لِلَّهِ فَلَا تَدْعُوا مَعَ اللَّهِ أَحَدًا\n(And the Masjids are for Allah, so invoke not anyone along with Allah.)\"\nThe Jinns crowding together to hear the Qur'an\nAllah said,\nوَأَنَّهُ لَمَّا قَامَ عَبْدُ اللَّهِ يَدْعُوهُ كَادُوا يَكُونُونَ عَلَيْهِ لِبَدًا\n(And when the servant of Allah stood up invoking Him in prayer they just made round him a dense crowd as if sticking one over the other.)\nAl-'Awfi reported from Ibn 'Abbas, \"When they heard the Prophet ﷺ reciting the Qur'an they almost mounted on top of him due to their zeal. When they heard him reciting the Qur'an they drew very near to him. He was unaware of them until the messenger (i.e., Jibril) came to him and made him recite,\nقُلْ أُوحِيَ إِلَيَّ أَنَّهُ اسْتَمَعَ نَفَرٌ مِنَ الْجِنِّ\n(Say: \"It has been revealed to me that a group of Jinn listened.\")(72:1) They were listening to the Qur'an.\" This is one opinion and it has been reported from Az-Zubayr bin Al-'Awwam. Ibn Jarir recorded from Ibn 'Abbas that he said, \"The Jinns said to their people,\nلَّمَا قَامَ عَبْدُ اللَّهِ يَدْعُوهُ كَادُواْ يَكُونُونَ عَلَيْهِ لِبَداً\n(when the servant of Allah stood up invoking Him in prayer they just made round him a dense crowd as if sticking one over the other.)\nWhen they saw him praying and his Companions were bowing with his bowing and prostrating with his prostrating, they were amazed at his Compnions obedience to him. Therefore, they said to their people,\nلَمَّا قَامَ عَبْدُ اللَّهِ يَدْعُوهُ كَادُوا يَكُونُونَ عَلَيْهِ لِبَدًا\n(when the servant of Allah stood up invoking Him in prayer they just made round him a dense crowd as if sticking one over the other.) )\"\nThis is the second view and it has also been reported from Sa'id bin Jubayr. Al-Hasan said, \"When the Messenger of Allah ﷺ stood up and said none has the right to be worshipped except Allah, and he called the people to their Lord, the Arabs almost crowded over him together (against him).\" Qatadah said concerning Allah's statement,\nوَأَنَّهُ لَمَّا قَامَ عَبْدُ اللَّهِ يَدْعُوهُ كَادُوا يَكُونُونَ عَلَيْهِ لِبَدًا\n(when the servant of Allah stood up invoking Him in prayer they just made round him a dense crowd as if sticking one over the other.) \"Humans and Jinns both crowded together over this matter in order to extinguish it. However, Allah insisted upon helping it, supporting it and making it victorious over those who opposed it.\" This is the third view and it has also been reported from Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, Sa'id bin Jubayr and Ibn Zayd. It was also the view preferred by Ibn Jarir. This view seems to be the most apparent meaning of the Ayah due to Allah's statement which follows it,\nقُلْ إِنَّمَا أَدْعُو رَبِّي وَلَا أُشْرِكُ بِهِ أَحَدًا\n(Say: \"I invoke only my Lord, and I associate none as partners along with Him.\") meaning, when they harmed him, opposed him, denied him and stood against him in order to thwart the truth he came with, and to unite against him, the Messenger ﷺ said to them\nإِنَّمَا أَدْعُو رَبِّي\n(I invoke only my Lord,) meaning, 'I only worship my Lord alone, and He has no partners. I seek His help and I put my trust in Him.'\nوَلَا أُشْرِكُ بِهِ أَحَدًا\n(and I associate none as partners along with Him.)\nThe Messenger (ﷺ) does not have Power to harm or give Guidance\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nقُلْ إِنِّي لَا أَمْلِكُ لَكُمْ ضَرًّا وَلَا رَشَدًا\n(Say: \"It is not in my power to cause you harm, or to bring you to the right path.\") meaning, 'say: I am only a man like you all and I have received revelation. I am only a servant among the servants of Allah. I have no control over the affairs of your guidance or your misguidance. Rather all of these things are referred to Allah.' Then he (the Prophet) says about himself that no one can save him from Allah either. This means, 'if I disobey Allah, then no one would be able to rescue me from His punishment.'\nوَلَنْ أَجِدَ مِنْ دُونِهِ مُلْتَحَدًا\n(and nor can I find refuge except in Him.) Mujahid, Qatadah and As-Suddi all said, \"No place to escape to.\"\nIt is only obligatory upon the Messenger (ﷺ) to convey the Message\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nإِلَّا بَلَاغًا مِنَ اللَّهِ وَرِسَالَاتِهِ ۚ\n((Mine is) but conveyance from Allah and His Messages,) This is an exception related to the previous statement,\nلَنْ يُجِيرَنِي مِنَ اللَّهِ أَحَدٌ\n(None can protect me from Allah's punishment,) meaning, 'nothing can save me from Him and rescue me except my conveyance of the Message that He has obligated me to carry out.' This is as Allah says,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الرَّسُولُ بَلِّغْ مَا أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْكَ مِنْ رَبِّكَ ۖ وَإِنْ لَمْ تَفْعَلْ فَمَا بَلَّغْتَ رِسَالَتَهُ ۚ وَاللَّهُ يَعْصِمُكَ مِنَ النَّاسِ ۗ\n(O Messenger! Proclaim which has been sent down to you from your Lord. And if you do not, then you have not conveyed His Message. Allah will protect you from mankind.)(5:67) Then Allah says,\nوَمَنْ يَعْصِ اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ فَإِنَّ لَهُ نَارَ جَهَنَّمَ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا أَبَدًا\n(and whosoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger, then verily, for him is the fire of Hell, he shall dwell therein forever.) meaning, 'I will convey unto you all the Messages of Allah, so whoever disobeys after that, then his reward will be the fire of Hell wherein he will abide forever.' This means, they will not be able to avoid it nor escape from it. Then Allah says,\nحَتَّىٰ إِذَا رَأَوْا مَا يُوعَدُونَ فَسَيَعْلَمُونَ مَنْ أَضْعَفُ نَاصِرًا وَأَقَلُّ عَدَدًا\n(Till, when they see that which they are promised, then they will know who it is that is weaker concerning helpers and less important concerning numbers.) meaning, until these idolators from the Jinns and humans see what has been promised to them on the Day of Judgement. Then on that day, they will know who's helpers are weaker and fewer in number – them or the believers who worship Allah alone. This means that the idolators have no helper at all and they are fewer in number than the soldiers of Allah.","href":"/tafsir/72?verse=18","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:72:25","title":"Ibn Kathir · 72:25–28","text":"Say: \"I know not whether that which you are promised is near or whether my Lord will appoint for it a distant term. (25)\"The All-Knower of the Unseen, and He reveals to none His Unseen. (26)Except to a Messenger whom He has chosen, and then He makes a band of watching guards to march before him and behind him (27)Till he knows that they have conveyed the Messages of their Lord. And He surrounds all that which is with them, and He keeps count of all things (28)\nThe Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) does not know when the Hour will be\nAllah commands His Messenger ﷺ to say to the people that he has no knowledge of when the Hour will be and he does not know whether its time is near or far.\nقُلْ إِنْ أَدْرِي أَقَرِيبٌ مَا تُوعَدُونَ أَمْ يَجْعَلُ لَهُ رَبِّي أَمَدًا\n(Say: \"I know not whether which you are promised is near or whether my Lord will appoint for it a distant term.\") meaning, a long period of time. In this noble Ayah is an evidence that the Hadith that many of the ignorant people often circulate, which says that the Prophet ﷺ will not remain under the earth more than one thousand years (i.e., the Hour will be before that period) is a baseless lie. We have not seen it in any of the Books (of Hadith). Verily, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ was asked about the time of the Hour and he would not respond. When Jibril appeared to him in the form of a bedouin Arab, one of the questions he asked the Prophet was, \"O Muhammad! Tell me about the Hour?\" So the Prophet ﷺ replied,\nمَا الْمَسْؤُولُ عَنْهَا بِأَعْلَمَ مِنَ السَّائِلِ\n(The one questioned about it knows no more than the questioner.) On another occasion when a bedouin Arab called out to the Prophet ﷺ in a loud voice saying, \"O Muhammad! When will be the Hour?\" The Prophet ﷺ said,\nوَيْحَكَ إِنَّهَا كَائِنَةٌ، فَمَا أَعْدَدْتَ لَهَا؟\n(Woe unto you. Verily, it will occur so what have you prepared for it?) The man replied, \"I have not prepared much for it of prayers and fasting, but I love Allah and His Messenger.\" The Prophet ﷺ then replied,\nفَأَنْتَ مَعَ مَنْ أَحْبَبْتَ\n(Then you will be with whomever you love.) Anas said, \"The Muslims were not happier with anything like they were upon (hearing) this Hadith.\" Concerning Allah's statement,\nعَالِمُ الْغَيْبِ فَلَا يُظْهِرُ عَلَىٰ غَيْبِهِ أَحَدًا - إِلَّا مَنِ ارْتَضَىٰ مِنْ رَسُولٍ\n(The All-Knower of the Unseen, and He reveals to none His Unseen. Except to a Messenger) This is similar to Allah's statement,\nوَلَا يُحِيطُونَ بِشَيْءٍ مِنْ عِلْمِهِ إِلَّا بِمَا شَاءَ ۚ\n(And they will never compass any thing of His knowledge except that which He wills.)(2:255) Similarly, Allah says here that He knows the unseen and the seen and that no one of His creation can attain any of His knowledge except that which Allah allows him to have. Thus, Allah says,\nعَالِمُ الْغَيْبِ فَلَا يُظْهِرُ عَلَىٰ غَيْبِهِ أَحَدًا - إِلَّا مَنِ ارْتَضَىٰ مِنْ رَسُولٍ\n(The All-Knower of the Unseen, and He reveals to none His Unseen. Except to a Messenger whom He has chosen,) This includes the angelic Messenger and the human Messenger. Then Allah says,\nفَإِنَّهُ يَسْلُكُ مِنْ بَيْنِ يَدَيْهِ وَمِنْ خَلْفِهِ رَصَدًا\n(and then He makes a band of watching guards to march before him and behind him.) meaning, He particularly gives him additional guardian angels who protect him by the command of Allah and they accompany him with that which is with him of Allah's revelation. Thus, Allah says,\nلِيَعْلَمَ أَنْ قَدْ أَبْلَغُوا رِسَالَاتِ رَبِّهِمْ وَأَحَاطَ بِمَا لَدَيْهِمْ وَأَحْصَىٰ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ عَدَدًا\n(Till he knows that they have conveyed the Messages of their Lord. And He surrounds all that which is with them, and He keeps count of all things.) The pronoun 'he' which is in His statement,\nلِيَعْلَمَ\n(Till he knows) refers to the Prophet ﷺ. Ibn Jarir recorded from Sa'id bin Jubayr that he said concerning the Ayah,\nعَالِمُ الْغَيْبِ فَلَا يُظْهِرُ عَلَىٰ غَيْبِهِ أَحَدًا - إِلَّا مَنِ ارْتَضَىٰ مِنْ رَسُولٍ فَإِنَّهُ يَسْلُكُ مِنْ بَيْنِ يَدَيْهِ وَمِنْ خَلْفِهِ رَصَدًا\n(The All-Knower of the Unseen, and He reveals to none His Unseen. Except to a Messenger whom He has chosen, and then He makes a band of watching guards to march before him and behind him.) \"These are four guardians among the angels along with Jibril,\nلِيَعْلَمَ\n(Till he knows) This means Muhammad ﷺ,\nأَنْ قَدْ أَبْلَغُوا رِسَالَاتِ رَبِّهِمْ وَأَحَاطَ بِمَا لَدَيْهِمْ وَأَحْصَىٰ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ عَدَدًا\n(that they have conveyed the Messages of their Lord. And He surrounds all that which is with them, and He keeps count of all things.)\" This was recorded by Ibn Abi Hatim. It has also been reported by Ad-Dahhak, As-Suddi and Yazid bin Abi Habib.\nAbdur-Razzaq reported from Ma'mar, from Qatadah,\nلِيَعْلَمَ أَنْ قَدْ أَبْلَغُوا رِسَالَاتِ رَبِّهِمْ\n(Till he knows that they have conveyed the Messages of their Lord.)\n\"So that the Prophet of Allah would know that the Messengers had conveyed their Messages from Allah and that the angels have protected them and defended them.\"\nThis has also been reported by Sa'id bin Abi 'Arubah from Qatadah, and Ibn Jarir preferred this interpretation. Al-Baghawi said, \"Ya'qub recited it as,\n(لِيُعْلَمَ)\n(in order to be known) this means, so that the people may know that the Messengers had conveyed the Message.\"\nIt also could carry the meaning that the pronoun refers to Allah (i.e., So that He (Allah) may know). This opinion has been mentioned by Ibn Al-Jawzi in Zad Al-Masir. The meaning of this is that He protects His Messengers through His angels so that they will be able to convey His Messages. He protects what He reveals to them of revelation so that He will know that they have indeed conveyed the Messages of their Lord. This is like His statement,\nوَمَا جَعَلْنَا الْقِبْلَةَ الَّتِي كُنْتَ عَلَيْهَا إِلَّا لِنَعْلَمَ مَنْ يَتَّبِعُ الرَّسُولَ مِمَّنْ يَنْقَلِبُ عَلَىٰ عَقِبَيْهِ ۚ\n(And We made the Qiblah which you used to face, only that We know who followed the Messenger from those who would turn on their heels.)(2:143) Allah also said,\nوَلَيَعْلَمَنَّ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَلَيَعْلَمَنَّ الْمُنَافِقِينَ\n(Verily, Allah knows those who believe, and that He knows the hypocrites.)(29:11) It should be added to these examples that from Allah's knowledge is that He knows all things before they occur, and this is something definite and certain. Therefore, He says after this,\nوَأَحَاطَ بِمَا لَدَيْهِمْ وَأَحْصَىٰ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ عَدَدًا\n(And He surrounds all that which is with them, and He keeps count of all things.)\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Al-Jinn, and all praises and thanks are due to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/72?verse=25","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:73:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 73:1–9","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\n(In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nيَا أَيُّهَا الْمُزَّمِّلُ - قُمِ اللَّيْلَ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا - نِصْفَهُ أَوِ انْقُصْ مِنْهُ قَلِيلًا - أَوْ زِدْ عَلَيْهِ وَرَتِّلِ الْقُرْآنَ تَرْتِيلًا - إِنَّا سَنُلْقِي عَلَيْكَ قَوْلًا ثَقِيلًا - إِنَّ نَاشِئَةَ اللَّيْلِ هِيَ أَشَدُّ وَطْئًا وَأَقْوَمُ قِيلًا - إِنَّ لَكَ فِي النَّهَارِ سَبْحًا طَوِيلًا - وَاذْكُرِ اسْمَ رَبِّكَ وَتَبَتَّلْ إِلَيْهِ تَبْتِيلًا - رَبُّ الْمَشْرِقِ وَالْمَغْرِبِ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ فَاتَّخِذْهُ وَكِيلًا\n(1. O you wrapped up!)(2. Stand (to pray) all night, except a little.)(3. Half of it or less than that, a little.)(4. Or a little more. And Rattil the Qur'an Tartil.)(5. Verily, We shall send down to you a Word Thaqil.)(6. Verily, rising (Nashi'ah) at night is better for understanding and more suitable for speech (recitation).)(7. Verily, for you in the day is lengthy Sabh.)(8. And remember the Name of your Lord and (Tabattil) devote yourself to Him with complete devotion.)(9. Lord of the east and the west; La ilaha illa Huwa, so take Him as a trustee.)\nThe Command to stand at Night (in Prayer)\nAllah commands His Messenger ﷺ to cease being wrapped up, and this means to be covered during the night. He commands him to get up and stand in prayer to His Lord. This is as Allah says,\nتَتَجَافَىٰ جُنُوبُهُمْ عَنِ الْمَضَاجِعِ يَدْعُونَ رَبَّهُمْ خَوْفًا وَطَمَعًا وَمِمَّا رَزَقْنَاهُمْ يُنْفِقُونَ\n(Their sides forsake their beds, to invoke their Lord in fear and hope, and they spend out of what We have bestowed on them.)(32:16)\nThus, the Prophet ﷺ did as Allah ordered him, by standing for prayer at night. This was obligatory upon him alone, as Allah said,\nوَمِنَ اللَّيْلِ فَتَهَجَّدْ بِهِ نَافِلَةً لَكَ عَسَىٰ أَنْ يَبْعَثَكَ رَبُّكَ مَقَامًا مَحْمُودًا\n(And in some parts of the night offer the Salah with it (the Qur'an), as an additional prayer for you. It may be that your Lord will raise you to Maqam Mahmud.)(17:79)\nHere Allah explains how much prayer he should perform. Allah says,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الْمُزَّمِّلُ - قُمِ اللَّيْلَ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا\n(O you wrapped up! Stand all night, except a little.) Ibn 'Abbas, Ad-Dahhak and As-Suddi all said,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الْمُزَّمِّلُ\n(O you wrapped up!) \"This means, O you who are asleep.\" Qatadah said, \"The one who is wrapped up in his garments.\" Concerning Allah's statement,\nنِصْفَهُ\n(Half of it) means, instead of the whole night.\nأَوِ انْقُصْ مِنْهُ قَلِيلًا - أَوْ زِدْ عَلَيْهِ\n(A little less than that, or a little more.) meaning, 'We have commanded you to stand in prayer for half of the night, either a little more than it or a little less. There is no hardship on you concerning that (slight increase or decrease).\nThe Way of reciting the Qur'an\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nوَرَتِّلِ الْقُرْآنَ تَرْتِيلًا\n(And Rattil the Qur'an Tartil.) meaning, recite it slowly, for that will help in understanding the Qur'an and contemplating it. This is how the Prophet ﷺ used to recite. 'A'ishah said, \"He (the Prophet) used to recite the chapter slowly, so much so that it would be longer than chapters that were actually longer than it.\"\nIn Sahih Al-Bukhari, it is recorded from Anas that he was asked about the recitation of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, so he replied, \"He used to elongate the letters.\" Then he (Anas) recited,\nبِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\n(In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.)(1:1) and he elongated \"In the Name of Allah,\" and he elongated \"The Most Gracious,\" and he elongated \"The Most Merciful.\"\nIbn Jurayj reported from Ibn Abi Mulaykah, who narrated from Umm Salamah that she was asked about the recitation of the Messenger of Allah , so she said, \"He used to pause in his recitation, verse by verse.\nبِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ - الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ - الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ - مَالِكِ يَوْمِ الدِّينِ\n(In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. All praise is Allah's, the Lord of all that exists. The Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. The Only Owner of the Day of Recompense.)(1:1-4)\nThis was recorded by Ahmad, Abu Dawud and At-Tirmidhi. We have already mentioned the Hadiths which prove the recommendation of slow rhythmic recitation and beautification of the voice while reciting at the beginning of this Tafsir. For example, the Hadith which states,\nزَيِّنُوا الْقُرْآنَ بِأَصْوَاتِكُمْ\n(Beautify the Qur'an with your voices.) and the Hadith,\nلَيْسَ مِنَّا مَنْ لَمْ يَتَغَنَّ بِالْقُرْآنِ\n(He is not of us who does not chant nicely with the recitation of the Qur'an.) and the Hadith,\nلَقَدْ أُوتِيَ هَذَا مِزْمَارًا مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ آلِ دَاوُدَ\n(Verily, he has been given this windpipe from the windpipes of the family of Dawud.) Referring to Abu Musa.\nAbu Musa replied, \"If I knew that you had been listening to my recitation, I would have truly beautified it for you.\" It has been narrated from Ibn Mas'ud that he said, \"Do not scatter the (recitation of) Qur'an out like the scattering of sand, and do not rush through it like the hasty recitation of poetry. Stop at its amazing parts and make your heart move with it. None of you should let his concern be to reach the end of the chapter.\" This has been recorded by Al-Baghawi. Al-Bukhari recorded from Abi Wa'il that he said, \"A man came to Ibn Mas'ud and said, 'I read the Mufassal chapters (from Qaf to An-Nas) last night in one unit of prayer.' Ibn Mas'ud said, 'This is rushing like the haste of reciting poetry. Verily, I know the pairs (of chapters) that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to combine between them (in prayer).' Then he mentioned twenty chapters from the Mufassal chapters, and said that the Prophet ﷺ used to recite two in each prayer unit.\"\nThe Magnificence of the Qur'an\nAllah then said,\nإِنَّا سَنُلْقِي عَلَيْكَ قَوْلًا ثَقِيلًا\n(Verily, We shall send down to you a Word Thaqil.)\nAl-Hasan and Qatadah both said, \"The actions with it.\" It has also been said that it means it will be heavy at the time of its revelation due to its magnificence. This is similar to what Zayd bin Thabit said. He said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ received some revelation while his thigh was on top of my thigh, and my thigh was almost crushed due to it.\"\nImam Ahmad recorded from 'Abdullah bin 'Amr that he said, \"I asked the Prophet ﷺ, 'O Messenger of Allah! Do you feel anything when revelation comes (to you)?' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ replied,\nأَسْمَعُ صَلَاصِلَ ثُمَّ أَسْكُتُ عِنْدَ ذَلِكَ، فَمَا مِنْ مَرَّةٍ يُوحَىٰ إِلَيَّ إِلَّا ظَنَنْتُ أَنَّ نَفْسِي تُقْبَضُ\n(I hear a ringing and then I remain quiet when that occurs. There has not been a single time that revelation has come to me except that I thought that my soul was about to be taken (death).)\"\nAhmad was alone in narrating this. In the beginning of Sahih Al-Bukhari, it is recorded from 'A'ishah that Al-Harith bin Hisham asked the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, \"How does the revelation come to you?\" The Prophet ﷺ replied,\nأَحْيَانًا يَأْتِي فِي مِثْلِ صَلْصَلَةِ الْجَرَسِ وَهُوَ أَشَدُّهُ عَلَيَّ، فَيُفْصَمُ عَنِّي وَقَدْ وَعَيْتُ عَنْهُ مَا قَالَ، وَأَحْيَانًا يَتَمَثَّلُ لِي الْمَلَكُ رَجُلًا فَيُكَلِّمُنِي فَأَعِي مَا يَقُولُ\n(Sometimes it comes to me like the ringing of a bell, and it is most severe upon me. Then this state passes away from me after I have grasped what is inspired. Sometimes the angel comes to me in the form of a man and talks to me and I grasp whatever he says.)\nA'ishah added, \"Verily, I saw him receiving revelation and I noticed the sweat dropping from his forehead on a very cold day as the revelation ended.\" This is the wording recorded by Al-Bukhari. Imam Ahmad recorded from 'A'ishah that she said, \"If the Messenger of Allah ﷺ received any revelation while he was on his riding animal, it would begin moving its Jiran intensely.\" The Jiran is the bottom of the neck. Ibn Jarir chose the interpretation that it (the revelation) is heavy in both ways simultaneously. This is as 'Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam said, \"Just as it is heavy in this world, it will also be heavy on the Day of Judgement in the Scales.\"\nThe Virtue of standing at Night for Prayer\nAllah says,\nإِنَّ نَاشِئَةَ اللَّيْلِ هِيَ أَشَدُّ وَطْئًا وَأَقْوَمُ قِيلًا\n(Verily, rising (Nashi'ah) at night is better for understanding and more suitable for speech (recitation).)\nUmar, Ibn 'Abbas and Ibn Zubayr, all said, \"The entire night is Nashi'ah.\" Mujahid and others said the same. It is said \"Nasha'a\" when a person stands at night to pray. In one narration from Mujahid he said, \"(It is) after 'Isha' (prayer).\" This was also said by Abu Mijlaz, Qatadah, Salim, Abu Hazim and Muhammad bin Al-Munkadir. The point is that Nashi'ah of the night refers to its hours and its times, every hour of it is called Nashi'ah, so it refers to the periods of time.\nThe purpose of this is that standing at night (for prayer) is better for training the heart and the tongue, and more conducive to recitation. Thus, Allah says,\nهِيَ أَشَدُّ وَطْئًا وَأَقْوَمُ قِيلًا\n(is better for understanding and more suitable for speech (recitation).) meaning, more comprehensive for the matter of performing the recitation and better for understanding it than in the recitation of the day. This is because the daytime is the time for people to disperse and move about, to raise voices and be lively.\nAl-Hafiz Abu Ya'la Al-Mawsili said, \"Ibrahim bin Sa'id Al-Jawhari told us that Abu Usamah told us that Al-A'mash informed us that Anas bin Malik recited this Ayah as:\n(إِنَّ نَاشِئَةَ اللَّيْلِ هِيَ أَشَدُّ وَأَصْوَبُ قِيلًا)\n('Verily, rising at night is better for understanding and more correct for the speech.') So a man said to him, 'We recite it;\nوَأَقْوَمُ قِيلًا\n(more suitable for speech).' So Anas said to him, 'Most correct (Aswab), most suitable (Aqwam), the best for preparation (Ahya') and similar words are all the same (in meaning).'\" Thus, Allah continues saying,\nإِنَّ لَكَ فِي النَّهَارِ سَبْحًا طَوِيلًا\n(Verily, for you in the day is lengthy Sabh.) Ibn 'Abbas, 'Ikrimah and \"Ata' bin Abi Muslim, all said, \"Leisure time and sleep.\" Abu Al-'Aliyah, Mujahid, Abu Malik, Ad-Dahhak, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas and Sufyan Ath-Thawri, all said, \"A long amount of leisure time.\" Qatadah said, \"Leisure, aspirations and activities.\" 'Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam said concerning the statement,\nإِنَّ لَكَ فِي النَّهَارِ سَبْحًا طَوِيلًا\n(Verily, for you in the day is lengthy Sabh.) \"This means for your needs. Therefore, leave the night open for your religious devotion. Allah said this when the (voluntary) night prayer was obligatory. Then, Allah blessed His servants, lightened the matter and removed its obligation.\" Then he recited,\nقُمِ اللَّيْلَ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا\n(Stand (to pray) all night, except a little.) to the end of the Ayah, then he recited,\nإِنَّ رَبَّكَ يَعْلَمُ أَنَّكَ تَقُومُ أَدْنَىٰ مِنْ ثُلُثَيِ اللَّيْلِ وَنِصْفَهُ\n(Verily, your Lord knows that you do stand less than two-thirds of the night, or half of it.)(73:20) until he reached,\nفَاقْرَءُوا مَا تَيَسَّرَ مِنْهُ\n(So recite of it what is easy.)(73:20) and Allah says,\nوَمِنَ اللَّيْلِ فَتَهَجَّدْ بِهِ نَافِلَةً لَكَ عَسَىٰ أَنْ يَبْعَثَكَ رَبُّكَ مَقَامًا مَحْمُودًا\n(And Tahajjud in some parts of the night (also offer the Salah with it), as an additional prayer for you. It may be that your Lord will raise you to Maqam Mahmud.)(17:79)\nIn fact, this is as true as what he ('Abdur-Rahman) said, The proof for this view is what Imam Ahmad recorded in his Musnad, that Sa'id bin Hisham divorced his wife and then traveled to Al-Madinah in order to sell some property he had with her. He intended to use its money to buy an animal and a weapon and then go for Jihad against the Romans until he died. In the process of this he met a group of his people and they informed him that a group of six men from his people had intended that in the time of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, upon which he ﷺ said,\nأَلَيْسَ لَكُمْ فِيَّ أُسْوَةٌ حَسَنَةٌ؟\n(Is there not for you all an excellent example in me?)\nSo he forbade them from that and made them testify that they would take their wives back. Then he (Sa'id) returned to us and informed us that he went to Ibn 'Abbas and asked him about the Witr (prayer). Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Shall I not inform you of the person who is the most knowledgeable person on the earth about the Witr prayer of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ?\" He said, \"Yes.\" Ibn 'Abbas then said, \"Go to 'A'ishah and ask her, then return to me and inform me of what she tells you.\"\nHe said, \"Then I went to Hakim bin Aflah and requested him to go with me to her. But he said, 'I do not want to be near her. Verily, I forbade her from saying anything concerning these two parties (the parties of 'Ali and Mu'awiyah), but she refused and continued being involved with them (in their conflict).' So I adjured him by Allah, so he came with me and we entered upon her (in her house).\" So she said, \"Is this the Hakim that I know?\" He (Hakim) said, \"Yes.\" Then she said, \"Who is this that is with you?\" He said, \"Sa'id bin Hisham.\" She said, \"Who is Hisham?\" He said, \"He is Ibn 'Amir.\" She then asked Allah to have mercy upon him ('Amir). Then she said, \"Yes, 'Amir was a true man.\" Then I (Sa'id) said, \"O Mother of the believers! Inform me about the character of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ.\" She replied, \"Have you not read the Qur'an?\" I said, \"Of course.\" Then she said, \"Verily, the character of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ was the Qur'an.\" I was about to stand and leave, but then I remembered to ask about the night prayer of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ. I said, \"O Mother of the believers! Inform me about the night prayer of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ.\" She said, \"Have you not read the Surah,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الْمُزَّمِّلُ\n(O you wrapped up.) I said, \"Of course.\" She then said, \"Verily, Allah made standing at night (for prayer) obligatory at the beginning of this Surah. So the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and his Companions stood for an entire year during the night (in prayer) until their feet swelled. Allah held back the revelation of the end of this Surah for twelve months. Then, Allah revealed the lightening of this burden at the end of this Surah. Then, the standing for night prayer became voluntary after it used to be obligatory.\"\nI was about to leave when I remembered to ask her about the Witr prayer of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ. So I said, \"O Mother of the believers! Inform me about the Witr prayer of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ.\" She said, \"We used to prepare his Siwak (toothstick) for him and his ablution water, and Allah would awaken him whenever He wished to awaken him during the night. Then, he would clean his teeth with the Siwak and perform ablution. Then, he would pray eight (Rak'ahs) units of prayer and he would not sit during them except at the end of the eighth one. At this point he would sit and remember his Lord the Most High, and supplicate to Him. Afterwards he would stand without saying the greeting of peace (Taslim). He would then pray a ninth unit of prayer and then sit. He would remember Allah Alone and then supplicate to Him (during this sitting). Then, he would say the greetings of peace (to conclude the prayer) making it audible to us. Then, he would pray two more units of prayer after this salutation of peace, while he would be sitting. So these are eleven units of prayer, O my son. Then, when he became older and heavier, he would perform Witr prayer with seven units of prayer, and then he would pray two extra units of prayer after them while sitting after the salutation of peace. So these are nine units of prayer, O my son. Whenever the Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to pray a particular prayer, he liked to remain consistent in its performance. If he would ever be preoccupied from performing the night prayer by oversleeping, pain or illness, he would pray twelve units of supererogatory prayer during the day. I do not know of Allah's Prophet ﷺ ever reciting the entire Qur'an in one night before morning nor did he fast an entire month other than the month of Ramadan.\"\nSo I went to Ibn 'Abbas and told him what she had said. Ibn 'Abbas then said, \"She has spoken truthfully and if I had went to her house I would have remained until she spoke directly to me and I could see her lips moving.\" This is how Imam Ahmad recorded this narration in its entirety. Muslim also recorded similarly in his Sahih.\nIbn Jarir recorded from Abu 'Abdur-Rahman that he said, \"When the Ayah\nيَا أَيُّهَا الْمُزَّمِّلُ\n(O you wrapped.)(73:1) was revealed, the people stood in night prayer for an entire year until their feet and shins swelled. This continued until Allah revealed,\nفَاقْرَءُوا مَا تَيَسَّرَ مِنْهُ\n(So recite of it what is easy.)(73:20) Then the people relaxed.\" Al-Hasan Al-Basri and As-Suddi both said the same. 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported from Ibn 'Abbas that he said concerning Allah's statement,\nقُمِ اللَّيْلَ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا - نِصْفَهُ أَوِ انْقُصْ مِنْهُ قَلِيلًا\n(Stand (to pray) all night, except a little. Half of it or less than that, a little.)(73:2-3) \"This became difficult on the believers. Then Allah lightened the matter for them and had mercy on them when He revealed after this,\nعَلِمَ أَن سَيَكُونُ مِنكُم مَّرْضَىٰ ۙ وَآخَرُونَ يَضْرِبُونَ فِي الْأَرْضِ يَبْتَغُونَ مِن فَضْلِ اللَّهِ ۙ\n(He knows that there will be some among you sick, others traveling through the land, seeking of Allah's bounty.) until Allah says,\nفَاقْرَءُوا مَا تَيَسَّرَ مِنْهُ\n(So, recite you of the Qur'an as much as may be easy for you.)(73:20) So Allah made the matter easy – and unto Him is due all praise – and he did not make matters difficult.\" Then Allah says,\nوَاذْكُرِ اسْمَ رَبِّكَ وَتَبَتَّلْ إِلَيْهِ تَبْتِيلًا\n(And remember the Name of your Lord and (Tabattal) devote yourself to Him with complete devotion.) meaning, make much remembrance (Dhikr) of Him, devote yourself to Him and spend your time worshipping Him when you have completed your occupations and what you need from the affairs of your worldly matters. This is as Allah says,\nفَإِذَا فَرَغْتَ فَانْصَبْ\n(So when you have finished (your occupation), devote yourself for Allah's worship.)(94:7) meaning, when you have completed your tasks and occupations, then busy yourself in His obedience and His worship so that you will have free time for leisure. The meaning of this was said by Ibn Zayd, or close to its meaning. Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, Abu Salih, 'Atiyah, Ad-Dahhak and As-Suddi, all said,\nوَتَبَتَّلْ إِلَيْهِ تَبْتِيلًا\n(And (Tabattal) devote yourself to Him with complete devotion.) \"This means, make your worship solely for Him alone.\" Al-Hasan said, \"Strive and devote yourself to Him.\" Ibn Jarir said, \"A devout worshipper is called Mutabattil. An example of this is the reported Hadith that he (the Prophet ﷺ) forbade At-Tabattul, which means total devotion to worship while avoiding getting married.\" Allah said,\nرَبُّ الْمَشْرِقِ وَالْمَغْرِبِ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ فَاتَّخِذْهُ وَكِيلًا\n(Lord of the east and the west; La ilaha illa Huwa. So take Him a trustee.) meaning, He is the Owner and Controller of affairs in the eastern regions and the western regions. He is the One except whom there is no deity worthy of worship. Just as you single Him out for worship, you should also single Him out for reliance. Therefore, take Him as a guardian and trustee. This is as Allah says in another Ayah,\nفَاعْبُدْهُ وَتَوَكَّلْ عَلَيْهِ\n(So worship Him and rely upon him.)(11:123) It is also similar to His statement,\nإِيَّاكَ نَعْبُدُ وَإِيَّاكَ نَسْتَعِينُ\n(You (Alone) we worship, and you (Alone) we ask for help.)(1:5) The Ayat with this meaning are numerous. They contain the command to make worship and acts of obedience exclusively for Allah, and to rely solely upon Him.","href":"/tafsir/73?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:73:10","title":"Ibn Kathir · 73:10–18","text":"And be patient with what they say, and keep away from them in a good way (10)And leave Me alone to deal with the deniers, those who are in possession of good things of life. And give them respite for a little (11)Verily, with Us are Ankal, and Jahim (12)And a food that chokes, and a painful torment (13)On the Day when the earth and the mountains will (Tarjufu) shake, and the mountains will be a heap of sand poured out (14)Verily, We have sent to you a Messenger to be a witness over you, as We did send a Messenger to Fir'awn (15)But Fir'awn disobeyed the Messenger; so We seized him with a severe punishment (16)Then how can you protect yourselves from the punishment, if you disbelieve, on a Day that will make the children gray-headed (17)Whereon the heaven will be cleft asunder? His promise is certainly to be accomplished (18)\nThe Command to be Patient with the Harms of the Disbelievers and a Discussion of what They will receive because of it\nAllah commands His Messenger ﷺ to be patient with what the foolish who reject him among his people say. Allah also commands him to keep away from them in a nice way. This means in a way that is not blameworthy. Then Allah says to him, as a threat and a warning to his people - and He (Allah) is the Most Great, Whose anger nothing can stand before,\nوَذَرْنِي وَالْمُكَذِّبِينَ أُولِي النَّعْمَةِ\n(And leave Me alone to deal with the deniers, those who are in possession of good things of life.) meaning, 'leave Me to deal with the rich rejectors, who own great wealth.' For verily, they are more able to obey than others besides them, and they are requested to give the rights (to people) because they have what others do not have.\nوَمَهِّلْهُمْ قَلِيلًا\n(And give them respite for a little.) meaning, for a little while. This is as Allah says,\nنُمَتِّعُهُمْ قَلِيلًا ثُمَّ نَضْطَرُّهُمْ إِلَىٰ عَذَابٍ غَلِيظٍ\n(We let them enjoy for a little, then in the end We shall oblige them to (enter) a great torment.)(31:24) Thus, Allah says,\nإِنَّ لَدَيْنَا أَنْكَالًا\n(Verily, with Us are Ankal,) and these are fetters. Ibn 'Abbas, 'Ikrimah, Tawus, Muhammad bin Ka'b, 'Abdullah bin Buraydah, Abu 'Imran Al-Jawni, Abu Mijlaz, Ad-Dahhak, Hammad bin Abi Sulayman, Qatadah, As-Suddi, Ibn Al-Mubarak, Ath-Thawri and others have all said this.\nوَجَحِيمًا\n(and Jahim.) This is a blazing fire.\nوَطَعَامًا ذَا غُصَّةٍ\n(And a food that chokes,) Ibn 'Abbas said, \"This means it will get stuck in the throat and it will not enter or come out.\"\nوَعَذَابًا أَلِيمًا - يَوْمَ تَرْجُفُ الْأَرْضُ وَالْجِبَالُ\n(and a painful torment. On the Day when the earth and the mountains will (Tarjuf) shake,) meaning, they will quake.\nوَكَانَتِ الْجِبَالُ كَثِيبًا مَهِيلًا\n(And the mountains will be a heap of sand poured out.) meaning, they will become like hills of sand after they had been firm rocks. Then they will be utterly destroyed and nothing will remain of them. This will occur until the entire earth becomes a flat land and no curvature will be seen in it. Thus, there will be no valleys and no hills. This means that no part of it will be low or elevated.\nYour Messenger is like the Messenger (ﷺ) to Fir'awn, and You know what happened to Fir'awn\nThen addresses the disbelievers of the Quraysh, and along with them the rest of mankind,\nإِنَّا أَرْسَلْنَا إِلَيْكُمْ رَسُولًا شَاهِدًا عَلَيْكُمْ\n(Verily, We have sent to you a Messenger to be a witness over you,) meaning, witnessing your deeds.\nكَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا إِلَىٰ فِرْعَوْنَ رَسُولًا - فَعَصَىٰ فِرْعَوْنُ الرَّسُولَ فَأَخَذْنَاهُ أَخْذًا وَبِيلًا\n(as We did send a Messenger to Fir'awn. But Fir'awn disobeyed the Messenger; so We seized him with a severe punishment.)\nأَخْذًا وَبِيلًا\n(severe punishment) Ibn Abbas, Mujahid, Qatadah, As-Suddi, and Ath-Thawri said that this means severe. This means, 'you should beware of denying this Messenger, lest you be afflicted by that which befell Fir'awn. Allah seized him with the seizing of One Mighty and Powerful.' This is as Allah says,\nفَأَخَذَهُ اللَّهُ نَكَالَ الْآخِرَةِ وَالْأُولَىٰ\n(So Allah seized him with punishment for his last and first transgression.)(79:25) 'Therefore, you will be even more deserving of destruction and ruin if you deny your Messenger, because your Messenger is more noble and a greater than Prophet Musa, the son of 'Imran.' This has been reported from Ibn 'Abbas and Mujahid.\nThe Threat of the Day of Judgement\nAllah says,\nفَكَيْفَ تَتَّقُونَ إِنْ كَفَرْتُمْ يَوْمًا يَجْعَلُ الْوِلْدَانَ شِيبًا\n(Then how can you proctect yourselves from the punishment, if you disbelieved, on a Day that will make the children gray-headed?)\nIbn Jarir quoted in the recitation of Ibn Mas'ud: \"How can you, O people, fear a Day that makes the children grey-headed, if you disbelieve in Allah and do not testify to Him?\"\nSo the first interpretation would mean, 'how can you attain safety for yourselves from the Day of this great horror if you disbelieve?' It could imply the meaning, 'how can you all attain piety if you disbelieve in the Day of Judgement and reject it.' Both of these meanings are good. However, the first interpretation is closer to the truth. And Allah knows best. The meaning of Allah's statement,\nيَوْمًا يَجْعَلُ الْوِلْدَانَ شِيبًا\n(On a Day that will make the children gray-headed?) is that this will happen due to the severity of its horrors, its earthquakes and its disturbing confusion. This is when Allah will say to Adam, \"Send a group to the Fire.\" Adam will say, \"How many?\" Allah will then reply, \"From every thousand, nine hundred and ninety-nine to the Fire, and one to Paradise.\" Then Allah says,\nالسَّمَاءُ مُنْفَطِرٌ بِهِ ۚ\n(Whereon the heaven will be cleft asunder?) Al-Hasan and Qatadah both said, \"This means, because of it (the Day of Judgement), due to its severity and its horror.\" Then Allah says,\nكَانَ وَعْدُهُ مَفْعُولًا\n(His promise is certainly to be accomplished.) meaning, the promise of this Day will be fulfilled. This means it will occur and there is no way around it, and it will come to pass and there is no avoiding it.","href":"/tafsir/73?verse=10","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:73:19","title":"Ibn Kathir · 73:19–20","text":"Verily, this is an admonition, therefore whosoever wills, let him take a path to His Lord (19)Verily, your Lord knows that you do stand a little less than two-thirds of the night, or half the night, or a third of the night, and also a party of those with you. And Allah measures the night and the day. He knows that you are unable to pray the whole night, so He has turned to you. So, recite you of the Qur'an as much as may be easy for you. He knows that there will be some among you sick, others traveling through the land, seeking of Allah's bounty, yet others fighting in Allah's cause. So recite as much of the Qur'an as may be easy, and perform Salah and give Zakah, and lend to Allah a handsome loan. And whatever good you send before you for yourselves, you will certainly find it with Allah, better and greater in reward. And seek Forgiveness of Allah. Verily, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most-Merciful (20)\nThis is a Surah that Men of Sound Understanding receive Admonition from\nAllah says,\nإِنَّ هَٰذِهِ\n(Verily, this) meaning, this Surah.\nتَذْكِرَةٌ\n(an admonition,) meaning, men of understanding receive admonition from it. Thus, Allah says,\nفَمَنْ شَاءَ اتَّخَذَ إِلَىٰ رَبِّهِ سَبِيلًا\n(therefore whosoever wills, let him take a path to His Lord.) meaning, from those whom Allah wills that they be guided. This is similar to the stipulation that Allah mentions in another Surah,\nوَمَا تَشَاءُونَ إِلَّا أَنْ يَشَاءَ اللَّهُ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ كَانَ عَلِيمًا حَكِيمًا\n(But you cannot will, unless Allah wills. Verily Allah is Ever All-Knowing, Al-Wise.)(76:30)\nAbrogation of the Obligation to offer the Night Prayer and a Mention of its Valid Excuses\nThen Allah says,\nإِنَّ رَبَّكَ يَعْلَمُ أَنَّكَ تَقُومُ أَدْنَىٰ مِنْ ثُلُثَيِ اللَّيْلِ وَنِصْفَهُ وَثُلُثَهُ وَطَائِفَةٌ مِنَ الَّذِينَ مَعَكَ ۚ\n(Verily, your Lord knows that you do stand a little less than two-thirds of the night, or half the night, or a third of the night, and also a party of those with you.) meaning, sometimes like this and sometimes like that, and all of these are done unintentionally. However, you all are not able to be consistent with the night prayer Allah has commanded you, because it is difficult for you. Thus, Allah says,\nوَاللَّهُ يُقَدِّرُ اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ ۚ\n(And Allah measures the night and the day.) meaning, sometimes the night and day are equal, and sometimes one of them will be longer or shorter than the other.\nعَلِمَ أَنْ لَنْ تُحْصُوهُ\n(He knows that you are unable to pray the whole night,) meaning, the obligation which He prescribed for you.\nفَاقْرَءُوا مَا تَيَسَّرَ مِنَ الْقُرْآنِ\n(So, recite you of the Qur'an as much as may be easy.) meaning, without specification of any set time. This means, stand and pray during the night as much as is easy (for you). Allah uses the term recitation (Qira'ah) to mean prayer (Salah). This is as Allah says in Surah Subhan (Al-Isra'),\nوَلَا تَجْهَرْ بِصَلَاتِكَ\n(And offer your Salah neither aloud)(17:110) meaning, your recitation.\nوَلَا تُخَافِتْ بِهَا\n(Nor in low voice.)(17:110) Then Allah says,\nعَلِمَ أَنْ سَيَكُونُ مِنْكُمْ مَرْضَىٰ ۙ وَآخَرُونَ يَضْرِبُونَ فِي الْأَرْضِ يَبْتَغُونَ مِنْ فَضْلِ اللَّهِ ۙ وَآخَرُونَ يُقَاتِلُونَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ ۖ\n(He knows that there will be some among you sick, others traveling through the land, seeking of Allah's bounty, yet others fighting in Allah's cause.) meaning, He knows that there will be people of this nation who will have excuses for not praying the (voluntary) night prayer. They are those who are ill and therefore they are not able to perform it, and those who are traveling in the land seeking the bounty of Allah in business and trade, and others who will be busy with that which is more important to them. An example of this is going on expeditions to fight in the way of Allah. This Ayah, rather, this entire Surah was revealed in Makkah even though fighting was not legislated until after it was revealed. Thus, it is among the greatest of the signs of prophethood, because it informs about unseen matters of the future. Thus, Allah says,\nفَاقْرَءُوا مَا تَيَسَّرَ مِنْهُ\n(So recite as much of the Qur'an as may be easy,) meaning, stand and pray at night whatever is easy for you to do of it. Allah said;\nوَأَقِيمُوا الصَّلَاةَ وَآتُوا الزَّكَاةَ\n(and perform Salah and give Zakah,) meaning, establish your obligatory prayers and pay your obligatory Zakah. This is a proof for those who say that Zakah was made obligatory in Makkah, but the various amounts of Nisab and how much was to be given was clarified in Al-Madinah. And Allah knows best.\nIbn 'Abbas, 'Ikrimah, Mujahid, Al-Hasan, Qatadah and others from the Salaf have said, \"Verily, this Ayah abrogated the standing for prayer at night that Allah previously made obligatory for the Muslims.\" It has been confirmed in the Two Sahihs that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said to a man,\nخَمْسُ صَلَوَاتٍ فِي الْيَوْمِ وَاللَّيْلَةِ\n(Five obligatory prayers during a day and a night (are obligatory).)\" The man said, \"Is there anything other than this (of prayer) that is obligatory upon me?\" The Messenger of Allah ﷺ replied,\nلَا، إِلَّا أَنْ تَطَوَّعَ\n(No, except what you may do voluntarily.)\nThe Command to give Charity and do Good Deeds\nAllah says,\nوَأَقْرِضُوا اللَّهَ قَرْضًا حَسَنًا ۚ\n(and lend to Allah a handsome loan.) meaning, from charitable donations. For verily, Allah will reward for this the best and most abundant of rewards. This is as Allah says,\nمَنْ ذَا الَّذِي يُقْرِضُ اللَّهَ قَرْضًا حَسَنًا فَيُضَاعِفَهُ لَهُ أَضْعَافًا كَثِيرَةً ۚ\n(Who is he that will lend to Allah a goodly loan so that He may multiply it to him many times?)(2:245) Then Allah says,\nوَمَا تُقَدِّمُوا لِأَنفُسِكُم مِّنْ خَيْرٍ تَجِدُوهُ عِندَ اللَّهِ هُوَ خَيْرًا وَأَعْظَمَ أَجْرًا ۚ\n(And whatever good you send before you for yourselves, you will certainly find it with Allah, better and greater in reward.) meaning, for all that you send before yourselves, you will get it (back) and it will be better than what you kept for yourselves in the worldly life. Al-Hafiz Abu Ya'la Al-Mawsili reported from Al-Harith bin Suwayd, from 'Abdullah that Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nأَيُّكُمْ مَالُهُ أَحَبُّ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ مَالِ وَارِثِهِ؟\n(Which of you hold his wealth to be more beloved to him than the wealth of his heir?) They said, \"O Messenger of Allah! There is not a single one of us who does not hold his wealth to be more beloved to him than the wealth of his heir.\" The Messenger of Allah ﷺ then said,\nاعْلَمُوا مَا تَقُولُونَ\n(Know what you are saying!) They replied, \"What do we know other than this, O Messenger of Allah?\" He then said,\nإِنَّمَا مَالُ أَحَدِكُمْ مَا قَدَّمَ، وَمَالُ وَارِثِهِ مَا أَخَّرَ\n(The wealth of one of you is only that which he sends forth, and the wealth of his heir is that which he leaves behind.) Al-Bukhari also recorded this Hadith. Then Allah says,\nوَاسْتَغْفِرُوا اللَّهَ ۖ إِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ\n(And seek forgiveness of Allah. Verily, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most-Merciful.) meaning, remember Him and seek forgiveness from Him often for all of your matters. For verily, He is Most Forgiving, Most Merciful to whoever seeks His forgiveness.\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Al-Muzzammil, and all praise and blessings are due to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/73?verse=19","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:74:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 74:1–10","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nيَا أَيُّهَا الْمُدَّثِّرُ - قُمْ فَأَنْذِرْ - وَرَبَّكَ فَكَبِّرْ - وَثِيَابَكَ فَطَهِّرْ - وَالرُّجْزَ فَاهْجُرْ - وَلَا تَمْنُنْ تَسْتَكْثِرُ - وَلِرَبِّكَ فَاصْبِرْ - فَإِذَا نُقِرَ فِي النَّاقُورِ - فَذَٰلِكَ يَوْمَئِذٍ يَوْمٌ عَسِيرٌ - عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ غَيْرُ يَسِيرٍ\n(1. O you enveloped in garments!)(2. Arise and warn!)(3. And magnify your Lord!)(4. And purify your garments!)(5. And keep away from Ar-Rujz!)(6. And give not a thing in order to have more.)(7. And be patient for the sake of your Lord!)(8. Then, when the Naqur is sounded.)(9. Truly, that Day will be a Hard Day.)(10. Far from easy for the disbelievers.)\nThe First Ayat to be revealed after 'Read!\nIt has been confirmed in the Sahih Al-Bukhari and Sahih Muslim on the authority of Abu Salamah that Jabir bin 'Abdullah informed him that he heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ speaking about the time period (of the pause in) revelation. The Prophet ﷺ said,\nفَبَيْنَا أَنَا أَمْشِي إِذْ سَمِعْتُ صَوْتًا مِنَ السَّمَاءِ فَرَفَعْتُ بَصَرِي قِبَلَ السَّمَاءِ، فَإِذَا الْمَلَكُ الَّذِي جَاءَنِي بِحِرَاءَ، قَاعِدٌ عَلَى كُرْسِيٍّ بَيْنَ السَّمَاءِ وَالْأَرْضِ، فَجُئِثْتُ مِنْهُ حَتّٰى هَوَيْتُ إِلَى الْأَرْضِ، فَجِئْتُ إِلَى أَهْلِي فَقُلْتُ: زَمِّلُونِي زَمِّلُونِي فَزَمَّلُونِي. فَأَنْزَلَ (اللهُ تَعَالىٰ)\nيَا أَيُّهَا الْمُدَّثِّرُ - قُمْ فَأَنْذِرْ\nإلى 'فَاهْجُرْ'\nثُمَّ حَمِيَ الْوَحْيُ وَتَتَابَعَ\n(While I was walking I heard a voice from the sky. So I lifted my gaze towards the sky and saw the same angel who had come to me at the cave of Hira'. He was sitting on a chair between the sky and the earth. So I fled from him (in fear) until I fell down to the ground. Then, I went to my family and I said, 'Wrap me up, wrap me up. So, they wrapped me up! So Allah revealed, (O you wrapped up! Arise and warn!) until (And keep away)[Here, Abu Salamah added, 'Ar-Rujz means idols.'](After this, the revelation started coming strongly and frequently in succession.)\nThis is the wording of Al-Bukhari. The way this Hadith is narrated necessitates that revelation had descended before this. This is due to the Prophet's statement,\nفَإِذَا الْمَلَكُ الَّذِي جَاءَنِي بِحِرَاءَ\n(The same angel who had come to me at the cave of Hira'.)\" That angel was Jibril, who had came to him with Allah's statement,\nاقْرَأْ بِاسْمِ رَبِّكَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ - خَلَقَ الْإِنْسَانَ مِنْ عَلَقٍ - اقْرَأْ وَرَبُّكَ الْأَكْرَمُ - الَّذِي عَلَّمَ بِالْقَلَمِ - عَلَّمَ الْإِنْسَانَ مَا لَمْ يَعْلَمْ\n(Read! In the Name of your Lord Who has created. He has created man from a clot. Read! And your Lord is the Most Generous. Who has taught by the pen. He has taught man that which he knew not.)(96:1-5) After this first occurrence (in the cave) there was a period of time that passed, then the angel descended again.\nImam Ahmad recorded from Abu Salamah bin 'Abdur-Rahman that Jabir bin 'Abdullah informed him that he heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ saying,\nثُمَّ فَتَرَ الْوَحْيُ عَنِّي فَتْرَةً، فَبَيْنَا أَنَا أَمْشِي سَمِعْتُ صَوْتًا مِنَ السَّمَاءِ، فَرَفَعْتُ بَصَرِي قِبَلَ السَّمَاءِ، فَإِذَا الْمَلَكُ الَّذِي جَاءَنِي، قَاعِدٌ عَلىٰ كُرْسِيٍّ بَيْنَ السَّمَاءِ وَالْأَرْضِ، فَجُئِثْتُ مِنْهُ فَرَقًا حَتّٰى هَوَيْتُ إِلَى الْأَرْضِ، فَجِئْتُ أَهْلِي فَقُلْتُ لَهُمْ: زَمِّلُونِي زَمِّلُونِي فَزَمَّلُونِي، فَأَنْزَلَ اللهُ تَعَالىٰ:\nيَا أَيُّهَا الْمُدَّثِّرُ - قُمْ فَأَنْذِرْ - وَرَبَّكَ فَكَبِّرْ - وَثِيَابَكَ فَطَهِّرْ - وَالرُّجْزَ فَاهْجُرْ\nثُمَّ حَمِيَ الْوَحْيُ وَتَتَابَعَ\n(Then the revelation ceased coming to me for a period of time.Then, while I was walking, I heard a voice from the sky. So I lifted my gaze towards the sky to see the same angel who had come to me, sitting on a chair between the sky and the earth. So I fled from him a short distance before I fell down to the ground. Then I came to my family and said to them, 'Wrap me up, wrap me up! So, they wrapped me up! Then Allah revealed, (O you wrapped up! Arise and warn! And magnify your Lord. And purify your garments. And keep away from Ar-Rujz!)(After this, the revelation started coming strongly and frequently in succession.) They both (Al-Bukhari and Muslim) recorded this Hadith by way of Az-Zuhri.\nAt-Tabarani recorded from Ibn 'Abbas that he said, \"Verily, Al-Walid bin Al-Mughirah prepared some food for the Quraysh. So when they had eaten from it he said, 'What do you have to say about this man?' Some of them said, 'He is a magician.' Others said, 'He is not a magician.' Then some of them said, 'He is a soothsayer.' But others said, 'He is not a soothsayer.' Some of them said, 'He is a poet.' But others said, 'He is not a poet.' Some of them said, 'This is magic from that of old.' Thus, they eventually all agreed that it was magic from ancient times. Then, when this news reached the Prophet ﷺ, he became grieved, covered his head and wrapped himself up. This is when Allah revealed,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الْمُدَّثِّرُ - قُمْ فَأَنْذِرْ - وَرَبَّكَ فَكَبِّرْ - وَثِيَابَكَ فَطَهِّرْ - وَالرُّجْزَ فَاهْجُرْ - وَلَا تَمْنُنْ تَسْتَكْثِرُ - وَلِرَبِّكَ فَاصْبِرْ\n(O you enveloped in garments! Arise and warn! And magnify your Lord (Allah)! And purify your garments! And keep away from Ar-Rujz (the idols)! And give not a thing in order to have more (or consider not your deeds of obedience to Allah as a favour to Him). And be patient for the sake of your Lord (i.e., perform your duty to Allah)!) Concerning Allah's statement,\nقُمْ فَأَنْذِرْ\n(Arise and warn!) means, prepare to go forth with zeal and warn the people. With this the Prophet ﷺ attained messengership just as he attained prophethood with the first revelation.\nوَرَبَّكَ فَكَبِّرْ\n(And magnify your Lord!) to declare the greatness of Him. Al-'Awfi reported from Ibn 'Abbas;\nوَثِيَابَكَ فَطَهِّرْ\n(And purify your garments!) \"This means, do not let your garments that you wear be from earnings that are unlawful.\" It has also been said, \"Do not wear your clothes in disobedience.\" Muhammad bin Sirin said,\nوَثِيَابَكَ فَطَهِّرْ\n(And purify your garments!) \"This means clean them with water.\" Ibn Zayd said, \"The idolators would not clean themselves, so Allah commanded him to clean himself and his garments.\" This view was preferred by Ibn Jarir. Sa'id bin Jubayr said,\nوَثِيَابَكَ فَطَهِّرْ\n(And purify your garments!) \"This means purify your heart and your intentions.\" Muhammad bin Ka'b Al-Qurazi and Al-Hasan Al-Basri both said, \"And beautify your character.\" Concerning Allah's statement,\nوَالرُّجْزَ فَاهْجُرْ\n(And keep away from Ar-Rujz!) 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported from Ibn 'Abbas, \"Ar-Rujz are idols, so keep away from them.\" Similar to this was said by Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Qatadah, Az-Zuhri and Ibn Zayd, \"Verily, it is the idols.\" This is like Allah's statement,\nيَا أَيُّهَا النَّبِيُّ اتَّقِ اللَّهَ وَلَا تُطِعِ الْكَافِرِينَ وَالْمُنَافِقِينَ ۗ\n(O Prophet! have Taqwa of Allah, and obey not the disbelievers and the hypocrites.)(33:1) and Allah's statement,\nوَقَالَ مُوسَىٰ لِأَخِيهِ هَارُونَ اخْلُفْنِي فِي قَوْمِي وَأَصْلِحْ وَلَا تَتَّبِعْ سَبِيلَ الْمُفْسِدِينَ\n(And Musa said to his brother Harun: \"Replace me among my people, act well and follow not way of the corrupters.\")(7:142) Then Allah says,\nوَلَا تَمْنُنْ تَسْتَكْثِرُ\n(And give not a thing in order to have more.) Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Do not give any gift seeking to get (back in return) more than it.\" Khusayf reported from Mujahid;\nوَلَا تَمْنُنْ تَسْتَكْثِرُ\n(And give not a thing (Tamnun) in order to have more.) \"Do not slacken in seeking more good. Tamnun in the language of the Arabs means to become weak.\" Concerning Allah's statement,\nوَلِرَبِّكَ فَاصْبِرْ\n(And be patient for the sake of your Lord!) meaning, make your patience with their harms be for the Face of your Lord, the Mighty and Majestic. This was stated by Mujahid. Ibrahim An-Nakha'i said, \"Be patient in your giving for the sake of Allah, the Mighty and Majestic.\"\nReminding of the Day of Judgement\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nفَإِذَا نُقِرَ فِي النَّاقُورِ - فَذَٰلِكَ يَوْمَئِذٍ يَوْمٌ عَسِيرٌ - عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ غَيْرُ يَسِيرٍ\n(Then, when the Naqur is sounded. Truly, that Day will be a Hard Day – far from easy for the disbelievers) Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, Ash-Sha'bi, Zayd bin Aslam, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, As-Suddi and Ibn Zayd, all said,\nالنَّاقُورِ\n(Naqur) \"It is the Trumpet.\" Mujahid said, \"It is in the shape of a horn.\" Ibn Abi Hatim narrated that Abu Sa'id Al-Ashaj told them that Asbat bin Muhammad related to them from Mutarrif, from 'Atiyah Al-'Awfi, from Ibn 'Abbas,\nفَإِذَا نُقِرَ فِي النَّاقُورِ\n(Then, when the Trumpet is sounded.) The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nكَيْفَ أَنْعَمُ وَصَاحِبُ الْقَرْنِ قَدِ الْتَقَمَ الْقَرْنَ وَحَنَى جَبْهَتَهُ يَنْتَظِرُ مَتَىٰ يُؤْمَرُ فَيَنْفُخُ؟\n(How can I be comfortable when the one with the horn has placed it in his mouth, leaned his forehead forward, and is waiting to be commanded so that he can blow?) The Companions of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said, \"What do you command us, O Messenger of Allah?\" He replied,\nقُولُوا: حَسْبُنَا اللهُ وَنِعْمَ الْوَكِيلُ، عَلَى اللهِ تَوَكَّلْنَا\n(Say: \"Allah is sufficient for us, and what an excellent Trustee He is. We put our trust in Allah.\") It has been recorded like this by Imam Ahmad on the authority of Asbat. Concerning Allah's statement,\nفَذَٰلِكَ يَوْمَئِذٍ يَوْمٌ عَسِيرٌ\n(Truly, that Day will be a Hard Day.) meaning, severe.\nعَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ غَيْرُ يَسِيرٍ\n(Far from easy for the disbelievers.) meaning, it will not be easy for them. This is as Allah says,\nيَقُولُ الْكَافِرُونَ هَٰذَا يَوْمٌ عَسِرٌ\n(The disbelievers will say: \"This a Hard Day.\")(54:8) We have reported from Zurarah bin Awfa, the judge of Al-Basrah, that he lead the people in the morning prayer and he recited this Surah. Then, when he reached Allah's statement,\nفَإِذَا نُقِرَ فِي النَّاقُورِ - فَذَٰلِكَ يَوْمَئِذٍ يَوْمٌ عَسِيرٌ - عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ غَيْرُ يَسِيرٍ\n(Then, when the Naqur is sounded. Truly, that Day will be a Hard Day – far from easy for the disbelievers.) he made a moaning sound and then he fell down dead. May Allah have mercy on him.","href":"/tafsir/74?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:74:11","title":"Ibn Kathir · 74:11–30","text":"Leave Me alone (to deal) with whom I created lonely (11)And then granted him resources in abundance (12)And children attending (13)And made life smooth and comfortable for him (14)After all that he desires that I should give more (15)Nay! Verily, he has been opposing Our Ayat (16)I shall force him to Sa'ud (17)Verily, he thought and plotted (18)So let him be cursed, how he plotted (19)And once more let him be cursed, how he plotted (20)Then he thought (21)Then he frowned and he looked in a bad tempered way (22)Then he turned back, and was proud (23)Then he said: \"This is nothing but magic from that of old (24)\"This is nothing but the word of a human being! (25)I will cast him into Saqar (26)And what will make you know (exactly) what Saqar is (27)It spares not, nor does it leave (anything)(28)Scorching for the humans (29)Over it are nineteen (30)\nA Threat for Whoever claims that the Qur'an is Magic\nAllah threatens this wicked person whom He has favored with the blessings of this world, yet he is ungrateful for the blessings of Allah and he meets them with disbelief (in Allah) and rejection of His Ayat. He invents lies against Allah's Ayat and claims that they are the words of a man. Allah recounts to him His favors upon him when He says,\nذَرْنِي وَمَنْ خَلَقْتُ وَحِيدًا\n(Leave Me alone (to deal) with whom I created lonely.) meaning, he came out of the womb of his mother alone, without any wealth or children. Then, Allah provided him with\nمَالًا مَمْدُودًا\n(resources in abundance.) meaning, vast and abundant. Allah then made for him,\nوَبَنِينَ شُهُودًا\n(And children attending.) Mujahid said, \"They are not absent.\" This means that they are present with him. They do not travel for business and trade. Rather, their servants and hired workers handle all of that for them while they are sitting with their father. He enjoys their company and delights in being with them.\nAccording to what has been stated by As-Suddi, Abu Malik and 'Asim bin 'Umar bin Qatadah, they were thirteen (children) in number. Ibn Abbas and Mujahid said that they were ten. This was a great blessing in their living with him.\nوَمَهَّدْتُ لَهُ تَمْهِيدًا\n(And made life smooth and comfortable for him.) meaning, 'I made possible for him to amass wealth, luxuries and other than that.'\nثُمَّ يَطْمَعُ أَنْ أَزِيدَ - كَلَّا ۖ إِنَّهُ كَانَ لِآيَاتِنَا عَنِيدًا\n(After all that he desires that I should give more. Nay! Verily, he has been opposing Our Ayat.) meaning, obstinate. This refers to his ungratefulness for his blessings after knowing (these blessings). Allah says,\nسَأُرْهِقُهُ صَعُودًا\n(I shall force him to Sa'ud!) Qatadah reported from Ibn 'Abbas that he said, \"Sa'ud is a rock in Hell that the disbeliever will be dragged across on his face.\" As-Suddi said, \"Sa'ud is a slippery rock in Hell that he will be forced to climb.\" Mujahid said,\nسَأُرْهِقُهُ صَعُودًا\n(I shall force him to Sa'ud!) \"This is a harsh portion of the torment.\" Qatadah said, \"It is a torment that contains no relaxation (break for relief).\" Concerning Allah's statement,\nإِنَّهُ فَكَّرَ وَقَدَّرَ\n(Verily, he thought and plotted.) meaning, 'We only caused him to face the grievous torment of Sa'ud, that is Our bringing him close to the harsh torment, because he was far away from faith.' This was because he thought and plotted, meaning he contemplated what he should say about the Qur'an when he was asked about it. So he deliberated over what statement he should invent against it.\nوَقَدَّرَ\n(and plotted.) meaning, he contemplated.\nفَقُتِلَ كَيْفَ قَدَّرَ - ثُمَّ قُتِلَ كَيْفَ قَدَّرَ\n(So let him be cursed, how he plotted! And once more let him be cursed, how he plotted!) This is a supplication against him.\nثُمَّ نَظَرَ\n(Then he thought.) meaning, he thought again and deliberated.\nثُمَّ عَبَسَ\n(Then he frowned) meaning, he contracted his eyebrows together and frowned.\nوَبَسَرَ\n(and he looked in a bad tempered way.) meaning, he scowled and was disgusted. Concerning Allah's statement,\nثُمَّ أَدْبَرَ وَاسْتَكْبَرَ\n(Then he turned back, and was proud.) meaning, he turned away from the truth and arrogantly refused to accept and submit to the Qur'an.\nفَقَالَ إِنْ هَٰذَا إِلَّا سِحْرٌ يُؤْثَرُ\n(Then he said: \"This is nothing but magic from that of old.\") meaning, 'this is magic that Muhammad received from those who were before him, and he is merely saying what he got from them.' This is why he said,\nإِنْ هَٰذَا إِلَّا قَوْلُ الْبَشَرِ\n(This is nothing but the word of a human being!) meaning, it is not the Words of Allah.\nThe person who is mentioned in this discussion is Al-Walid bin Al-Mughirah Al-Makhzumi. He was one of the chiefs of the Quraysh – may Allah curse him. Among the narrations about this is what was reported by Al-'Awfi from Ibn 'Abbas. He (Ibn 'Abbas) said,\n\"Al-Walid bin Al-Mughirah entered the house of Abu Bakr bin Abi Quhafah and asked him about the Qur'an. When Abu Bakr informed him about it, he left and went to the Quraysh saying, 'What a great thing this is that Ibn Abi Kabshah is saying. I swear by Allah that it is not poetry, nor magic, nor the prattling of insanity. Verily, his speech is from the Words of Allah!' So when a group of the Quraysh heard this they gathered and said, 'By Allah, if Al-Walid converts (to Islam) all of the Quraysh will convert.' When Abu Jahl bin Hisham heard this he said, 'By Allah, I will deal with him for you.' So he went to Al-Walid's house and entered upon him. He said to Al-Walid, 'Don't you see that your people are collecting charity for you?' Al-Walid replied, 'Don't I have more wealth and children than they do?' Abu Jahl answered, 'They are saying that you only went to Ibn Abi Quhafah's house so that you can get some of his food.' Al-Walid then said, 'Is this what my tribe is saying? Nay, by Allah, I am not seeking to be close to Ibn Abi Quhafah, nor 'Umar, nor Ibn Abi Kabshah. And his speech is only inherited magic of old.' So Allah revealed to His Messenger ﷺ,\nذَرْنِي وَمَنْ خَلَقْتُ وَحِيدًا\n(Leave me alone with whom I created lonely.) until His statement,\nلَا تُبْقِي وَلَا تَذَرُ\n(It spares not, nor does it leave (anything)!)\" Qatadah said, \"They claim that he (Al-Walid) said, 'By Allah, I thought about what the man says, and it is not poetry. Verily, it has a sweetness and it is truly elegant. Verily, it is exalted and it is not overcome. And I have no doubt that it is magic.' So Allah revealed,\nفَقُتِلَ كَيْفَ قَدَّرَ\n(So let him be cursed, how he plotted!)\nثُمَّ عَبَسَ وَبَسَرَ\n(Then he frowned and he looked in a bad tempered way.) He contracted his eyes together and scowled.\" Allah says,\nسَأُصْلِيهِ سَقَرَ\n(I will cast him into Saqar.) meaning, 'I will engulf him in it from all his sides.' Then Allah says,\nوَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا سَقَرُ\n(And what will make you know (exactly) what Saqar is?) This is to give fright and emphasis to its matter. Then Allah explains this by His saying,\nوَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا سَقَرُ\n(It spares not, nor does it leave (anything)!) meaning, it eats their flesh, veins, nerves and their skins. Then their organs will be changed into something else. They will remain in this (form), not living or dying. This was stated by Ibn Buraydah, Abu Sinan and others. Concerning Allah's statement,\nلَوَّاحَةٌ لِلْبَشَرِ\n(Scorching for the humans!) Mujahid said, \"This means for the skin.\" Qatadah said,\nلَوَّاحَةٌ لِلْبَشَرِ\n(Scorching for the humans!) \"This means burning the skin.\" Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Burning the skin of man.\" Concerning Allah's statement,\nعَلَيْهَا تِسْعَةَ عَشَرَ\n(Over it are nineteen.) meaning, the first of the guardians of Hell. They are magnificent in (their appearance) and harsh in their character.","href":"/tafsir/74?verse=11","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:74:31","title":"Ibn Kathir · 74:31–37","text":"And We have set none but angels as guardians of the Fire. And We have fixed their number only as a trial for the disbelievers, in order that the People of the Scripture may arrive at a certainty and that the believers may increase in faith, and that no doubt may be left for the People of the Scripture and the believers, and that those in whose hearts is a disease and the disbelievers may say: \"What does Allah intend by this example?\" Thus Allah leads astray whom He wills and guides whom He wills. And none can know the hosts of your Lord but He. And this is nothing but a reminder to mankind (31)Nay! And by the moon (32)And by the night when it withdraws (33)And by the dawn when it brightens (34)Verily, it is but one of the greatest (signs)(35)A warning to mankin (36)To any of you that chooses to go forward, or to remain behind (37)\nThe Number of Guardians of Hell and what the Disbelievers said about that\nAllah says,\nوَمَا جَعَلْنَا أَصْحَابَ النَّارِ\n(And We have set none as (Ashab) guardians of the Fire) meaning, its guardians.\nإِلَّا مَلَائِكَةً\n(but angels.) Guardian angels, stern and severe. This is a refutation of the idolators of the Quraysh when they mentioned the number of guardian angels. Abu Jahl said, \"O people of Quraysh! Are not every ten among you able to defeat one of them?\" So Allah said,\nوَمَا جَعَلْنَا أَصْحَابَ النَّارِ إِلَّا مَلَائِكَةً ۙ\n(And We have set none but angels as guardians of the Fire.) meaning, extremely strong in their creation. They cannot be stood against nor defeated. It has been said that Abu Al-Ashaddayn, and his name was Kaladah bin Usayd bin Khalaf, said, \"O people of Quraysh! You defend me against two of them and I will defend you against seventeen of them.\" He said this thinking himself to be very great. For they claimed that he achieved such strength that he would stand on a skin of cow hide and ten people would try to pull it out from under his feet, but the skin would be torn to pieces and still not be removed from under him. Concerning Allah's statement,\nوَمَا جَعَلْنَا عِدَّتَهُمْ إِلَّا فِتْنَةً لِلَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا\n(And We have fixed their number only as a trial for the disbelievers,) meaning, 'We only have mentioned their number as being nineteen as a test from Us for mankind.'\nلِيَسْتَيْقِنَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ\n(In order that the People of the Scripture may arrive at a certainty) meaning, so that they may know that this Messenger is true. For he speaks according to the same thing that they have with them of heavenly revealed Scriptures that came to the Prophets before him. Concerning Allah's statement,\nوَيَزْدَادَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِيمَانًا\n(and that the believers may increase in faith.) meaning, to their faith. This is due to what they witness from the truthfulness of the information of their Prophet, Muhammad ﷺ.\nوَلَا يَرْتَابَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ ۙ وَلِيَقُولَ الَّذِينَ فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ مَرَضٌ\n(and that no doubt may be left for the People of the Scripture and the believers, and that those in whose hearts is a disease) meaning, among the hypocrites.\nوَالْكَافِرُونَ مَاذَا أَرَادَ اللَّهُ بِهَٰذَا مَثَلًا\n(and the disbelievers may say: \"What does Allah intend by this example?\") meaning, they say, \"What is the wisdom in mentioning this here?\" Allah says,\nكَذَٰلِكَ يُضِلُّ اللَّهُ مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَهْدِي مَنْ يَشَاءُ ۚ\n(Thus Allah leads astray whom He wills and guides whom He wills.) meaning, by way of examples like this, faith becomes firm in the hearts of some people and it is shaken with others. This has a profound wisdom and it is an irrefutable proof.\nNone knows the Soldiers of Allah except Him\nAllah says,\nوَمَا يَعْلَمُ جُنُودَ رَبِّكَ إِلَّا هُوَ ۚ\n(And none can know the hosts of your Lord but He.) meaning, none knows their number and their count except Allah. This is so that one does not make the mistake of thinking that they are only nineteen in all. It has been confirmed in the Hadith concerning Al-Isra' that is reported in the Two Sahihs and other collections, that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said in describing the Frequented House (Al-Bayt Al-Ma'mur), which is in the seventh heaven,\nفَإِذَا هُوَ يَدْخُلُهُ فِي كُلِّ يَوْمٍ سَبْعُونَ أَلْفَ مَلَكٍ لَا يَعُودُونَ إِلَيْهِ آخِرَ مَا عَلَيْهِمْ\n(Seventy thousand angels enter into it every day and they do not return to it as it is all that is due upon them (one visit in their lifetime).) Concerning Allah's statement,\nوَمَا هِيَ إِلَّا ذِكْرَىٰ لِلْبَشَرِ\n(And this is nothing but a reminder to mankind.) Mujahid and others said,\nوَمَا هِيَ\n(And this is not.) \"This means the Hellfire which has been described.\"\nإِلَّا ذِكْرَىٰ لِلْبَشَرِ\n(but a reminder to mankind.) Then Allah says,\nكَلَّا وَالْقَمَرِ - وَاللَّيْلِ إِذْ أَدْبَرَ\n(Nay! And by the moon. And by the night when it withdraws.) meaning, when it withdraws.\nوَالصُّبْحِ إِذَا أَسْفَرَ\n(And by the dawn when it brightens.) meaning, when it shines.\nإِنَّهَا لَإِحْدَى الْكُبَرِ\n(Verily, it is but one of the greatest (signs).) meaning, the great things. This refers to the Hellfire. Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak and others of the Salaf, all said this.\nنَذِيرًا لِلْبَشَرِ - لِمَنْ شَاءَ مِنْكُمْ أَنْ يَتَقَدَّمَ أَوْ يَتَأَخَّرَ\n(A warning to mankind – to any of you that chooses to go forward, or to remain behind.) meaning, for whoever wishes to accept the warning and be guided to the truth, or hold back from accepting it, turn away from it and reject it.","href":"/tafsir/74?verse=31","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:74:38","title":"Ibn Kathir · 74:38–56","text":"Every person is a pledge for what he has earned (38)Except those on the Right (39)In Gardens they will ask one another (40)About criminals (and they will say to them)(41)\"What has caused you to enter Hell? (42)They will say: \"We were not of those who used to offer the Salah, (43)\"Nor did we feed the poor; (44)\"And we used to speak falsehood with vain speakers. (45)\"And we used to deny the Day of Recompense, (46)\"Until Al-Yaqin came to us. (47)So no intercession of intercessors will be of any use to them (48)Then what is wrong with them that they turn away from admonition (49)As if they were wild donkeys (50)Fleeing from a Qaswarah (51)Nay, everyone of them desires that he should be given pages spread out (52)Nay! But they fear not the Hereafter (53)Nay, verily, this is an admonition (54)So, whosoever wills receives admonition from it (55)And they will not receive admonition unless Allah wills; He is the One, deserving of the Taqwa and He is the One Who forgives (56)\nWhat will take place in the Discussion between the People of Paradise and the People of the Hellfire\nAllah informs that,\nكُلُّ نَفْسٍ بِمَا كَسَبَتْ رَهِينَةٌ\n(Every person is a pledge for what he has earned,) meaning, bound to his deed on the Day of Judgement. Ibn 'Abbas and others have said this.\nإِلَّا أَصْحَابَ الْيَمِينِ\n(Except those on the Right.) For verily, they will be\nفِي جَنَّاتٍ يَتَسَاءَلُونَ - عَنِ الْمُجْرِمِينَ\n(In Gardens they will ask one another, about criminals (and they will say to them)) meaning, while they are in lofty rooms they will ask the criminals, who will be in the lowest levels (of Hell), saying to them,\nمَا سَلَكَكُمْ فِي سَقَرَ - قَالُوا لَمْ نَكُ مِنَ الْمُصَلِّينَ - وَلَمْ نَكُ نُطْعِمُ الْمِسْكِينَ\n(\"What has caused you to enter Hell?\" They will say: \"We were not of those who used to offer the Salah, nor did we feed the poor.\") meaning, 'we did not worship Allah, nor did we do good to His creatures of our own species (i.e., other people).'\nوَكُنَّا نَخُوضُ مَعَ الْخَائِضِينَ\n(And we used to speak falsehood with vain speakers.) meaning, 'we used to speak about what we had no knowledge of.' Qatadah said, \"It means that every time someone went astray we would go astray with them.\"\nوَكُنَّا نُكَذِّبُ بِيَوْمِ الدِّينِ - حَتَّىٰ أَتَانَا الْيَقِينُ\n(And we used to deny the Day of Recompense, until the certainty (Al-Yaqin) came to us.) meaning, death. This is as Allah says,\nوَاعْبُدْ رَبَّكَ حَتَّىٰ يَأْتِيَكَ الْيَقِينُ\n(And worship your Lord until there comes unto you the certainty.)(15:99) The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nأَمَّا هُوَ يعني - عثمان بن مظعون - فَقَدْ جَاءَهُ الْيَقِينُ مِنْ رَبِّهِ\n(Concerning him verily, Al-Yaqin (death) came to him from his Lord.)\" Allah then says,\nفَمَا تَنْفَعُهُمْ شَفَاعَةُ الشَّافِعِينَ\n(So no intercession of intercessors will be of any use to them.) meaning, whoever has these characteristics, then the intercession of whoever tries to intercede for him will be of no benefit on the Day of Judgement. This is because intercession is only useful if the conditions for it are met. However, whoever comes before Allah as a disbeliever on the Day of Judgement, then he will get the Hellfire and there is no way of avoiding it. He will abide in it (Hell) forever.\nThe Disapproval of the Disbelievers' Rejection and Their Position\nThen Allah says,\nفَمَا لَهُمْ عَنِ التَّذْكِرَةِ مُعْرِضِينَ\n(Then what is wrong with them that they turn away from admonition?) meaning, 'what is wrong with these disbelievers who are turning away from what you are calling them to and reminding them of?'\nكَأَنَّهُمْ حُمُرٌ مُسْتَنْفِرَةٌ - فَرَّتْ مِنْ قَسْوَرَةٍ\n(As if they were wild donkeys. Fleeing from a Qaswarah.) meaning, as if they were fleeing from the truth and turning away from it, like a wild donkey when it flees from something that is trying to catch it, like a lion. This was said by Abu Hurayrah. Hammad bin Salamah reported from 'Ali bin Zayd who reported from Yusuf bin Mihran who narrated that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"It (Qaswarah) is the lion in the Arabic language. It is called Qaswarah in the Abyssinian language, Sher in the Persian language and Awba in the Nabtiyyah (Nabatean) language.\"\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nبَلْ يُرِيدُ كُلُّ امْرِئٍ مِنْهُمْ أَنْ يُؤْتَىٰ صُحُفًا مُنَشَّرَةً\n(Nay, everyone of them desires that he should be given pages spread out.) meaning, each one of these idolators wants to have a book revealed to him as Allah revealed to the Prophet ﷺ. Mujahid and others have said this. This is similar to Allah's statement,\nوَإِذَا جَاءَتْهُمْ آيَةٌ قَالُوا لَنْ نُؤْمِنَ حَتَّىٰ نُؤْتَىٰ مِثْلَ مَا أُوتِيَ رُسُلُ اللَّهِ ۘ اللَّهُ أَعْلَمُ حَيْثُ يَجْعَلُ رِسَالَتَهُ ۗ\n(And when there comes to them a sign they say: \"We shall not believe until we receive the like of that which the Messengers of Allah had received.\" Allah knows best with whom to place His Message.)(6:124)\nIt is reported in a narration from Qatadah that he said, \"They want to be declared innocent (on the Day of Judgement) without having to do any deeds.\" Then Allah says,\nكَلَّا ۖ بَلْ لَا يَخَافُونَ الْآخِرَةَ\n(Nay! But they fear not the Hereafter.) meaning, they were only corrupted by their lack of faith in it and their rejection of its occurrence.\nThe Qur'an is a Reminder\nThen Allah says,\nكَلَّا إِنَّهُ تَذْكِرَةٌ\n(Nay, verily, this is an admonition.) meaning, truly the Qur'an is a reminder.\nفَمَنْ شَاءَ ذَكَرَهُ - وَمَا يَذْكُرُونَ إِلَّا أَنْ يَشَاءَ اللَّهُ ۚ\n(So, whosoever wills receives admonition (from it)! And they will not receive admonition unless Allah wills;) This is similar to Allah's statement,\nوَمَا تَشَاءُونَ إِلَّا أَنْ يَشَاءَ اللَّهُ\n(And you cannot will unless Allah wills.)(81:29) Concerning Allah's statement,\nهُوَ أَهْلُ التَّقْوَىٰ وَأَهْلُ الْمَغْفِرَةِ\n(He is the One, deserving the Taqwa and He is the One Who forgives.)\nThis means that He deserves to be feared and He is eligible to forgive the sin of whoever turns to Him and repents. This was said by Qatadah.\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Al-Muddaththir, all praise and thanks are due to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/74?verse=38","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:75:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 75:1–15","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nلَا أُقْسِمُ بِيَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ - وَلَا أُقْسِمُ بِالنَّفْسِ اللَّوَّامَةِ - أَيَحْسَبُ الْإِنْسَانُ أَلَّنْ نَجْمَعَ عِظَامَهُ - بَلَىٰ قَادِرِينَ عَلَىٰ أَنْ نُسَوِّيَ بَنَانَهُ - بَلْ يُرِيدُ الْإِنْسَانُ لِيَفْجُرَ أَمَامَهُ - يَسْأَلُ أَيَّانَ يَوْمُ الْقِيَامَةِ - فَإِذَا بَرِقَ الْبَصَرُ - وَخَسَفَ الْقَمَرُ - وَجُمِعَ الشَّمْسُ وَالْقَمَرُ - يَقُولُ الْإِنْسَانُ يَوْمَئِذٍ أَيْنَ الْمَفَرُّ - كَلَّا لَا وَزَرَ - إِلَىٰ رَبِّكَ يَوْمَئِذٍ الْمُسْتَقَرُّ - يُنَبَّأُ الْإِنْسَانُ يَوْمَئِذٍ بِمَا قَدَّمَ وَأَخَّرَ - بَلِ الْإِنْسَانُ عَلَىٰ نَفْسِهِ بَصِيرَةٌ - وَلَوْ أَلْقَىٰ مَعَاذِيرَهُ\n(1. Nay! I swear by the Day of Resurrection.)(2. And nay! I swear by An-Nafs Al-Lawwamah.)(3. Does man think that We shall not assemble his bones?)(4. Yes, We are able to put together in perfect order the tips of his fingers.)(5. Nay! Man desires to break out ahead of himself.)(6. He asks: \"When will be this Day of Resurrection?\")(7. So, when Bariqa the sight.)(8. And the moon will be eclipsed.)(9. And the sun and moon will be joined together.)(10. On that Day man will say: \"Where (is the refuge) to flee?\")(11. No! There is no refuge!)(12. Unto your Lord will be the place of rest that Day.)(13. On that Day man will be informed of what he sent forward, and what he left behind.)(14. Nay! Man will be well informed about himself,)(15. Though he may put forth his excuses.)\nThe Oath about the Final Return on the Day of Resurrection and the Refutation against the Plots of the Thinkers\nIt has been mentioned previously on more than one occasion that if the thing that is being sworn about is something that is being negated, then it is permissible to use the word \"La\" (Nay) before the oath to emphasize the negation. Here, what is being sworn about is the affirmation of the final abode and the refutation against the claim of the ignorant that the resurrection of bodies will not occur. This is why Allah says,\nلَا أُقْسِمُ بِيَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ - وَلَا أُقْسِمُ بِالنَّفْسِ اللَّوَّامَةِ\n(Nay! I swear by the Day of Resurrection. And nay! I swear by An-Nafs Al-Lawwamah.) Qatadah said, \"This means, I swear by both of these things.\" This has also been reported from Ibn 'Abbas and Sa'id bin Jubayr. Concerning the Day of Judgement, it is well known what it is. In reference to An-Nafs Al-Lawwamah, Qurrah bin Khalid reported from Al-Hasan Al-Basri that he said about this Ayah, \"Verily, by Allah, we think that every believer blames himself. He says (questioning himself), 'What did I intend by my statement? What did I intend by my eating? What did I intend in what I said to myself?' However, the sinner proceeds ahead and he does not blame himself.\"\nIbn Jarir recorded from Sa'id bin Jubayr that he said concerning Allah's statement,\nوَلَا أُقْسِمُ بِالنَّفْسِ اللَّوَّامَةِ\n(And nay! I swear by An-Nafs Al-Lawwamah) \"He criticizes himself in good and bad.\" Similar has been reported from 'Ikrimah. Ibn Abi Najih reported from Mujahid: \"He is sorry for what he missed (of good deeds) and he blames himself for it.\" Allah said;\nأَيَحْسَبُ الْإِنْسَانُ أَلَّنْ نَجْمَعَ عِظَامَهُ\n(Does man think that We shall not assemble his bones?) meaning, 'on the Day of Judgement does he think that We are not able to return his bones and gather them from their various places?'\nبَلَىٰ قَادِرِينَ عَلَىٰ أَنْ نُسَوِّيَ بَنَانَهُ\n(Yes, We are able to put together in perfect order the tips of his fingers.) meaning, 'does man think that We will not gather his bones? Surely, We will gather them and We are quite able to put together his fingertips. This means Our power is suitable to gather (and recreate) them, and if We wished We could surely resurrect him with more than what he originally had. We could make his Banan, which are the tips of his fingers, all equal (in length).' Concerning Allah's statement,\nبَلْ يُرِيدُ الْإِنْسَانُ لِيَفْجُرَ أَمَامَهُ\n(Nay! Man desires to break out ahead of himself.) Sa'id reported from Ibn 'Abbas that he said, \"This means to proceed forward.\" Mujahid said about,\nلِيَفْجُرَ أَمَامَهُ\n(to break out ahead of himself.) \"This means that he wants to proceed ahead following his own whims.\" 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported from Ibn 'Abbas that he said, \"This refers to the disbeliever who denies the Day of Reckoning.\" Ibn Zayd said the same thing. Thus, Allah says after this,\nيَسْأَلُ أَيَّانَ يَوْمُ الْقِيَامَةِ\n(He asks: \"When will be this Day of Resurrection?\") meaning, he says when will the Day of Judgement be? His question is only a question of denying its occurrence, and rejecting its existence. This is as Allah says,\nوَيَقُولُونَ مَتَىٰ هَٰذَا الْوَعْدُ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ صَادِقِينَ - قُلْ لَكُمْ مِيعَادُ يَوْمٍ لَا تَسْتَأْخِرُونَ عَنْهُ سَاعَةً وَلَا تَسْتَقْدِمُونَ\n(And they say: \"When is this promise if you are truthful?\" Say: \"The appointment to you is for a Day, which you cannot put back for an hour nor put forward.\")(34:29-30) Here Allah says,\nفَإِذَا بَرِقَ الْبَصَرُ\n(So, when Bariqa the sight.) Abu 'Amr bin Al-'Ala' recited this Ayah as Bariqa with a Kasrah under the letter Ra, which means to be diminished. That which he (Abu 'Amr) has said resembles the statement of Allah,\nلَا يَرْتَدُّ إِلَيْهِمْ طَرْفُهُمْ\n(Their gaze returning not towards them.)(14:43) meaning, they will be looking this way and that way in horror. Their gaze will not be able to rest upon anything due to the severity of the terror on that Day.\nOthers recited it as Baraqa with a Fathah over the letter Ra, and its meaning is close to the first recitation (Bariqa). The intent here is that the eyes will be dazzled, humbled, diminished, and humiliated on the Day of Judgement due to the severity of the horrors and the greatness of the matters that they will witness on that Day. Concerning Allah's statement,\nوَخَسَفَ الْقَمَرُ\n(And the moon will be eclipsed.) meaning, its light will go away.\nوَجُمِعَ الشَّمْسُ وَالْقَمَرُ\n(And the sun and moon will be joined together.) Mujahid said, \"They will be rolled up.\" In explaining this Ayah, Ibn Zayd recited the following Ayat,\nإِذَا الشَّمْسُ كُوِّرَتْ - وَإِذَا النُّجُومُ انْكَدَرَتْ\n(When the sun is wound round and its light is lost and is overthrown, and when the stars fall.)(81:1,2)\nIt has been reported from Ibn Mas'ud that he recited the Ayah as,\n(وَجُمِعَ بَيْنَ الشَّمْسِ وَالْقَمَرِ)\n(and the sun and the moon will be joined between each other.) Allah said,\nيَقُولُ الْإِنْسَانُ يَوْمَئِذٍ أَيْنَ الْمَفَرُّ\n(On that Day man will say:\"Where (is the refuge) to flee?\") meaning, the human will see these horrors on the Day of Judgement and he will want to flee. He will say, \"Where (is the place) to flee to?\" This means, where is the escape or refuge? Allah then says,\nكَلَّا لَا وَزَرَ - إِلَىٰ رَبِّكَ يَوْمَئِذٍ الْمُسْتَقَرُّ\n(No! There is no refuge! Unto your Lord will be the place of rest that Day.) Ibn Mas'ud, Ibn 'Abbas, Sa'id bin Jubayr and several others of the Salaf said, \"There will be no salvation.\" This Ayah is similar to Allah's statement,\nمَا لَكُمْ مِنْ مَلْجَإٍ يَوْمَئِذٍ وَمَا لَكُمْ مِنْ نَكِيرٍ\n(You will have no refuge on that Day nor there will be for you any denying.)(42:47) meaning, 'there will be no place for you to hide.' This is like what Allah says here,\nلَا وَزَرَ\n(There is no refuge.) meaning, 'there will be no place for you to seek shelter.' Thus, Allah says,\nإِلَىٰ رَبِّكَ يَوْمَئِذٍ الْمُسْتَقَرُّ\n(Unto your Lord will be the place of rest that Day.) meaning, the place of return and the final destination.\nThe Deeds of Man will be placed before Him on the Day of Judgement\nThen Allah says,\nيُنَبَّأُ الْإِنْسَانُ يَوْمَئِذٍ بِمَا قَدَّمَ وَأَخَّرَ\n(On that Day man will be informed of what he sent forward, and what he left behind.) meaning, he will be informed of all of his deeds, the old of them and the recent of them, the first of them and the last of them, the small of them and the large of them. This is as Allah says,\nوَوَجَدُوا مَا عَمِلُوا حَاضِرًا ۗ وَلَا يَظْلِمُ رَبُّكَ أَحَدًا\n(And they will find all that they did, placed before them, and your Lord treats no one with injustice.)(18:49) Likewise, Allah says here,\nبَلِ الْإِنْسَانُ عَلَىٰ نَفْسِهِ بَصِيرَةٌ - وَلَوْ أَلْقَىٰ مَعَاذِيرَهُ\n(Nay! Man will be well informed about himself, though he may put forth his excuses.) meaning, he will be a witness against himself, knowing full well what he did, even though he will try to make excuses and deny it. This is as Allah says,\nاقْرَأْ كِتَابَكَ كَفَىٰ بِنَفْسِكَ الْيَوْمَ عَلَيْكَ حَسِيبًا\n((It will be said to him): \"Read your book. You are sufficient as a reckoner against yourself this Day.\")(17:14) 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas said,\nبَلِ الْإِنْسَانُ عَلَىٰ نَفْسِهِ بَصِيرَةٌ\n(Nay! Man will be well informed about himself.) \"His hearing, his sight, his two hands, his two legs and his limbs.\"\nQatadah said, \"This means he is a witness against himself.\" In another narration from Qatadah he said, \"By Allah! If you wish to see him, you would see him as someone who sees the shortcomings of the people and their sins, yet he is heedless of his own sins.\" It used to be said, \"Verily, it is written in the Injil: 'O Son of Adam, do you see the small splinters in the eye of your brother and disregard the tree stump that is in your eye, so you do not see it?'\" Mujahid said,\nوَلَوْ أَلْقَىٰ مَعَاذِيرَهُ\n(Though he may put forth his excuses.) \"This means, even though he argues in defense of it, he is a witness against it.\" Qatadah said,\nوَلَوْ أَلْقَىٰ مَعَاذِيرَهُ\n(Though he may put forth his excuses.) \"Even though he will try to make false excuses on that Day, they will not be accepted from him.\" As-Suddi said,\nوَلَوْ أَلْقَىٰ مَعَاذِيرَهُ\n(Though he may put forth his excuses.) \"This means his argument.\" This is as Allah says,\nثُمَّ لَمْ تَكُنْ فِتْنَتُهُمْ إِلَّا أَنْ قَالُوا وَاللَّهِ رَبِّنَا مَا كُنَّا مُشْرِكِينَ\n(There will then be no Fitnah for them but to say: \"By Allah, our Lord, we were not those who joined others in worship with Allah.\")(6:23) Allah also says,\nيَوْمَ يَبْعَثُهُمُ اللَّهُ جَمِيعًا فَيَحْلِفُونَ لَهُ كَمَا يَحْلِفُونَ لَكُمْ ۖ وَيَحْسَبُونَ أَنَّهُمْ عَلَىٰ شَيْءٍ ۚ أَلَا إِنَّهُمْ هُمُ الْكَاذِبُونَ\n(On the Day when Allah will resurrect them all together; then they will swear to Him as they swear to you (O Muslims). And they think that they have something. Verily, they are liars!)(58:18) Al-'Awfi reported from Ibn 'Abbas:\nوَلَوْ أَلْقَىٰ مَعَاذِيرَهُ\n(Though he may put forth his excuses.) \"This is apologizing. Haven't you heard that Allah said,\nلَا يَنْفَعُ الظَّالِمِينَ مَعْذِرَتُهُمْ\n(The Day when their excuses will be of no profit to wrongdoers.)(40:52) and He says,\nوَأَلْقَوْا إِلَى اللَّهِ يَوْمَئِذٍ السَّلَمَ ۖ\n(And they will offer submision to Allah on that Day.)(16:87) and He says,\nفَأَلْقَوُا السَّلَمَ مَا كُنَّا نَعْمَلُ مِنْ سُوءٍ\n(Then they will (falsely) submit: \"We used not to do any evil.\")(16:28) and their statement,\nوَاللَّهِ رَبِّنَا مَا كُنَّا مُشْرِكِينَ\n(By Allah, our Lord, we were not those who joined others in worship with Allah.)(6:23)\"","href":"/tafsir/75?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:75:16","title":"Ibn Kathir · 75:16–25","text":"Move not your tongue concerning to make haste therewith (16)It is for Us to collect it and that it be recited (17)And when We have recited it to you, then follow its recitation (18)Then it is for Us to make it clear (19)But no! Rather you love the present life of this world (20)And neglect the Hereafter (21)Some faces that Day shall be Nadirah (22)Looking at their Lord (23)And some faces that Day will be Basirah (24)Thinking that some calamity is about to fall on them (25)\nHow the Prophet (ﷺ) received the Revelation\nThis is Allah teaching His Messenger ﷺ how to receive the revelation from the angel. For verily, he (the Prophet ﷺ) was rushing in his attempts to grasp the revelation and he would be reciting the revelation with the angel while he was reciting it. Therefore, Allah commanded him that when the angel brings some revelation to him he should just listen. Allah would make sure to collect it in his chest, and He would make it easy for him to recite it in the same way that it was revealed to him. Allah would explain it, interpret it and clarify it for him. So the first phase was gathering it in his chest, the second phase was recitation and the third phase was its explanation and clarification of its meaning. Thus, Allah says,\nلَا تُحَرِّكْ بِهِ لِسَانَكَ لِتَعْجَلَ بِهِ\n(Move not your tongue concerning to make haste therewith.) meaning, with the Qur'an. This is as Allah says,\nوَلَا تَعْجَلْ بِالْقُرْآنِ مِنْ قَبْلِ أَنْ يُقْضَىٰ إِلَيْكَ وَحْيُهُ ۖ وَقُلْ رَبِّ زِدْنِي عِلْمًا\n(And be not in haste with the Qur'an before its revelation is completed to you, and say: \"My Lord! Increase me in knowledge.\")(20:114) Then Allah says,\nإِنَّ عَلَيْنَا جَمْعَهُ\n(It is for Us to collect it) meaning, 'in your chest.'\nوَقُرْآنَهُ\n(and that it be recited.) meaning, 'that you recite it.'\nفَإِذَا قُرْآنَهُ\n(And when We have recited it to you,) meaning, 'when the angel has recited it to you from Allah,'\nفَاتَّبِعْ قُرْآنَهُ\n(then follow its recitation.) meaning, 'listen to it then recite it as he taught you to recite it.'\nثُمَّ إِنَّ عَلَيْنَا بَيَانَهُ\n(Then it is for Us to make it clear.) meaning, 'after memorizing it and reciting it, We will explain it to you, clarify it and inspire you with its meaning according to what We intended and legislated.'\nImam Ahmad recorded from Ibn 'Abbas that he said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to struggle very hard to grasp the revelation and he used to move his lips (rapidly with the recitation). The narrator, Sa'id, then said, \"Ibn 'Abbas said to me, 'I will move my lips like the Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to move his lips (in order to show you).'\" Then, the subnarrator said, \"And Sa'id said to me, 'I will move my lips like I saw Ibn 'Abbas moving his lips (in order to show you).'\" Then Allah revealed,\nلَا تُحَرِّكْ بِهِ لِسَانَكَ لِتَعْجَلَ بِهِ - إِنَّ عَلَيْنَا جَمْعَهُ وَقُرْآنَهُ\n(Move not your tongue concerning to make haste therewith. It is for Us to collect it and that it be recited.) Ibn 'Abbas said, \"This means He will collect it in his chest to recite it.\nفَإِذَا قَرَأْنَاهُ فَاتَّبِعْ قُرْآنَهُ\n(And when We have recited it to you, then follow its recitation.) meaning, listen to it and pay attention.\nثُمَّ إِنَّ عَلَيْنَا بَيَانَهُ\n(Then it is for Us to make it clear (to you).) So after this, when Jibril would leave, he would recite it as Jibril had taught him to recite it.\"\nThis has also been recorded by Al-Bukhari and Muslim. Al-Bukhari's wording says, \"So whenever Jibril would come to him he would be silent, and when Jibril had left he would recite it just as Allah, the Mighty and Sublime had promised him.\"\nThe Cause of rejecting the Day of Judgement is Love of the World and Heedlessness of the Hereafter\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nكَلَّا بَلْ تُحِبُّونَ الْعَاجِلَةَ - وَتَذَرُونَ الْآخِرَةَ\n(But no! Rather you love the present life of this world. And neglect the Hereafter.) meaning, the only thing that has caused them to reject the Day of Judgement and oppose the true revelation and the Mighty Qur'an Allah revealed to His Messenger ﷺ is that their only concern is the present worldly life. They are preoccupied and distracted from the Hereafter.\nSeeing Allah in the Hereafter\nThen Allah says,\nوُجُوهٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ نَاضِرَةٌ\n(Some faces that Day shall be Nadirah.) which comes from the word Nadarah, which means splendid, radiant, glowing, delighted with goodness.\nإِلَىٰ رَبِّهَا نَاظِرَةٌ\n(Looking at their Lord.) meaning, they will see Him with their very eyes. This is just as was recorded by Al-Bukhari in his Sahih,\nإِنَّكُمْ سَتَرَوْنَ رَبَّكُمْ عِيَانًا\n(Verily, you all will see your Lord with your own eyes.) The believers seeing Allah in the abode of the Hereafter has been confirmed in the authentic Hadiths from numerous routes of transmission with the scholars of Hadith. It is not possible to deny this or refuse it. Examples would be the Hadiths of Abu Sa'id and Abu Hurayrah, and they are both recorded in the Two Sahihs. They both mentioned that some people said, \"O Messenger of Allah! Will we see our Lord on the Day of Judgement?\" The Prophet ﷺ said,\nهَلْ تُضَارُّونَ فِي رُؤْيَةِ الشَّمْسِ وَالْقَمَرِ لَيْسَ دُونَهُمَا سَحَابٌ؟\n(Are you harmed by seeing the sun and the moon when there are no clouds beneath them) They replied, \"No.\" The Prophet ﷺ then said,\nفَإِنَّكُمْ تَرَوْنَ رَبَّكُمْ كَذَلِكَ\n(Then you will surely see your Lord like that.) In the Two Sahihs it is recorded from Jabir that he said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ looked at the moon on a night when it was full, and he said,\nإِنَّكُمْ تَرَوْنَ رَبَّكُمْ كَمَا تَرَوْنَ هَذَا الْقَمَرَ، فَإِنِ اسْتَطَعْتُمْ أَنْ لَا تُغْلَبُوا عَلَى صَلَاةٍ قَبْلَ طُلُوعِ الشَّمْسِ وَلَا قَبْلَ غُرُوبِهَا، فَافْعَلُوا\n(Verily, you will see your Lord just as you see this moon! So if you are able to avoid missing a prayer before the rising of the sun (Fajr prayer) or before its setting ('Asr prayer) then do so.)\" Among the Hadiths, which Muslim was alone in recording, is a narration from Suhayb that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nإِذَا دَخَلَ أَهْلُ الْجَنَّةِ الْجَنَّةَ - قَالَ - يَقُولُ اللهُ تَعَالىٰ: تُرِيدُونَ شَيْئًا أَزِيدُكُمْ؟ فَيَقُولُونَ: أَلَمْ تُبَيِّضْ وُجُوهَنَا؟ أَلَمْ تُدْخِلْنَا الْجَنَّةَ وَتُنَجِّنَا مِنَ النَّارِ؟ قَالَ: فَيَكْشِفُ الْحِجَابَ، فَمَا أُعْطُوا شَيْئًا أَحَبَّ إِلَيْهِمْ مِنَ النَّظَرِ إِلَى رَبِّهِمْ، وَهِيَ الزِّيَادَةُ\n(When the people of Paradise enter the Paradise, Allah will say, 'Do you want me to give you anything extra?' They will say, 'Haven't you whitened our faces? Haven't you entered us into Paradise and saved us from the Fire?' Then He will remove the veil and they will not be given anything more beloved to them than looking at their Lord, and that will be the extra (Ziyadah).) Then he recited this Ayah,\nلِلَّذِينَ أَحْسَنُوا الْحُسْنَىٰ وَزِيَادَةٌ ۖ\n(For those who have done good is the best and extra (Ziyadah).)(10:26) Also among the Hadiths, which Muslim was alone in recording, is the Hadith of Jabir in which the Prophet ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ اللهَ يَتَجَلَّى لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ يَضْحَكُ\n(Verily, Allah will appear before the believers while He is laughing.)\nThis will take place on the open plains of the Resurrection place. In some of these Hadiths, it mentions that the believers will be looking at their Lord on the open plains and some mention that this will occur in the Gardens of Paradise.\nIf it were not due to fear of taking up a lot of space, we would present all of these Hadiths with their routes of transmission and wordings from those that are in the Sahih collections, the collections of good narrations, the Musnad collections and the Sunan collections. However, we have mentioned this in separate places in this Tafsir, and Allah is the Giver of success.\nThis issue is something that the Companions, the Successors and the Salaf of this nation have agreed upon, and all praise is due to Allah. It is something that is agreed upon between the Imams of Islam and the guides of all mankind.\nBlackening of the Faces of the Disobedient People on the Day of Judgement\nAllah says,\nوَوُجُوهٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ بَاسِرَةٌ - تَظُنُّ أَنْ يُفْعَلَ بِهَا فَاقِرَةٌ\n(And some faces that Day will be Basirah. Thinking that some calamity is about to fall on them.)\nThese are the faces of the sinners that will be Basirah on the Day of Judgement. Qatadah said, \"This means gloomy.\" As-Suddi said, \"Their (the faces) color will change.\"\nتَظُنُّ\n(Thinking) meaning, they will be certain.\nأَنْ يُفْعَلَ بِهَا فَاقِرَةٌ\n(that some calamity is about to fall on them.) Mujahid said, \"A disaster.\" Qatadah said, \"An evil.\" As-Suddi said, \"They will be certain that they are going to be destroyed.\" Ibn Zayd said, \"They will think that they are going to enter into the Hellfire.\" This situation is similar to Allah's statement,\nيَوْمَ تَبْيَضُّ وُجُوهٌ وَتَسْوَدُّ وُجُوهٌ ۚ\n(On the Day when some faces will become white and some faces will become black.)(3:106) Similarly Allah says,\nوُجُوهٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ مُسْفِرَةٌ - ضَاحِكَةٌ مُسْتَبْشِرَةٌ - وَوُجُوهٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ عَلَيْهَا غَبَرَةٌ - تَرْهَقُهَا قَتَرَةٌ - أُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْكَفَرَةُ الْفَجَرَةُ\n(Some faces that Day will be bright. Laughing, rejoicing at the good news. And other faces, that Day will be dust-stained; darkness will cover them, such will be the disbelieving, wicked.)(80:38-42) Allah also says,\nوُجُوهٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ خَاشِعَةٌ - عَامِلَةٌ نَاصِبَةٌ - تَصْلَىٰ نَارًا حَامِيَةً\n(Some faces, that Day will be humiliated. Laboring, weary. They will enter in the hot blazing Fire.)(88:2-4) until Allah says,\nوُجُوهٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ نَاعِمَةٌ - لِسَعْيِهَا رَاضِيَةٌ - فِي جَنَّةٍ عَالِيَةٍ\n((Other) faces that Day will be joyful. Happy with their endeavor. In a lofty Paradise.)(88:8-10) And there are other similar Ayat and discussions (in the Qur'an).","href":"/tafsir/75?verse=16","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:75:26","title":"Ibn Kathir · 75:26–40","text":"Nay, when it reaches to the collarbones (26)And it will be said: \"Who can cure him? (27)And he will think that it was the parting (28)And one shank will be joined with another shank (29)The drive will be on that Day to your Lord (30)So, he neither believed nor prayed (31)But on the contrary, he denied and turned away (32)Then he walked in conceit to his family admiring himself (33)Woe to you! And then woe to you (34)Again, woe to you! And then woe to you (35)Does man think that he will be left neglected (36)Was he not a Nutfah of semen emitted (37)Then he became an 'Alaqah; then shaped and fashioned in due proportion (38)And made of him two sexes, male and female (39)Is it not so then, that He would be able to give life to the dead (40)\nCertainty will occur at the Time of Death\nAllah informs of the condition at the time of death and what terrors it contains. May Allah make us firm at that time with the Firm Statement. Allah says,\nكَلَّا إِذَا بَلَغَتِ التَّرَاقِيَ\n(Nay, when it reaches to the collarbones.) If we make the word \"Kalla\" negative, then this Ayah means, 'O son of Adam! You are not able to deny that which I informed you of at that time (death). This will become something witnessed by you with your own eyes.' If we consider the word \"Kalla\" to be a word of affirmation, then this would be the most obvious meaning. In this case it would mean that it is certainly true when the soul reaches the collarbones - meaning, 'your soul will be pulled out of your body and it will reach your collarbones.' This is similar to Allah's statement,\nفَلَوْلَا إِذَا بَلَغَتِ الْحُلْقُومَ - وَأَنْتُمْ حِينَئِذٍ تَنْظُرُونَ - وَنَحْنُ أَقْرَبُ إِلَيْهِ مِنْكُمْ وَلَٰكِنْ لَا تُبْصِرُونَ - فَلَوْلَا إِنْ كُنْتُمْ غَيْرَ مَدِينِينَ - تَرْجِعُونَهَا إِنْ كُنْتُمْ صَادِقِينَ\n(Then why do you not (intervene) when (the soul of the dying person) reaches the throat? And you at the moment are looking on, but We are nearer to him than you, but you see not, then why do you not if you are exempt from the reckoning and recompense, bring back the soul, if your are truthful?)(56:83-87) Thus, Allah similarly says here,\nكَلَّا إِذَا بَلَغَتِ التَّرَاقِيَ - وَقِيلَ مَنْ ۜ رَاقٍ\n(Nay, when it reaches to the collarbones. And it will be said: \"Who can cure him?) 'Ikrimah reported from Ibn 'Abbas that he said, \"Meaning, who is the person who recites divine prayers of healing so that he may come and cure him?\" Abu Qilabah made a similar statement when he said,\nوَقِيلَ مَنْ ۜ رَاقٍ\n(And it will be said: \"Who can cure him?) \"This means who is the doctor that can cure him?\" Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak and Ibn Zayd all have similar statements. 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported from Ibn 'Abbas that he said concerning the Ayah,\nوَالْتَفَّتِ السَّاقُ بِالسَّاقِ\n(And one shank will be joined with another shank.) \"This is the last day of the days of this world and the first day of the days of the Hereafter. So there will be hardships that will meet (more) hardships, except for he whom Allah has mercy upon.\" 'Ikrimah said,\nوَالْتَفَّتِ السَّاقُ بِالسَّاقِ\n(And one shank will be joined with another shank.) \"The great matter (will be joined) with the great matter.\" Mujahid said, \"A test (will be joined) with a test.\" Al-Hasan Al-Basri said concerning Allah's statement,\nوَالْتَفَّتِ السَّاقُ بِالسَّاقِ\n(And one shank will be joined with another shank. ) \"These are your two shins when they are bound together.\" In another narration from him (Al-Hasan) he said, \"His two legs have died and they will not carry him while he used to walk around on them.\" Concerning Allah's statement,\nإِلَىٰ رَبِّكَ يَوْمَئِذٍ الْمَسَاقُ\n(The drive will be on that Day to your Lord!) meaning, the place of return and the destination. This is that the soul ascends into the heavens and Allah says, \"Return my servant to the earth, for verily, I have created them from it, I return them into it, and from it I will bring them out at another time.\" This has been reported in the lengthy Hadith of Al-Bara'. Verily, Allah says,\nوَهُوَ الْقَاهِرُ فَوْقَ عِبَادِهِ ۖ وَيُرْسِلُ عَلَيْكُمْ حَفَظَةً حَتَّىٰ إِذَا جَاءَ أَحَدَكُمُ الْمَوْتُ تَوَفَّتْهُ رُسُلُنَا وَهُمْ لَا يُفَرِّطُونَ - ثُمَّ رُدُّوا إِلَى اللَّهِ مَوْلَاهُمُ الْحَقِّ ۚ أَلَا لَهُ الْحُكْمُ وَهُوَ أَسْرَعُ الْحَاسِبِينَ\n(He is the Irresistible (Supreme), over His servants, and He sends guardians over you, until when death approaches one of you, Our messengers take his soul, and they never neglect their duty. Then they are returned to Allah, their True Master. Surely, for Him is the judgement and He is the swiftest in taking account.)(6:61-62)\nMentioning the Case of the Denier\nAllah says,\nفَلَا صَدَّقَ وَلَا صَلَّىٰ - وَلَٰكِنْ كَذَّبَ وَتَوَلَّىٰ\n(So, he neither believed nor prayed! But on the contrary, he denied and turned away!) This is to inform about the disbeliever who used to deny the truth in his heart in the abode of this worldly life, and he used to turn away from acting according to its way. Thus, there is no good in him, internally or externally. Therefore, Allah says,\nفَلَا صَدَّقَ وَلَا صَلَّىٰ - وَلَٰكِنْ كَذَّبَ وَتَوَلَّىٰ - ثُمَّ ذَهَبَ إِلَىٰ أَهْلِهِ يَتَمَطَّىٰ\n(So he neither believed nor prayed! But on the contrary, he denied and turned away! Then he walked in conceit (full pride) to his family admiring himself!)(75:31-33) meaning, stubborn, cruel, obstinate, wanton, lazy, having no concern and doing no deeds. This is similar to Allah's statement,\nوَإِذَا انْقَلَبُوا إِلَىٰ أَهْلِهِمُ انْقَلَبُوا فَكِهِينَ\n(And when they returned to their own people, they would return jesting.)(83:31) Allah also says,\nإِنَّهُ كَانَ فِي أَهْلِهِ مَسْرُورًا - إِنَّهُ ظَنَّ أَنْ لَنْ يَحُورَ\n(Verily, he was among his people in joy! Verily, he thought that he would never come back (to Us)!)(84:13,14) meaning, return.\nبَلَىٰ إِنَّ رَبَّهُ كَانَ بِهِ بَصِيرًا\n(Yes! Verily, his Lord has been ever beholding him!)(84:15) Ad-Dahhak reported from Ibn 'Abbas that he said,\nثُمَّ ذَهَبَ إِلَىٰ أَهْلِهِ يَتَمَطَّىٰ\n(Then he walked in conceit to his family admiring himself!) \"This means arrogantly.\" Qatadah and Zayd bin Aslam both said, \"Strutting.\" Allah then says,\nأَوْلَىٰ لَكَ فَأَوْلَىٰ - ثُمَّ أَوْلَىٰ لَكَ فَأَوْلَىٰ\n(Woe to you! And then woe to you! Again, woe to you! And then woe to you!) This is a definite warning and threat from Allah to those who disbelieve in Him and strut about when walking. This means, 'you deserve to strut like this while you have disbelieved in your Creator and Maker.' This is what is commonly said in this type of situation in order to mock and intimidate (someone). This is as Allah says,\nذُقْ إِنَّكَ أَنْتَ الْعَزِيزُ الْكَرِيمُ\n(Taste you (this)! Verily you were (pretending to be) the mighty, the generous!)(44:49) Similarly, Allah says,\nكُلُوا وَتَمَتَّعُوا قَلِيلًا إِنَّكُمْ مُجْرِمُونَ\n(Eat and enjoy yourselves for a little. Verily, you are criminals.)(77:46) Allah also says,\nفَاعْبُدُوا مَا شِئْتُمْ مِنْ دُونِهِ ۗ\n(So worship what you like besides Him.)(39:15) And like Allah's statement,\nاعْمَلُوا مَا شِئْتُمْ ۖ\n(Do what you will.)(41:40) There are other examples of this as well.\nAbu 'Abdur-Rahman An-Nasa'i recorded from Sa'id bin Jubayr that he said, \"I mentioned to Ibn 'Abbas,\nأَوْلَىٰ لَكَ فَأَوْلَىٰ - ثُمَّ أَوْلَىٰ لَكَ فَأَوْلَىٰ\n(Woe to you! And then woe to you! Again, woe to you! And then woe to you!) He (Ibn 'Abbas) replied, 'The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said this to Abu Jahl, then Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, revealed this Ayah.'\" Ibn Abi Hatim recorded from Qatadah that he said concerning Allah's statement,\nأَوْلَىٰ لَكَ فَأَوْلَىٰ - ثُمَّ أَوْلَىٰ لَكَ فَأَوْلَىٰ\n(Woe to you! And then woe to you! Again, woe to you! And then woe to you!) \"It is a threat followed by a threat, just as you hear it. They claim that the Prophet of Allah grabbed the clothes of the enemy of Allah, Abu Jahl. The Prophet ﷺ then said to him, 'Woe to you! And then (again) woe to you! Again woe to you! And then (again) woe to you!' At this the enemy of Allah, Abu Jahl, said, 'Are you threatening me, O Muhammad? By Allah! Neither you nor your Lord are able to do anything, and verily, I am the mightiest person walking between its (Makkah's) two mountains.'\"\nMan will not be left neglected\nAllah says,\nأَيَحْسَبُ الْإِنْسَانُ أَنْ يُتْرَكَ سُدًى\n(Does man think that he will be left neglected?) As-Suddi said, \"Meaning not resurrected.\" Mujahid, Ash-Shafi'i and 'Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam, all said, \"Meaning, he will not be commanded and prohibited.\" Apparently the Ayah includes both meanings. This means that he will not be left neglected in this worldly life, without being commanded and prohibited. He also will not be left neglected in his grave unattended to without being resurrected. Rather he will be commanded and prohibited in this life, and gathered back to Allah in the abode of the Hereafter. The intent here is to affirm the existence of the abode of the final return and to refute whoever rejects it from the people of deviance, ignorance and stubbornness. Thus, Allah uses the beginning of creation as a proof for the repetition of the creation in His saying,\nأَلَمْ يَكُ نُطْفَةً مِنْ مَنِيٍّ يُمْنَىٰ\n(Was he not a Nutfah of semen emitted?) meaning, was not man a weak drop of sperm from a despised fluid known as semen, that is emitted from the loins into the wombs?\nثُمَّ كَانَ عَلَقَةً فَخَلَقَ فَسَوَّىٰ\n(Then he became an 'Alaqah; then shaped and fashioned in due proportion.) meaning, he became a clot, then a lump of flesh, then he was formed and the soul was blown into him. Then he became a perfect creation with healthy limbs, as either a male or a female by the permission and decree of Allah. Thus, Allah says,\nفَجَعَلَ مِنْهُ الزَّوْجَيْنِ الذَّكَرَ وَالْأُنْثَىٰ\n(And made of him two sexes, male and female.) Then Allah says,\nأَلَيْسَ ذَٰلِكَ بِقَادِرٍ عَلَىٰ أَنْ يُحْيِيَ الْمَوْتَىٰ\n(Is it not so then, that He would be able to give life to the dead?) meaning, is not He Who made this perfect creation from this weak drop of sperm able to repeat that as He did originally?\nAnd \"the ability to repeat that\" either refers to the origination only, or to both that and the process of perfecting it, according to two different views, as in Allah's saying;\nوَهُوَ الَّذِي يَبْدَأُ الْخَلْقَ ثُمَّ يُعِيدُهُ وَهُوَ أَهْوَنُ عَلَيْهِ ۚ\n(And He it is Who originates the creation, then He will repeat it; this is easier for Him.)(30:27) The first view is more popular, and Allah knows best.\nSupplication upon completing this Surah\nAbu Dawud recorded from Musa bin Abi 'A'ishah that he said, \"A man used to pray on top of his house and whenever he recited,\nأَلَيْسَ ذَٰلِكَ بِقَادِرٍ عَلَىٰ أَنْ يُحْيِيَ الْمَوْتَىٰ\n(Is it not so then, that He would be able to give life to the dead?) he would say, 'Glory to You, of course.' So the people asked him about that and he said, 'I heard it from the Messenger of Allah ﷺ.'\" Abu Dawud was alone in transmitting this Hadith and he did not mention who this Companion was, but there is no harm in that.\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Al-Qiyamah, all praise and thanks are due to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/75?verse=26","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:76:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 76:1–3","text":"The Recitation of Surat As-Sajdah and Al-Insan in the Morning Prayer on Friday\nIt has been mentioned previously that it is recorded in Sahih Muslim from Ibn 'Abbas that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to recite in the Morning prayer on Friday:\nالم - تَنْزِيلُ\n(Alif Lam Mim. The revelation...)(32:1-2) and;\nهَلْ أَتَىٰ عَلَى الْإِنْسَانِ\n(Has there not been over man...)(76)\nبِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nهَلْ أَتَىٰ عَلَى الْإِنْسَانِ حِينٌ مِنَ الدَّهْرِ لَمْ يَكُنْ شَيْئًا مَذْكُورًا - إِنَّا خَلَقْنَا الْإِنْسَانَ مِنْ نُطْفَةٍ أَمْشَاجٍ نَبْتَلِيهِ فَجَعَلْنَاهُ سَمِيعًا بَصِيرًا - إِنَّا هَدَيْنَاهُ السَّبِيلَ إِمَّا شَاكِرًا وَإِمَّا كَفُورًا\n(1. Has there not been over man a period of time, when he was not a thing worth mentioning?)(2. Verily, We have created man from Nutfah Amshaj, in order to try him, so, We made him hearer and seer.)(3. Verily, We guided him to the way, whether he be grateful or ungrateful.)\nAllah created Man after He did not exist\nAllah informs that He brought man into existence after he was not even a thing worth mentioning, due to his lowliness and weakness. Allah says,\nهَلْ أَتَىٰ عَلَى الْإِنْسَانِ حِينٌ مِنَ الدَّهْرِ لَمْ يَكُنْ شَيْئًا مَذْكُورًا\n(Has there not been over man a period of time, when he was not a thing worth mentioning?) Then Allah explains this by saying,\nإِنَّا خَلَقْنَا الْإِنْسَانَ مِنْ نُطْفَةٍ أَمْشَاجٍ\n(Verily, We have created man from Nutfah Amshaj,) meaning, mixed. The words Mashaj and Mashij mean something that is mixed together. Ibn 'Abbas said concerning Allah's statement,\nمِنْ نُطْفَةٍ أَمْشَاجٍ\n(from Nutfah Amshaj,) \"This means the fluid of the man and the fluid of the woman when they meet and mix.\" Then man changes after this from stage to stage, condition to condition and color to color. 'Ikrimah, Mujahid, Al-Hasan and Ar-Rabi' bin Anas all made statements similar to this. They said, \"Amshaj is the mixing of the man's fluid with the woman's fluid.\" Concerning Allah's statement,\nنَبْتَلِيهِ\n(in order to try him,) means, 'We test him.' It is similar to Allah's statement,\nلِيَبْلُوَكُمْ أَيُّكُمْ أَحْسَنُ عَمَلًا\n(That He may test you which of you is best in deed.)(67:2) Then Allah says,\nفَجَعَلْنَاهُ سَمِيعًا بَصِيرًا\n(so, We made him hearer and seer.) meaning, 'We gave him the faculties of hearing and sight so that he would be able to use them for obedience and disobedience.'\nAllah guided Him to the Path, so Man is either Grateful or Ungrateful\nAllah says,\nإِنَّا هَدَيْنَاهُ السَّبِيلَ\n(Verily, We guided to him the way,) meaning, 'We explained it to him, made it clear to him and showed it to him.' This is as Allah says,\nوَأَمَّا ثَمُودُ فَهَدَيْنَاهُمْ فَاسْتَحَبُّوا الْعَمَىٰ عَلَى الْهُدَىٰ\n(And as for Thamud, We guided them but they preferred blindness to guidance.)(41:17) Allah also said,\nوَهَدَيْنَاهُ النَّجْدَيْنِ\n(And We guided him to the two ways.)(90:10) meaning, 'We explained to him the path of good and the path of evil.' This is the statement of 'Ikrimah, 'Atiyah, Ibn Zayd and Mujahid from what is well-known from him and the majority. Allah then says,\nإِمَّا شَاكِرًا وَإِمَّا كَفُورًا\n(Whether he be grateful or ungrateful.) This is his decree. Thus, with this he is either wretched or happy. This is like what has been recorded by Muslim in a Hadith from Abu Malik Al-Ash'ari. He said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nكُلُّ النَّاسِ يَغْدُو فَبَائِعٌ نَفْسَهُ، فَمُوبِقُهَا أَوْ مُعْتِقُهَا\n(All of mankind wakes up in the morning the merchant of his own soul. So he either imprisons it or sets it free. )","href":"/tafsir/76?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:76:4","title":"Ibn Kathir · 76:4–12","text":"Verily, We have prepared for the disbelievers iron chains, iron collars, and Sa'ir (4)Verily, the Abrar (righteous believers) shall drink of a cup mixed with Kafur (5)A spring wherefrom the servants of Allah will drink, causing it to gush forth abundantly (6)They fulfill (their) vows, and they fear a Day whose evil will be wide-spreading (7)And they give food, inspite of their love for it, to the poor, the orphan and the captive (8)(Saying): \"We feed you seeking Allah's Face only. We wish for no reward, nor thanks from you. (9)\"Verily, We fear from our Lord a Day that is 'Abus and Qamtarir. (10)So, Allah saved them from the evil of that Day, and gave them Nadrah (a light of beauty) and joy (11)And their recompense shall be Paradise, and silken garments, because they were patient (12)\nThe Recompense of the Disbelievers and the Righteous\nAllah informs of what he has waiting for those who disbelieve in Him from His creatures of chains, iron collars and Sa'ir. Sa'ir is the flame and fire of the Hell. This is as Allah says,\nإِذِ الْأَغْلَالُ فِي أَعْنَاقِهِمْ وَالسَّلَاسِلُ يُسْحَبُونَ - فِي الْحَمِيمِ ثُمَّ فِي النَّارِ يُسْجَرُونَ\n(When iron collars will be rounded over their necks, and the chains, they shall be dragged along, in the boiling water, then they will be burned in the Fire.)(40:71-72) After mentioning the blazing Fire He has prepared for these wretched people, Allah goes on to say,\nإِنَّ الْأَبْرَارَ يَشْرَبُونَ مِنْ كَأْسٍ كَانَ مِزَاجُهَا كَافُورًا\n(Verily, the Abrar (righteous believers) shall drink of a cup mixed with Kafur.) The properties of the Kafur (camphor) are well known; cooling, having a nice fragrance and in addition to this its taste will be delicious in Paradise. Al-Hasan said, \"The coolness of the camphor will be in the pleasantness of ginger.\" Thus Allah said,\nعَيْنًا يَشْرَبُ بِهَا عِبَادُ اللَّهِ يُفَجِّرُونَهَا تَفْجِيرًا\n(A spring wherefrom the servants of Allah will drink, causing it to gush forth abundantly.) meaning, this (drink) that will be mixed for these righteous people will be taken from Kafur, which is a spring that Allah's close servants will drink directly from, without it being mixed with anything, and they will drink to their fill from it. The word Yashrabu (to drink) includes the meaning of Yarwa (to quench one's thirst). Allah then says,\nيُفَجِّرُونَهَا تَفْجِيرًا\n(causing it to gush forth abundantly (Tafjir).) meaning, they will have control of it however and wherever they wish. They will have access to it from their castles, their homes, their sitting rooms and their residences. At-Tafjir means to cause to gush forth or flow out. This is as Allah says,\nوَقَالُوا لَنْ نُؤْمِنَ لَكَ حَتَّىٰ تَفْجُرَ لَنَا مِنَ الْأَرْضِ يَنْبُوعًا\n(And they say: \"We shall not believe in you until you cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for us.)(17:90) And Allah says,\nوَفَجَّرْنَا خِلَالَهُمَا نَهَرًا\n(We caused a river to gush forth in the midst of them.)(18:33) Mujahid said,\nيُفَجِّرُونَهَا تَفْجِيرًا\n(causing it to gush forth abundantly.) \"This means that they will divert it to wherever they wish.\" 'Ikrimah and Qatadah both made similar statements. Ath-Thawri said, \"They will cause it to flow wherever they wish.\"\nThe Deeds of these Righteous People\nAllah says,\nيُوفُونَ بِالنَّذْرِ وَيَخَافُونَ يَوْمًا كَانَ شَرُّهُ مُسْتَطِيرًا\n(They fulfill vows, and they fear a Day whose evil will be wide-spreading.) meaning, they devote to worship Allah using that which He made obligatory upon them from actions of obligatory obedience that is based on Islamic legislation. They also worship Him by fulfilling their vows. Imam Malik reported from Talhah bin 'Abdul-Malik Al-Ayli, who reported from Al-Qasim bin Malik, from 'A'ishah that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَنْ نَذَرَ أَنْ يُطِيعَ اللهَ فَلْيُطِعْهُ، وَمَنْ نَذَرَ أَنْ يَعْصِيَ اللهَ فَلَا يَعْصِهِ\n(Whoever makes a vow to obey Allah, then he should obey Him. And whoever makes a vow to disobey Allah, then he should not disobey Him.) Al-Bukhari also recorded this Hadith from Malik.\nThese people also abandon those forbidden things which He (Allah) has prohibited for them, due to their fear of having an evil reckoning on the Day of Return. This is the Day when the evil will spread out among all people except for those upon whom Allah has had mercy. Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Spreading.\" Qatadah said, \"By Allah! The evil of that Day will spread until it fills the heavens and the earth.\" Concerning Allah's statement,\nوَيُطْعِمُونَ الطَّعَامَ عَلَىٰ حُبِّهِ\n(And they give food, inspite of their love for it,) It has been said that this means the love of Allah, the Most High. In their view the pronoun refers to Allah. However, the most apparent meaning is that the pronoun refers to the food. This would mean, they give food while they themselves love it and desire it. This was stated by Mujahid and Muqatil, and it was the preferred opinion of Ibn Jarir. This is similar to Allah's statement,\nوَآتَى الْمَالَ عَلَىٰ حُبِّهِ\n(And gives his wealth, in spite of love for it.)(2:177) Allah also says,\nلَنْ تَنَالُوا الْبِرَّ حَتَّىٰ تُنْفِقُوا مِمَّا تُحِبُّونَ ۚ\n(By no means shall you attain Al-Birr unless you spend of that which you love.)(3:92) In the Sahih, there is a Hadith which states,\nأَفْضَلُ الصَّدَقَةِ أَنْ تَصَدَّقَ وَأَنْتَ صَحِيحٌ شَحِيحٌ، تَأْمُلُ الْغِنَىٰ وَتَخْشَى الْفَقْرَ\n(The best charity is that which you give while you are healthy, covetous, hoping for wealth and fearing poverty.) This means in the condition of your love for wealth, your eagerness for it and your need for it. Thus, Allah says,\nوَيُطْعِمُونَ الطَّعَامَ عَلَىٰ حُبِّهِ مِسْكِينًا وَيَتِيمًا وَأَسِيرًا\n(And they give food, inspite of their love for it, to the poor, the orphan and the captive,)\nConcerning the poor person and the orphan, an explanation of them and their characteristics has already preceded. In reference to the captive, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Al-Hasan and Ad-Dahhak all said, \"He is the captive among the people of the Qiblah (i.e., the Muslims).\" Ibn 'Abbas said, \"At that time (when this Ayah was revealed) their (the Muslims') captives were idolators.\" Proof for this is that on the day of Badr the Messenger of Allah ﷺ commanded his Companions to treat the captives respectfully. They (the Companions) would give them preference over themselves when eating their meals. 'Ikrimah said, \"They (captives) are the slaves.\" Ibn Jarir preferred this opinion since the Ayah generally refers to both the Muslim and the idolators. Sa'id bin Jubayr, 'Ata', Al-Hasan and Qatadah all made similar statements. The Messenger of Allah ﷺ advised treating servants well in more than one Hadith. This held such importance with him that the last statement of advice that he gave (before dying) was his saying,\nالصَّلَاةَ وَمَا مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَانُكُمْ\n(The prayer (As-Salah) and what your right hand possesses (slaves).) Mujahid said, \"He (the captive) is the prisoner.\" This means that these (righteous) people give food to others even though they themselves desire it and love it, saying at the same time,\nإِنَّمَا نُطْعِمُكُمْ لِوَجْهِ اللَّهِ\n(We feed you seeking Allah's Face only.) meaning, hoping for the reward of Allah and His pleasure.\nلَا نُرِيدُ مِنْكُمْ جَزَاءً وَلَا شُكُورًا\n(We wish for no reward, nor thanks from you.) meaning, 'we do not seek any reward from you in return for it. We also are not seeking for you to thank us in front of the people.'\nMujahid and Sa'id bin Jubayr both said, \"By Allah! They do not say this with their tongues, but rather, Allah knows it in their hearts and He commends them for it. Every seeker should seek after this.\"\nإِنَّا نَخَافُ مِنْ رَبِّنَا يَوْمًا عَبُوسًا قَمْطَرِيرًا\n(Verily, We fear from our Lord a Day that is 'Abus and Qamtarir.) meaning, 'we only do this so that perhaps Allah may have mercy on us and treat us with gentleness on the Day that is 'Abus and Qamtarir.' 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported from Ibn 'Abbas, \"'Abus means difficult and Qamtarir means long.\" 'Ikrimah and others said from Ibn Abbas,\nيَوْمًا عَبُوسًا قَمْطَرِيرًا\n(a Day that is 'Abus and Qamtarir (hard and distressful, that will make the faces look horrible from extreme dislike to it.)) \"The disbeliever will frown on that day until sweat will flow between his eyes like tar.\" Mujahid said, \"Abus 'Abis means (frowning with) the two lips and Qamtarir means drawing up the face in a scowl.\" Sa'id bin Jubayr and Qatadah said, \"Faces will be made to frown due to dismay. Qamtarir is the contraction of the forehead and what is between the two eyes due to dismay.\" Ibn Zayd said, \" 'Abus is the evil and Qamtarir is the severity.\"\nSome Details concerning the Reward of the Righteous in Paradise and what it contains of Delights\nAllah says,\nفَوَقَاهُمُ اللَّهُ شَرَّ ذَٰلِكَ الْيَوْمِ وَلَقَّاهُمْ نَضْرَةً وَسُرُورًا\n(So, Allah saved them from the evil of that Day, and gave them Nadrah (a light of beauty) and joy.) This is used as a way of eloquence in stating similarity (i.e., two similar things).\nفَوَقَاهُمُ اللَّهُ شَرَّ ذَٰلِكَ الْيَوْمِ\n(So, Allah saved them from the evil of that Day,) meaning, He protects them from that which they fear of it.\nوَلَقَّاهُمْ نَضْرَةً\n(and gave them Nadrah (a light of beauty)) meaning, in their faces.\nوَسُرُورًا\n(And joy) in their hearts. Al-Hasan Al-Basri, Qatadah, Abu 'Aliyah and Ar-Rabi' bin Anas all stated this. This is similar to Allah's statement,\nوُجُوهٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ مُسْفِرَةٌ - ضَاحِكَةٌ مُسْتَبْشِرَةٌ\n(Some faces that Day will be bright, laughing, rejoicing at good news.)(80:38-39)\nThis is because if the heart is happy, then the face will be enlightened. As Ka'b bin Malik said in his lengthy Hadith about Allah's Messenger , whenever he was happy, then his face will be radiant until it will be as if it is a piece of the moon. 'A'ishah said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ entered into my home happy and his facial expression was glowing.\" And the Hadith continues. dAllah then says,\nوَجَزَاهُمْ بِمَا صَبَرُوا\n(And their recompense because they were patient) meaning, due to their patience He will give them, bestow upon them and accommodate them with Paradise and silken garments. This means a home that is spacious, a delightful life and fine clothing. Al-Hafiz Ibn 'Asakir said in his biography of Hisham bin Sulayman Ad-Darani, \"Surat Al-Insan was recited to Abu Sulayman Ad-Darani, and when the reciter reached the Ayah where Allah says,\nوَجَزَاهُمْ بِمَا صَبَرُوا جَنَّةً وَحَرِيرًا\n(And their recompense shall be Paradise, and silken garments, because they were patient.) he (Abu Sulayman) said, 'Because they were patient in leaving off their desires in the world.'\"","href":"/tafsir/76?verse=4","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:76:13","title":"Ibn Kathir · 76:13–22","text":"## The raised Couches and the lack of Heat and Cold\n\nAllah tells us about the people of Paradise and the eternal delights they will experience, as well as the comprehensive favors that they will be given. Allah says,\nمُّتَّكِئِينَ فِيهَا عَلَى الاٌّرَائِكِ\n(Reclining therein on raised couches.) This has already been discussed in Surat As-Saffat and the difference of opinion about the meaning of reclining. Is it lying down, reclining on the elbows, sitting down cross-legged, or being firmly seated We have also mentioned that the Al-Ara'ik are couches beneath curtained canopies. Concerning Allah's statement,\nلاَ يَرَوْنَ فِيهَا شَمْساً وَلاَ زَمْهَرِيراً\n(they will see there neither the excessive heat, nor the excessive bitter cold.) meaning, there will be no disturbing heat with them, nor any painful cold, rather there will only be one climate that will be always and eternal and they will not want it to be changed.\n\n## The Shade and Fruit Clusters will be near\n\nوَدَانِيَةً عَلَيْهِمْ ظِلَـلُهَا\n(And the shade thereof is close upon them.) meaning, the branches will be close to them.\nوَذُلِّلَتْ قُطُوفُهَا تَذْلِيلاً\n(And the bunches of fruit thereof will hang low within their reach.) meaning, whenever he attempts to get any fruit, it will come nearer to him and come down from its highest branch as if it hears and obeys. This is as Allah says in another Ayah,\nوَجَنَى الْجَنَّتَيْنِ دَانٍ\n(And fruits of the two gardens will be near at hand.) (55:54) Allah also says,\nقُطُوفُهَا دَانِيَةٌ\n(The fruits in bunches whereof will be low and near at hand.) (69:23) Mujahid said,\nوَذُلِّلَتْ قُطُوفُهَا تَذْلِيلاً\n(And the bunches of fruit thereof will hang low within their reach.) \"If he stands it will rise with him an equal amount, if he sits it will lower itself for him so that he can reach it and if he lies down it will lower itself for him more so that he can reach it. So this is Allah's statement,\nتَذْلِيلاً\n(will hang low within their reach). \" Qatadah said, \"No thorn or distance will repel their hands away from it (the fruit).\"\n\n## Vessels of Silver and Drinking Cups\n\nAllah says,\nوَيُطَافُ عَلَيْهِمْ بِـَانِيَةٍ مِّن فِضَّةٍ وَأَكْوابٍ\n(And among them will be passed round vessels of silver and cups of crystal) meaning, servants will go around them with containers of food made of silver and cups of drink. These are drinking vessels that do not have handles or spouts. Then Allah says,\nقَوَارِيرَاْقَوَارِيرَاْ مِن فِضَّةٍ\n((Qawarir) Crystal-clear, made of silver.) Ibn `Abbas, Mujahid, Al-Hasan Al-Basri and others have all said, \"It (Qawarir) is the whiteness of silver in the transparency of glass.\" Qawarir is only made of glass. So these cups are made of silver, but due to their fine thinness, what is inside of them will be visible from outside of them (as if they are glass). This is among the things of which there is nothing like in this world. Allah said,\nقَدَّرُوهَا تَقْدِيراً\n(They will determine the measure thereof.) meaning, according to the amount that will quench their thirst. It will not be more than that nor less than it, rather it will be prepared in an amount that is suitable for quenching the thirst of their drinkers. This is the meaning of the statement of Ibn `Abbas, Mujahid, Sa`id bin Jubayr, Abu Salih, Qatadah, Ibn Abza, `Abdullah bin `Ubayd bin `Umayr, Ash-Sha`bi and Ibn Zayd. This was stated by Ibn Jarir and others. This is the most excellent provision, distinction and honor.\n\n## The Ginger Drink and the Drink of Salsabil\n\nAllah says,\nوَيُسْقَوْنَ فِيهَا كَأْساً كَانَ مِزَاجُهَا زَنجَبِيلاً\n(And they will be given to drink there of a cup mixed with Zanjabil (ginger),) meaning, they -- the righteous -- will also be given a drink from these cups.\nكَأْساً\n(a cup) meaning, a drink of wine.\nكَانَ مِزَاجُهَا زَنجَبِيلاً\n(mixed with Zanjabil (ginger),) So on one occasion they will be given a drink that is mixed with camphor, and it is cool. Then on another occasion they will be given a drink mixed with ginger, and it is hot. This is so that their affair will be balanced. However, those who are nearest to Allah, they will drink from all of it however they wish, as Qatadah and others have said. The statement of Allah has already preceded which says,\nعَيْناً يَشْرَبُ بِهَا عِبَادُ اللَّهِ\n(A spring wherefrom the servants of Allah will drink.) (76:6) And here Allah says,\nعَيْناً فِيهَا تُسَمَّى سَلْسَبِيلاً\n(A spring there, called Salsabil.) `Ikrimah said, \"It (Salsabil) is the name of a spring in Paradise.\" Mujahid said, \"It is called this due to its continuous flowing and the severity of its current.\"\n\n## The Boys and Servants\n\nAllah says,\nوَيَطُوفُ عَلَيْهِمْ وِلْدَنٌ مُّخَلَّدُونَ إِذَا رَأَيْتَهُمْ حَسِبْتَهُمْ لُؤْلُؤاً مَّنثُوراً\n(And round about them will (serve) boys of everlasting youth. If you see them, you would think them scattered pearls.) meaning, young boys from the boys of Paradise will go around serving the people of Paradise.\nمُّخَلَّدُونَ\n(everlasting youth.) meaning, in one state forever which they will be never changing from, they will not increase in age. Those who have described them as wearing earings in their ears have only interpreted the meaning in such a way because a child is befitting of this description and not an adult man. Concerning Allah's statement,\nإِذَا رَأَيْتَهُمْ حَسِبْتَهُمْ لُؤْلُؤاً مَّنثُوراً\n(If you see them, you would think them scattered pearls.) meaning, when you see them dispersing to fulfill the needs of their masters, their great number, their beautiful faces, handsome colors, fine clothing and ornaments, you would think that they were scattered pearls. There is no better quality than this, nor is there anything nicer to look at than scattered pearls in a beautiful place. Allah says,\nوَإِذَا رَأَيْتَ\n(And when you look) meaning, `when you see it, O Muhammad.'\nثُمَّ\n(there) meaning, there. This refers to Paradise and its beauty, its vastness, its loftiness and the joy and happiness it contains.\nرَأَيْتَ نَعِيماً وَمُلْكاً كَبِيراً\n(You will see a delight, and a great dominion.) meaning, there will be a great kingdom that belongs to Allah and a dazzling, splendid dominion. It has been confirmed in the Sahih that Allah will say to the last of the people of the Fire to be taken out of it, and the last of the people to enter into Paradise,\n«إِنَّ لَكَ مِثْلَ الدُّنْيَا وَعَشَرَةَ أَمْثَالِهَا»\n(verily, you will have similar to the world and ten worlds like it (in addition to it).\") If this is what He will give to the least of those who will be in Paradise, then what do you think about the one who will have a higher status and will be favored even more by Allah , nor any painful cold, rather there will only be one climate that will be always and eternal and they will not want it to be changed. This refers to Paradise and its beauty, its vastness, its loftiness and the joy and happiness it contains.\nرَأَيْتَ نَعِيماً وَمُلْكاً كَبِيراً\n(You will see a delight, and a great dominion.) meaning, there will be a great kingdom that belongs to Allah and a dazzling, splendid dominion. It has been confirmed in the Sahih that Allah will say to the last of the people of the Fire to be taken out of it, and the last of the people to enter into Paradise,\n«إِنَّ لَكَ مِثْلَ الدُّنْيَا وَعَشَرَةَ أَمْثَالِهَا»\n(verily, you will have similar to the world and ten worlds like it (in addition to it).\") If this is what He will give to the least of those who will be in Paradise, then what do you think about the one who will have a higher status and will be favored even more by Allah\nAllah says,\nعَـلِيَهُمْ ثِيَابُ سُندُسٍ خُضْرٌ وَإِسْتَبْرَقٌ\n(Their garments will be of fine green silk, and Istabraq.) meaning, among the garments of the people of Paradise is silk and Sundus, which is a high quality silk. These garments will be shirts and similar clothing from the undergarments. Concerning Istabraq (velvet), from it there is that which has a glitter and shimmer to it, and it is that which is worn as outer clothes, just as is well-known in clothing.\nوَحُلُّواْ أَسَاوِرَ مِن فِضَّةٍ\n(They will be adorned with bracelets of silver,) This is a description of the righteous. In reference to those who will be near to Allah, then their description is as Allah says,\nيُحَلَّوْنَ فِيهَا مِنْ أَسَاوِرَ مِن ذَهَبٍ وَلُؤْلُؤاً وَلِبَاسُهُمْ فِيهَا حَرِيرٌ\n(Wherein they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls and their garments therein will be of silk.) (22:23) After Allah mentions the outward beautification with silk and ornaments, He then says,\nوَسَقَـهُمْ رَبُّهُمْ شَرَاباً طَهُوراً\n(and their Lord will give them a purifying drink.) meaning, it will purify their insides of envy, despise, hatred, harm and the other reprehensible character traits. This is just as we have recorded from the Commander of the believers, `Ali bin Abi Talib, that he said, \"When the people of Paradise come to the Gate of Paradise, they will find two springs there. Then it will be as if they were inspired with what to do, so they will drink from one of them and Allah will remove whatever harmfulness there may be within them. Then they will bathe in the other spring and a glow of delight will run all over them. Thus, Allah informs of their outward condition and their inner beauty.\" Allah then says,\nإِنَّ هَـذَا كَانَ لَكُمْ جَزَآءً وَكَانَ سَعْيُكُم مَّشْكُوراً\n(Verily, this is a reward for you, and your endeavor has been accepted.) meaning, this will be said to them in honor of them and as a goodness towards them. This is as Allah says,\nكُلُواْ وَاشْرَبُواْ هَنِيئَاً بِمَآ أَسْلَفْتُمْ فِى الاٌّيَّامِ الْخَالِيَةِ\n(Eat and drink at ease for that which you have sent forth before you in days past!) (69:24) Allah also says,\nوَنُودُواْ أَن تِلْكُمُ الْجَنَّةُ أُورِثْتُمُوهَا بِمَا كُنتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ\n(And it will be cried out to them: \"This is the Paradise which you have inherited for what you used to do.\") (7:43) Then Allah says,\nوَكَانَ سَعْيُكُم مَّشْكُوراً\n(and your endeavor has been accepted) mean- ing, `Allah the Exalted will reward you for a small amount (of deeds) with a large amount (of reward).'","href":"/tafsir/76?verse=13","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:76:23","title":"Ibn Kathir · 76:23–31","text":"Verily, it is We Who have sent down the Qur'an to you by stages (23)Therefore be patient with constancy to the command of your Lord, and obey neither a sinner nor a disbeliever among them (24)And remember the Name of your Lord every morning and afternoon (25)And during the night, prostrate yourself to Him, and glorify Him a long night through (26)Verily, these love the present life of this world, and put behind them a heavy Day (27)It is We Who created them, and We have made them of strong build. And when We will, We can replace them with others like them with a complete replacement (28)Verily, this is an admonition, so whosoever wills, let him take a path to his Lord (29)But you cannot will, unless Allah wills. Verily, Allah is Ever All-Knowing, All-Wise (30)He will admit to His mercy whom He wills and as for the wrongdoers – He has prepared a painful torment (31)\nMention of the Qur'an's Revelation and the Command to be Patient and remember Allah\nAllah reminds His Messenger ﷺ of how He blessed him by revealing the Magnificent Qur'an to him.\nفَاصْبِرْ لِحُكْمِ رَبِّكَ\n(Therefore be patient with constancy to the command of your Lord.,) meaning, 'just as you have been honored by what has been revealed to you, then be patient with His decree and decision and know that He will handle your affairs in a good manner.'\nوَلَا تُطِعْ مِنْهُمْ آثِمًا أَوْ كَفُورًا\n(And obey neither a sinner (Athim) nor a disbeliever (Kafur) among them.) meaning, 'do not obey the disbelievers and the hypocrites if they wish to deter you from what has been revealed to you. Rather convey that which has been revealed to you from your Lord and put your trust in Allah, for verily, Allah will protect you from the people.' The Athim is the sinner in his deeds and the Kafur is the disbeliever in his heart.\nوَاذْكُرِ اسْمَ رَبِّكَ بُكْرَةً وَأَصِيلًا\n(And remember the Name of your Lord every morning and afternoon.) meaning, at the beginning of the day and at its end.\nوَمِنَ اللَّيْلِ فَاسْجُدْ لَهُ وَسَبِّحْهُ لَيْلًا طَوِيلًا\n(And during the night, prostrate yourself to Him, and glorify Him a long night through.) This is similar to Allah's statement,\nوَمِنَ اللَّيْلِ فَتَهَجَّدْ بِهِ نَافِلَةً لَكَ عَسَىٰ أَنْ يَبْعَثَكَ رَبُّكَ مَقَامًا مَحْمُودًا\n(And in some parts of the night offer the Salah with it (the Qur'an), as an additional prayer (Tajhajjud) for you. It may be that you Lord will raise you to Maqam Mahmud.)(17:79) Similarly, Allah also says,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الْمُزَّمِّلُ - قُمِ اللَّيْلَ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا - نِصْفَهُ أَوِ انْقُصْ مِنْهُ قَلِيلًا - أَوْ زِدْ عَلَيْهِ وَرَتِّلِ الْقُرْآنَ تَرْتِيلًا\n(O you wrapped! Stand all night, except a little. Half of it or a little less than that, or a little more. And recite the Qur'an Tartil.)(73:1-4)\nThe Censure of Love for the World and informing about the Day of the Final Return\nAllah reprimands the disbelievers and those similar to them who love the world and are devoted and dedicated to it, who put the abode of the Hereafter behind them in disregard. He says;\nإِنَّ هَٰؤُلَاءِ يُحِبُّونَ الْعَاجِلَةَ وَيَذَرُونَ وَرَاءَهُمْ يَوْمًا ثَقِيلًا\n(Verily, these love the present life of this world, and put behind them a heavy Day.) meaning, the Day of Judgement. Then Allah says,\nنَحْنُ خَلَقْنَاهُمْ وَشَدَدْنَا أَسْرَهُمْ ۖ\n(It is We Who created them, and We have made them of strong build.) Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid and others have said, \"This means their creation.\"\nوَإِذَا شِئْنَا بَدَّلْنَا أَمْثَالَهُمْ تَبْدِيلًا\n(And when We will, We can replace them with others like them with a complete replacement.) meaning, 'when We wish, We will resurrect them on the Day of Judgement and change them, repeating their creation in a new form.' Here the beginning of their creation is a proof for the repetition of their creation. Ibn Zayd and Ibn Jarir both said,\nوَإِذَا شِئْنَا بَدَّلْنَا أَمْثَالَهُمْ تَبْدِيلًا\n(And when We will, We can replace them with others like them with a complete replacement.) \"This means, if We wish We can bring another group of people besides them (in their place).\" This is like Allah's statement,\nإِنْ يَشَأْ يُذْهِبْكُمْ أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ وَيَأْتِ بِآخَرِينَ ۚ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ عَلَىٰ ذَٰلِكَ قَدِيرًا\n(If He wills, He can take you away, O people, and bring others. And Allah is capable over that.)(4:133) This is also like His statement,\nإِنْ يَشَأْ يُذْهِبْكُمْ وَيَأْتِ بِخَلْقٍ جَدِيدٍ - وَمَا ذَٰلِكَ عَلَى اللَّهِ بِعَزِيزٍ\n(If He wills, He can remove you and bring a new creation! And for Allah that is not hard or difficult.)(14:19-20)\nThe Qur'an is a Reminder, and Guidance comes from the Help of Allah\nAllah then says,\nإِنَّ هَٰذِهِ تَذْكِرَةٌ ۖ\n(Verily, this is an admonition,) meaning, this Surah is a reminder.\nفَمَنْ شَاءَ اتَّخَذَ إِلَىٰ رَبِّهِ سَبِيلًا\n(so whosoever wills, let him take a path to his Lord.) meaning, a path and a way. This means, whoever wishes to be guided by the Qur'an. This is similar to Allah's statement,\nوَمَاذَا عَلَيْهِمْ لَوْ آمَنُوا بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الْآخِرِ\n(And what loss have they if they had believed in Allah and in the Last Day.)(4:39) Then Allah says,\nوَمَا تَشَاءُونَ إِلَّا أَنْ يَشَاءَ اللَّهُ ۚ\n(But you cannot will, unless Allah wills.) meaning, no one is able to guide himself, enter into faith or bring about any benefit for himself,\nإِلَّا أَنْ يَشَاءَ اللَّهُ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ كَانَ عَلِيمًا حَكِيمًا\n(Unless Allah wills. Verily, Allah is Ever All-Knowing, All-Wise.) meaning, He is Most Knowledgeable of who deserves to be guided. So, He makes guidance easy for him and He predestines for him that which will be a cause for it. However, whoever deserves misguidance, He averts guidance from him. Unto Him belongs the most excellent wisdom and the most irrefutable argument. Thus, He says,\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ كَانَ عَلِيمًا حَكِيمًا\n(Verily, Allah is Ever All-Knowing, All-Wise.) Then He says,\nيُدْخِلُ مَنْ يَشَاءُ فِي رَحْمَتِهِ ۚ وَالظَّالِمِينَ أَعَدَّ لَهُمْ عَذَابًا أَلِيمًا\n(He will admit to His mercy whom He wills and as for the wrongdoers – He has prepared a painful torment.) meaning, He guides whomever He wishes and He leads astray whomever He wishes. Whoever He guides, there is no one who can lead him astray; and whoever He leads astray, there is no one who can guide him.\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Al-Insan. And all praise and thanks are due to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/76?verse=23","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:77:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 77:1–15","text":"The Revelation of this Surat and its Recitation in the Maghrib Prayer\nAl-Bukhari recorded from 'Abdullah – that is Ibn Mas'ud – that he said, \"While we were with the Messenger of Allah ﷺ in a cave at Mina,\nوَالْمُرْسَلَاتِ\n(By the Mursalat.) was revealed to him. He was reciting it and I was learning it from his mouth. Verily, his mouth was moist with it when a snake leaped out at us. The Prophet ﷺ said,\nاقْتُلُوهَا\n(Kill it!) So we quickly went after it, but it got away. Then the Prophet ﷺ said,\nوُقِيَتْ شَرَّكُمْ، كَمَا وُقِيتُمْ شَرَّهَا\n(It was saved from your harm just as you all were saved from its harm.)\" Muslim also recorded this Hadith by way of Al-A'mash. Imam Ahmad recorded from Ibn 'Abbas, who reported from his mother that she heard the Prophet ﷺ reciting\nوَالْمُرْسَلَاتِ عُرْفًا\n(By the Mursalat.) in the Maghrib prayer. In a report from Malik on the authority of Ibn 'Abbas, he narrated that Umm Al-Fadl (his mother) heard him (Ibn 'Abbas) reciting\nوَالْمُرْسَلَاتِ عُرْفًا\n(By the Mursalat 'Urfa.)(77:1) so she said, \"O my son! You reminded me with your recitation of this Surat. Verily, it is the last thing I heard from the Messenger of Allah ﷺ. He recited it in the Maghrib prayer (i.e., before he died).\" Both Al-Bukhari and Muslim recorded this report in the Two Sahihs by way of Malik.\nبِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nوَالْمُرْسَلَاتِ عُرْفًا - فَالْعَاصِفَاتِ عَصْفًا - وَالنَّاشِرَاتِ نَشْرًا - فَالْفَارِقَاتِ فَرْقًا - فَالْمُلْقِيَاتِ ذِكْرًا - عُذْرًا أَوْ نُذْرًا - إِنَّمَا تُوعَدُونَ لَوَاقِعٌ - فَإِذَا النُّجُومُ طُمِسَتْ - وَإِذَا السَّمَاءُ فُرِجَتْ - وَإِذَا الْجِبَالُ نُسِفَتْ - وَإِذَا الرُّسُلُ أُقِّتَتْ - لِأَيِّ يَوْمٍ أُجِّلَتْ - لِيَوْمِ الْفَصْلِ - وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا يَوْمُ الْفَصْلِ - وَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِلْمُكَذِّبِينَ\n(1. By the Mursalat 'Urfa.)(2. The 'Asifat 'Asfa.)(3. And the Nashirat Nashra.)(4. The Fariqat that separate.)(5. The Mulqiyat that remind,)(6. Excusing or warning.)(7. Surely, what you are promised will occur.)(8. Then when the stars lose their lights.)(9. And when Furijat the heaven.)(10. And when the mountains are blown away.)(11. And when the Messengers are Uqqitat.)(12. For what Day are these signs postponed?)(13. For the Day of Sorting Out (the men of Paradise from the men destined for Hell).)(14. And what will explain to you what is the Day of Sorting Out?)(15. Woe that Day to the deniers (of the Day of Resurrection)!)\nAllah's swearing by Different Creatures about the Occurrence of the Hereafter\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that Abu Hurayrah said,\nوَالْمُرْسَلَاتِ عُرْفًا\n(By the Mursalat 'Urfa.) \"The angels.\" From Masruq, Abu Ad-Duha, Mujahid in one narrations from him, As-Suddi and Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, statements similar to this have been reported.\nIt has been reported from Abu Salih that he said, \"These are the Messenger.\" In another narration from him (Abu Salih) he said that it means the angels. Abu Salih has also said the meaning of Al-'Asifat, An-Nashirat, Al-Fariqat and Al-Mulqiyat, that they all refer to the angels.\nAth-Thawri narrated from Salamah bin Kuhayl, who reported from Muslim Al-Batin, who reported from Abu Al-'Ubaydayn that he asked Ibn Mas'ud about the meaning of Al-Mursalat 'Urfa, and he (Ibn Mas'ud) said, \"The wind.\" He said the same about Al-'Asifat 'Asfa and An-Nashirat Nashra, that they all refer to the wind. Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid and Qatadah all said the same.\nIbn Jarir confidently affirmed that Al-'Asifat 'Asfa means the wind just as Ibn Mas'ud and those who followed him said.However, he (Ibn Jarir) did not affirm whether An-Nashirat Nashra are the angels or the wind as has preceded. It has been reported from Abu Salih that An-Nashirat Nashra is the rain. The most obvious meaning is as Allah says,\nوَأَرْسَلْنَا الرِّيَاحَ لَوَاقِحَ\n(And we send the winds fertilizing.)(15:22) He also says,\nوَهُوَ الَّذِي يُرْسِلُ الرِّيَاحَ بُشْرًا بَيْنَ يَدَيْ رَحْمَتِهِ ۖ\n(And it is He Who sends the winds as heralds of glad tidings, going before His mercy (rain).)(7:57)\nSimilarly, Al-'Asifat are winds. It is said (in Arabic) that the winds 'Asifat when they make noise with their blowing. Likewise, An-Nashirat are the winds that scatter into clouds in the horizons of the sky according to the will of the Lord. Allah then says,\nفَالْفَارِقَاتِ فَرْقًا - فَالْمُلْقِيَاتِ ذِكْرًا - عُذْرًا أَوْ نُذْرًا\n(The Fariqat that separate, the Mulqiyat that remind, excusing or warning.) meaning, the angels. This was said by Ibn Mas'ud, Ibn 'Abbas, Masruq, Mujahid, Qatadah, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, As-Suddi and Ath-Thawri. There is no difference of opinion here, because they (the angels) are the ones who descend with Allah's command to the Messengers, separating between the truth and falsehood, guidance and misguidance, and the lawful and the forbidden. They bring the revelation to the Messengers, which contains exemption or absolvement for the creatures and a warning for them of Allah's torment if they oppose His command. Allah said,\nإِنَّمَا تُوعَدُونَ لَوَاقِعٌ\n(Surely, what you are promised will occur.) This is the subject of these oaths. This means, what you all have been promised concerning the establishment of the Hour (Judgement Day), the blowing of the horn, the resurrection of the bodies, the gathering of those of old and those of latter times on one common ground and the rewarding of every doer of a deed based upon his deed. If he did good, then his reward will be good, and if he did evil, then his reward will be evil. All of this will occur, meaning it will come to pass and there is no avoiding it.\nA Mention of some of what will occur on the Day of Judgement\nThen Allah says,\nفَإِذَا النُّجُومُ طُمِسَتْ\n(Then when the stars lose their lights.) meaning, their light will leave. This is similar to Allah's statement,\nوَإِذَا النُّجُومُ انْكَدَرَتْ\n(And when the star fall.)(81:2) It is also similar to His statement,\nوَإِذَا الْكَوَاكِبُ انْتَثَرَتْ\n(And when the stars have fallen and scattered.)(82:2) Then Allah says,\nوَإِذَا السَّمَاءُ فُرِجَتْ\n(And when Furijat the heaven.) meaning, it is cleft asunder, becomes split, its sides fall and its edges become weak.\nوَإِذَا الْجِبَالُ نُسِفَتْ\n(And when the mountains are blown away.) meaning, they will be removed and no sight or trace of them will remain. This is as Allah says,\nوَيَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْجِبَالِ فَقُلْ يَنْسِفُهَا رَبِّي نَسْفًا\n(And they ask you concerning the mountains: Say, \"My Lord will blast them and scatter them as particles of dust.\")(20:105) Allah also says,\nوَيَوْمَ نُسَيِّرُ الْجِبَالَ وَتَرَى الْأَرْضَ بَارِزَةً وَحَشَرْنَاهُمْ فَلَمْ نُغَادِرْ مِنْهُمْ أَحَدًا\n(And (remember) the Day We shall cause the mountains to pass away (like clouds of dust), and you will see the earth as a leveled plain, and we shall gather them all together so as to leave not one of them behind.)(18:47) Then He says,\nوَإِذَا الرُّسُلُ أُقِّتَتْ\n(And when the Messengers are Uqqitat.) Al-'Awfi narrated from Ibn 'Abbas that he said that Uqqitat means \"Gathered.\" Ibn Zayd said, \"This is similar to Allah's statement,\nيَوْمَ يَجْمَعُ اللَّهُ الرُّسُلَ\n(On the Day when Allah will gather the Messengers together.)(5:109) Mujahid said,\nأُقِّتَتْ\n(Uqqitat.) \"This means postponed.\" Ath-Thawri narrated from Mansur, who narrated from Ibrahim that he said concerning the word,\nأُقِّتَتْ\n(Uqqitat.) \"This means promised.\" It seems as though he holds this to be similar to Allah's statement,\nوَأَشْرَقَتِ الْأَرْضُ بِنُورِ رَبِّهَا وَوُضِعَ الْكِتَابُ وَجِيءَ بِالنَّبِيِّينَ وَالشُّهَدَاءِ وَقُضِيَ بَيْنَهُمْ بِالْحَقِّ وَهُمْ لَا يُظْلَمُونَ\n(And the earth will shine with the light of its Lord: and the Book will be produced; and the Prophets and the witnesses will be brought forward; and it will be judged between them with truth, and they will not be wronged.)(39:69) Then Allah says,\nلِأَيِّ يَوْمٍ أُجِّلَتْ - لِيَوْمِ الْفَصْلِ - وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا يَوْمُ الْفَصْلِ - وَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِلْمُكَذِّبِينَ\n(For what Day are these signs postponed? For the Day of Sorting Out. And what will explain to you what is the Day of Sorting Out? Woe that Day to the deniers!)\nAllah is saying, 'for which day are the Messengers postponed and their matter expected, so that the Hour will be established' This is as Allah says,\nفَلَا تَحْسَبَنَّ اللَّهَ مُخْلِفَ وَعْدِهِ رُسُلَهُ ۗ إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَزِيزٌ ذُو انْتِقَامٍ - يَوْمَ تُبَدَّلُ الْأَرْضُ غَيْرَ الْأَرْضِ وَالسَّمَاوَاتُ ۖ وَبَرَزُوا لِلَّهِ الْوَاحِدِ الْقَهَّارِ\n(So think not that Allah will fail to keep His promise to His Messengers. Certainly, Allah is Almighty, All-Able of Retribution. On the Day when the earth will be changed to another earth and so will be the heavens, and they will appear before Allah, the One, the Irresistible.)(14:47, 48) This is the Day of Sorting Out, as Allah says,\nلِيَوْمِ الْفَصْلِ\n(the Day of Sorting Out.) Then Allah says, in magnifying its matter,\nوَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا يَوْمُ الْفَصْلِ - وَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِلْمُكَذِّبِينَ\n(And what will explain to you what is the Day of Sorting Out? Woe that Day to the deniers.) meaning, woe unto them from Allah's torment that is coming in the future.","href":"/tafsir/77?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:77:16","title":"Ibn Kathir · 77:16–28","text":"Did We not destroy the ancients (16)So shall We make later generations to follow them (17)Thus do We deal with the criminals (18)Woe that Day to the deniers (19)Did We not create you from a despised water (20)Then We placed it in a place of safety (21)For a known period (22)So We did measure; and We are the best to measure (23)Woe that Day to the deniers (24)Have We not made the earth Kifat (a receptacle (25)For the living and the dead (26)And have placed therein fixed towers, and have given you Furat water (27)Woe that Day to the deniers (28)\nThe Call to contemplate the various Manifestations of Allah's Power\nAllah says,\nأَلَمْ نُهْلِكِ الْأَوَّلِينَ\n(Did We not destroy the ancients?) meaning, those who rejected the Messengers and opposed what they came to them with.\nثُمَّ نُتْبِعُهُمُ الْآخِرِينَ\n(So shall We make later generations to follow them.) meaning, from those who are similar to them. Thus, Allah says,\nكَذَٰلِكَ نَفْعَلُ بِالْمُجْرِمِينَ - وَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِلْمُكَذِّبِينَ\n(Thus do We deal with the criminals. Woe that Day to the deniers!) Ibn Jarir said this. Then Allah reminding His creatures of His favor, and using the beginning of creation to support the idea of repeating it, He says:\nأَلَمْ نَخْلُقْكُمْ مِنْ مَاءٍ مَهِينٍ\n(Did We not create you from a despised water?) meaning, weak and despised in comparison to the power of the Creator. This is similar to what has been reported in the Hadith of Busr bin Jahhash (that Allah says),\nابْنَ آدَمَ أَنّٰى تُعْجِزُنِي وَقَدْ خَلَقْتُكَ مِنْ مِثْلِ هَذِهِ؟\n(\"(O) Son of Adam ! How can you think that I am unable, and yet I created you from something like this (i.e., semen)?\")\nفَجَعَلْنَاهُ فِي قَرَارٍ مَكِينٍ\n(Then We placed it in a place of safety,) meaning, 'We gathered him in the womb, where the fluid of the man and the woman settles. The womb has been prepared for this, as a protector of the fluid deposited in it. Allah said:\nإِلَىٰ قَدَرٍ مَعْلُومٍ\n(For a known period?) meaning, for a fixed period of time, which is from six months to nine months. Thus, Allah says,\nفَقَدَرْنَا فَنِعْمَ الْقَادِرُونَ - وَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِلْمُكَذِّبِينَ\n(So We did measure; and We are the best to measure. Woe that Day to the deniers!) Then Allah says,\nأَلَمْ نَجْعَلِ الْأَرْضَ كِفَاتًا - أَحْيَاءً وَأَمْوَاتًا\n(Have We not made the earth Kifat for the living and the dead?) Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Kifat means a place of shelter.\" Mujahid said, \"It holds the dead so that nothing is seen of it.\" Ash-Sha'bi said, \"Its interior is for your dead and its surface is for your living.\" Mujahid and Qatadah also said this.\nوَجَعَلْنَا فِيهَا رَوَاسِيَ شَامِخَاتٍ\n(And have placed therein fixed towers,) meaning, the mountains. The earth is held in place with them so that it does not shake and sway.\nوَأَسْقَيْنَاكُمْ مَاءً فُرَاتًا\n(and have given you Furat water?) meaning, cold and delicious water from the clouds or from what He causes to gush forth from the springs of the earth.\nوَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِلْمُكَذِّبِينَ\n(Woe that Day to the deniers!) meaning, woe to whoever reflects upon these created things which demonstrate the greatness of their Creator, then after that continues to reject Him and disbelieve in Him.","href":"/tafsir/77?verse=16","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:77:29","title":"Ibn Kathir · 77:29–40","text":"(It will be said to the disbelievers): \"Depart you to that which you used to deny! (29)\"Depart you to a shadow in three columns, (30)\"Neither shady nor of any use against the fierce flame of the Fire. (31)Verily, it (Hell) throws sparks (huge) as Al-Qasr (32)As if they were Sufr camels (33)Woe that Day to the deniers (of the Day of Resurrection)(34)That will be a Day when they shall not speak (during some part of it)(35)And they will not be permitted to put forth any excuse (36)Woe that Day to the deniers (of the Day of Resurrection)(37)That will be a Day of Decision! We have brought you and the men of old together (38)So, if you have a plot, use it against Me (Allah)(39)Woe that Day to the deniers (of the Day of Resurrection)(40)\nThe driving of the Criminals to their Final Abode in Hell and how it will be done\nAllah informs about the disbelievers who deny the final abode, the recompense, Paradise, and the Hellfire. On the Day of Judgement it will be said to them:\nانْطَلِقُوا إِلَىٰ مَا كُنْتُمْ بِهِ تُكَذِّبُونَ - انْطَلِقُوا إِلَىٰ ظِلٍّ ذِي ثَلَاثِ شُعَبٍ\n(Depart you to that which you used to deny! Depart you to a shadow in three columns,) meaning, a flame of fire when it rises and ascends with smoke. So due to its severity and strength, it will have three columns.\nلَا ظَلِيلٍ وَلَا يُغْنِي مِنَ اللَّهَبِ\n(Neither shady nor of any use against the fierce flame of the Fire.) meaning, shade of the smoke that comes from the flame – which itself will not have a shade, nor will it benefit against the flame. This means it will not protect them from the heat of the flame. Allah said,\nإِنَّهَا تَرْمِي بِشَرَرٍ كَالْقَصْرِ\n(Verily, it throws sparks as Al-Qasr,) meaning, its sparks will shoot out from its flame like huge castles. Ibn Mas'ud said, \"Like forts.\" Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, Qatadah and Malik who reported from Zayd bin Aslam and others said, \"This means the trunk of trees.\"\nكَأَنَّهُ جِمَالَتٌ صُفْرٌ\n(As if they were Sufr camels.) means, black camels. This is the view of Mujahid, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, and Ad-Dahhak, and Ibn Jarir favored this view. Ibn 'Abbas Mujahid, and Sa'id bin Jubayr said about,\nجِمَالَتٌ صُفْرٌ\n(Sufr camels.) \"Meaning ropes of ships.\"\nإِنَّهَا تَرْمِي بِشَرَرٍ كَالْقَصْرِ\n(Verily, it (Hell) throws sparks as Al-Qasr.) Imam Al-Bukhari recorded from Ibn 'Abbas that he said: \"We were directed to the timber a length of three cubits or more in order to use it for construction of buildings. We used to call it Al-Qasr.\nكَأَنَّهُ جِمَالَتٌ صُفْرٌ\n(As if they were Sufr camels.) These (Jimalat) are ropes of ships that are bundled until they resemble the intestines of men.\"\nوَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِلْمُكَذِّبِينَ\n(Woe that Day to the deniers!)\nThe Inability of the Criminals to speak, make Excuses, or step forward on the Day of Judgement\nThen Allah says,\nهَٰذَا يَوْمُ لَا يَنْطِقُونَ\n(That will be a Day when they shall not speak,) meaning, they will not speak.\nوَلَا يُؤْذَنُ لَهُمْ فَيَعْتَذِرُونَ\n(And they will not be permitted to put forth any excuse.) meaning, they will not be able to speak, nor will they be granted permission to speak so that they can make excuses. Rather, the proof will be established against them, and they will be called upon to speak about the wrong that they did, but they will not be able to say anything. The courts of the Day of Judgement will occur in stages. Sometimes the Lord informs of this stage and sometimes He informs of that stage. This is to show the terrors and calamities of that Day. Thus, after all the details of this discussion, He says:\nوَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِلْمُكَذِّبِينَ\n(Woe that Day to the deniers!) Then Allah says,\nهَٰذَا يَوْمُ الْفَصْلِ ۖ جَمَعْنَاكُمْ وَالْأَوَّلِينَ - فَإِنْ كَانَ لَكُمْ كَيْدٌ فَكِيدُونِ\n(That will be a Day of Decision! We have brought you and the men of old together! So if you have a plot, use it against Me!) This is an address from the Creator to His servants. He says to them,\nهَٰذَا يَوْمُ الْفَصْلِ ۖ جَمَعْنَاكُمْ وَالْأَوَّلِينَ\n(That will be a Day of Decision! We have brought you and the men of old together!) meaning, He will gather all of them by His power on one common plane, He will make them hear the caller and He will cause them to see. Then He says,\nفَإِنْ كَانَ لَكُمْ كَيْدٌ فَكِيدُونِ\n(So, if you have a plot, use it against Me!) This is a serious threat and a harsh warning. It means, 'if you are able to save yourselves from being seized by Me, and rescue yourselves from My ruling, then do so. But you are certainly not able to do so.' This is as Allah says,\nيَا مَعْشَرَ الْجِنِّ وَالْإِنْسِ إِنِ اسْتَطَعْتُمْ أَنْ تَنْفُذُوا مِنْ أَقْطَارِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ فَانْفُذُوا ۚ لَا تَنْفُذُونَ إِلَّا بِسُلْطَانٍ\n(O assembly of Jinn and men! If you have power to pass beyond the zones of the heavens and the earth, then pass beyond (them)! But you will never be able to pass them, except with authority (from Allah)!)(55:33) Allah also says,\nوَلَا تَضُرُّونَهُ شَيْئًا\n(And you will not harm Him in the least.)(11:57) It is narrated in a Hadith (that Allah said),\nيَا عِبَادِي، إِنَّكُمْ لَنْ تَبْلُغُوا نَفْعِي فَتَنْفَعُونِي، وَلَنْ تَبْلُغُوا ضَرِّي فَتَضُرُّونِي\n(\"O My servants! You all can never attain My benefit and thereby benefit Me, and you all can never attain My harm and thereby harm Me.\")","href":"/tafsir/77?verse=29","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:77:41","title":"Ibn Kathir · 77:41–50","text":"Verily, those who had Taqwa, shall be amidst shades and springs (41)And fruits, such as they desire (42)\"Eat and drink comfortably for that which you used to do. (43)Verily, thus We reward the Muhsinin (44)Woe that Day to the deniers (45)Eat and enjoy yourselves for a little while. Verily, you are criminals (46)Woe that Day to the deniers (47)And when it is said to them: \"Bow down yourself!\" They bow not down (48)Woe that Day to the deniers (49)Then in what statement after this will they believe (50)\nThe Final Abode for Those Who have Taqwa\nAllah informs that His servants who have Taqwa and worship Him by performing the obligations and abandoning the forbidden things, will be in gardens and springs on the Day of Judgement. This means they will be in the opposite condition of the wretched people, who will be in shades of Al-Yahmum, which is purtrid, black smoke. Allah says,\nوَفَوَاكِهَ مِمَّا يَشْتَهُونَ\n(And fruits, such as they desire.) meaning, and from other types of fruits, they will have whatever they request.\nكُلُوا وَاشْرَبُوا هَنِيئًا بِمَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ\n(Eat and drink comfortably for that which you used to do.) meaning, this will be said to them out of kindness for them. Reestablishing what He has previously mentioned, Allah says;\nإِنَّا كَذَٰلِكَ نَجْزِي الْمُحْسِنِينَ\n(Verily, thus We reward the Muhsinin.) meaning, 'this is Our reward for whoever does good deeds.'\nوَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِلْمُكَذِّبِينَ\n(Woe that Day to the deniers!)\nA Threat for Whoever denies the Day of Judgement\nAllah says,\nكُلُوا وَتَمَتَّعُوا قَلِيلًا إِنَّكُمْ مُجْرِمُونَ\n(Eat and enjoy yourselves for a little while. Verily, you are criminals.) This is an address to the deniers of the Day of Judgement. It is commanding them with a command of threat and intimidation. Allah says,\nكُلُوا وَتَمَتَّعُوا قَلِيلًا\n(Eat and enjoy yourselves for a little while.) meaning, for a period of time that is short, small and brief.\nإِنَّكُمْ مُجْرِمُونَ\n(Verily, you are criminals.) meaning, then you all will be driven to the fire of Hell which has already been mentioned.\nوَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِلْمُكَذِّبِينَ\n(Woe that Day to the deniers!) This is similar to Allah's statement,\nنُمَتِّعُهُمْ قَلِيلًا ثُمَّ نَضْطَرُّهُمْ إِلَىٰ عَذَابٍ غَلِيظٍ\n(We let them enjoy for a little while, then in the end We shall oblige them to a great torment.)(31:24) Allah also says,\nقُلْ إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَفْتَرُونَ عَلَى اللَّهِ الْكَذِبَ لَا يُفْلِحُونَ - مَتَاعٌ فِي الدُّنْيَا ثُمَّ إِلَيْنَا مَرْجِعُهُمْ ثُمَّ نُذِيقُهُمُ الْعَذَابَ الشَّدِيدَ بِمَا كَانُوا يَكْفُرُونَ\n(Verily, those who invent a lie against Allah, will never be successsful. (A brief) enjoyment in this world! And then unto Us will be their return, then We shall make them taste the severest torment because they used to disbelieve.)(10:69,70) Then Allah says,\nوَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمُ ارْكَعُوا لَا يَرْكَعُونَ\n(And when it is said to them: \"Bow down yourself!\" They bow not down.) meaning, when these ignorant disbelievers are ordered to pray with the congregation (of believers), they refuse and turn away from it arrogantly. Thus, Allah says,\nوَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِلْمُكَذِّبِينَ\n(Woe that Day to the deniers!) Then Allah says,\nفَبِأَيِّ حَدِيثٍ بَعْدَهُ يُؤْمِنُونَ\n(Then in what statement after this will they believe?) meaning, if they do not believe in this Qur'an, then what talk will they believe in? This is as Allah says,\nفَبِأَيِّ حَدِيثٍ بَعْدَ اللَّهِ وَآيَاتِهِ يُؤْمِنُونَ\n(Then in which speech after Allah and His Ayat will they believe?)(45: 6)\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Al-Mursalat, and all praise and thanks are due to Allah. He is the Giver of success and security.","href":"/tafsir/77?verse=41","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:78:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 78:1–16","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.\nعَمَّ يَتَسَاءَلُونَ - عَنِ النَّبَإِ الْعَظِيمِ - الَّذِي هُمْ فِيهِ مُخْتَلِفُونَ - كَلَّا سَيَعْلَمُونَ - ثُمَّ كَلَّا سَيَعْلَمُونَ - أَلَمْ نَجْعَلِ الْأَرْضَ مِهَادًا - وَالْجِبَالَ أَوْتَادًا - وَخَلَقْنَاكُمْ أَزْوَاجًا - وَجَعَلْنَا نَوْمَكُمْ سُبَاتًا - وَجَعَلْنَا اللَّيْلَ لِبَاسًا - وَجَعَلْنَا النَّهَارَ مَعَاشًا - وَبَنَيْنَا فَوْقَكُمْ سَبْعًا شِدَادًا - وَجَعَلْنَا سِرَاجًا وَهَّاجًا - وَأَنزَلْنَا مِنَ الْمُعْصِرَاتِ مَاءً ثَجَّاجًا - لِّنُخْرِجَ بِهِ حَبًّا وَنَبَاتًا - وَجَنَّاتٍ أَلْفَافًا\n(1. What are they asking about?)(2. About the great news,)(3. About which they are in disagreement.)(4. Nay, they will come to know!)(5. Nay, again, they will come to know!)(6. Have We not made the earth as a bed,)(7. And the mountains as pegs?)(8. And We have created you in pairs.)(9. And We have made your sleep as a thing for rest.)(10. And We have made the night as a covering,)(11. And We have made the day for livelihood.)(12. And We have built above you seven strong,)(13. And We have made (therein) a shining lamp.)(14. And We have sent down from the Mu'sirat water Thajjaj.)(15. That We may produce therewith grains and vegetations,)(16. And gardens that are Alfaf.)\nRefutation against the Idolators' Denial of the Occurrence of the Day of Judgement\nIn rejection of the idolators' questioning about the Day of Judgement, due to their denial of its occurrence, Allah says,\nعَمَّ يَتَسَاءَلُونَ - عَنِ النَّبَإِ الْعَظِيمِ\n(What are they asking about? About the great news,)\nmeaning, what are they asking about? They are asking about the matter of the Day of Judgement, and it is the great news. Meaning the dreadful, horrifying, overwhelming information.\nالَّذِي هُمْ فِيهِ مُخْتَلِفُونَ\n(About which they are in disagreement.)\nmeaning, the people are divided into two ideas about it. There are those who believe in it and those who disbelieve in it. Then Allah threatens those who deny the Day of Judgement by saying,\nكَلَّا سَيَعْلَمُونَ - ثُمَّ كَلَّا سَيَعْلَمُونَ\n(Nay, they will come to know! Nay, again, they will come to know!)\nThis is a severe threat and a direct warning.\nMentioning Allah's Power, and the Proof of His Ability to resurrect the Dead\nThen, Allah begins to explain His great ability to create strange things and amazing matters. He brings this as a proof of His ability to do whatever He wishes concerning the matter of the Hereafter and other matters as well. He says,\nأَلَمْ نَجْعَلِ الْأَرْضَ مِهَادًا\n(Have We not made the earth as a bed,)\nmeaning, an established, firm and peaceful resting place that is subservient to them.\nوَالْجِبَالَ أَوْتَادًا\n(And the mountains as pegs?)\nmeaning, He made them as pegs for the earth to hold it in place, make it stable and firm. This is so that it may be suitable for dwelling and not quake with those who are in it. Then Allah says,\nوَخَلَقْنَاكُمْ أَزْوَاجًا\n(And We have created you in pairs.)\nmeaning, male and female, both of them enjoying each other, and by this means procreation is achieved. This is similar to Allah's statement,\nوَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ أَنْ خَلَقَ لَكُم مِّنْ أَنفُسِكُمْ أَزْوَاجًا لِّتَسْكُنُوا إِلَيْهَا وَجَعَلَ بَيْنَكُم مَّوَدَّةً وَرَحْمَةً\n(And among His signs is this that He created for you wives from among yourselves, that you may find repose in them, and He has put between you affection and mercy.)(30:21)\nوَجَعَلْنَا نَوْمَكُمْ سُبَاتًا\n(And We have made your sleep as a thing for rest.)\nmeaning, a cessation of movement in order to attain rest from the frequent repetition and going about in search of livelihood during the day. A similar Ayah has been mentioned previously in Surat Al-Furqan.\nوَجَعَلْنَا اللَّيْلَ لِبَاسًا\n(And We have made the night as a covering,)\nmeaning, its shade and darkness covers the people. This is as Allah says,\nوَالَّيْلِ إِذَا يَغْشَاهَا\n(By the night as it conceals it.)(91:4)\nQatadah commented;\nوَجَعَلْنَا اللَّيْلَ لِبَاسًا\n(And We have made the night as a covering,)\nmeaning, a tranquil residence. Concerning Allah's statement,\nوَجَعَلْنَا النَّهَارَ مَعَاشًا\n(And We have made the day for livelihood.)\nmeaning, 'We made it radiant, luminous, and shining so that the people would be able to move about in it.' By it they are able to come and go for their livelihood, earning, business dealings and other than that as well. In reference to Allah's statement,\nوَبَنَيْنَا فَوْقَكُمْ سَبْعًا شِدَادًا\n(And We have built above you seven strong,)\nmeaning, the seven heavens in their vastness, loftiness, perfection, precision, and adornment with both stable and moving stars. Thus, Allah says,\nوَجَعَلْنَا سِرَاجًا وَهَّاجًا\n(And We have made (therein) a shining lamp.)\nmeaning, the radiant sun that gives light to all of the world. Its light glows for all of the people of the earth. Allah then says,\nوَأَنزَلْنَا مِنَ الْمُعْصِرَاتِ مَاءً ثَجَّاجًا\n(And We have sent down from the Mu'sirat water Thajjaj.)\nAli bin Abi Talhah reported from Ibn 'Abbas that he said, \"From the Mu'sirat means from the clouds.\" This was also stated by 'Ikrimah, Abu Al-'Aliyah, Ad-Dahhak, Al-Hasan, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, Ath-Thawri, and it is preferred by Ibn Jarir. Al-Farra' said, \"They are the clouds that are filled with rain, but they do not bring rain. This is like the woman being called Mu'sir when (the time of) her menstrual cycle approaches, yet she does not menstruate.\" This is as Allah says,\nاللَّهُ الَّذِي يُرْسِلُ الرِّيَاحَ فَتُثِيرُ سَحَابًا فَيَبْسُطُهُ فِي السَّمَاءِ كَيْفَ يَشَاءُ وَيَجْعَلُهُ كِسَفًا فَتَرَى الْوَدْقَ يَخْرُجُ مِنْ خِلَالِهِ\n(Allah is He Who sends the winds, so that they raise clouds, and spread them along the sky as He wills, and then break them into fragments, until you see rain drops come forth from their midst!)(30:48)\nmeaning, from its midst.\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nمَاءً ثَجَّاجًا\n(water Thajjaj) Mujahid, Qatadah, and Ar-Rabi' bin Anas all said, \"Thajjaj means poured out.\" At-Thawri said, \"Continuous.\" Ibn Zayd said, \"Abundant.\" In the Hadith of the woman with prolonged menstrual bleeding, when the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said to her,\nأَنْعَتُ لَكِ الْكُرْسُفَ\n(I suggest you to make an absorbent cloth for yourself.)\nMeaning, 'dress the area with cotton.' The woman replied, \"O Messenger of Allah! It (the bleeding) is too much for that. Verily, it flows in profusely (Thajja).\" This contains an evidence for using the word Thajj to mean abundant, continuous and flowing. And Allah knows best. Allah said,\nلِّنُخْرِجَ بِهِ حَبًّا وَنَبَاتًا - وَجَنَّاتٍ أَلْفَافًا\n(That We may produce therewith corn and vegetation, and gardens that are Alfaf.)\nmeaning, 'so that We may bring out great abundance, goodness, benefit, and blessing through this water.'\nحَبًّا\n(grains) This refers to that which is preserved for (the usage) of humans and cattle.\nوَنَبَاتًا\n(and vegetations) meaning, vegetables that are eaten fresh.\nوَجَنَّاتٍ\n(And gardens) meaning, gardens of various fruits, differing colors, and a wide variety of tastes and fragrances, even if it is ingathered at one location of the earth. This is why Allah says\nوَجَنَّاتٍ أَلْفَافًا\n(And gardens that are Alfaf.) Ibn 'Abbas and other said, \"Alfaf means gathered.\" This is similar to Allah's statement,\nوَفِي الْأَرْضِ قِطَعٌ مُّتَجَاوِرَاتٌ وَجَنَّاتٌ مِّنْ أَعْنَابٍ وَزَرْعٌ وَنَخِيلٌ صِنْوَانٌ وَغَيْرُ صِنْوَانٍ يُسْقَىٰ بِمَاءٍ وَاحِدٍ وَنُفَضِّلُ بَعْضَهَا عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ فِي الْأُكُلِ ۚ إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِّقَوْمٍ يَعْقِلُونَ\n(And in the earth are neighboring tracts, and gardens of vines, and green crops, and date palms, growing into two or three from a single stem root, or otherwise, watered with the same water; yet some of them We make more excellent than others to eat. Verily, in these things there are Ayat for the people who understand.)(13:4)","href":"/tafsir/78?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:78:17","title":"Ibn Kathir · 78:17–30","text":"Verily, the Day of Decision is a fixed time (17)The Day when the Trumpet will be blown, and you shall come forth in crowds (18)And the heaven shall be opened, and it will become as gates (19)And the mountains shall be moved away from their places and they will be as if they were a mirage (20)Truly, Hell is a place of ambus (21)A dwelling place for the Taghun (22)They will abide therein Ahqab (23)Nothing cool shall they taste therein, nor any drink (24)Except Hamim, and Ghassa (25)An exact recompense (according to their evil crimes)(26)For verily, they used not to look for a reckoning (27)But they denied Our Ayat Kidhdhaba (28)And all things We have recorded in a Book (29)So taste you. No increase shall We give you, except in torment (30)\nExplaining the Day of Decision and what occurs during it\nAllah says about the Day of Decision – and it is the Day of Judgement – that it is at a fixed time, with a set appointment. Its time cannot be added to or decreased. No one knows its exact time except Allah. This is as Allah says,\nوَمَا نُؤَخِّرُهُ إِلَّا لِأَجَلٍ مَّعْدُودٍ\n(And We delay it only for a term fixed.)(11:104)\nيَوْمَ يُنفَخُ فِي الصُّورِ فَتَأْتُونَ أَفْوَاجًا\n(The Day when the Trumpet will be blown, and you shall come forth in crowds.)\nMujahid said, \"Groups after groups.\" Ibn Jarir said, \"This means that each nation will come with its Messenger. It is similar to Allah's statement,\nيَوْمَ نَدْعُو كُلَّ أُنَاسٍ بِإِمَامِهِمْ\n(The Day when We shall call together all human beings with their Imam.)(17:71)\"\nAl-Bukhari reported concerning the explanation of Allah's statement,\nيَوْمَ يُنفَخُ فِي الصُّورِ فَتَأْتُونَ أَفْوَاجًا\n(The Day when the Trumpet will be blown, and you shall come forth in crowds.)\nAbu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَا بَيْنَ النَّفْخَتَيْنِ أَرْبَعُونَ\n(That which is between the two blowings is forty.)\nSomeone asked, \"Is it forty days, O Abu Hurayrah?\" But he (Abu Hurayrah) refused to reply, saying \"no comment.\" They then asked, \"Is it forty months?\" But he (Abu Hurayrah) refused to reply, saying \"no comment.\" They asked again, \"Is it forty years?\" But he (Abu Hurayrah) refused to reply, saying \"no comment.\" (Abu Hurayrah added:) \"Then the Prophet ﷺ went on to say,\nثُمَّ يُنْزِلُ اللهُ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مَاءً فَيَنْبُتُونَ كَمَا يَنْبُتُ الْبَقْلُ، لَيْسَ مِنَ الْإنْسَانِ شَيْءٌ إِلَّا يَبْلَى، إِلَّا عَظْمًا وَاحِدًا، وَهُوَ عَجْبُ الذَّنَبِ، وَمِنْهُ يُرَكَّبُ الْخَلْقُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ\n(Then Allah will send down a rain from the sky and the dead body will sprout just as a green plant sprouts. Every part of the last person will deteriorate except for one bone, and it is the coccyx bone (tailbone). From it the creation will be assembled on the Day of Judgement.)\"\nوَفُتِحَتِ السَّمَاءُ فَكَانَتْ أَبْوَابًا\n(And the heaven shall be opened, and it will become as gates.)\nmeaning, paths, and routes for the descending of the angels.\nوَسُيِّرَتِ الْجِبَالُ فَكَانَتْ سَرَابًا\n(And the mountains shall be moved away from their places and they will be as if they were a mirage.)\nThis is similar to Allah's statement,\nوَتَرَى الْجِبَالَ تَحْسَبُهَا جَامِدَةً وَهِيَ تَمُرُّ مَرَّ السَّحَابِ\n(And you will see the mountains and think them solid, but they shall pass away as the passing away of the clouds.)(27:88)\nHe also says,\nوَتَكُونُ الْجِبَالُ كَالْعِهْنِ الْمَنفُوشِ\n(And the mountain will be like carded wool.)(101:5)\nAnd Allah says here,\nفَكَانَتْ سَرَابًا\n(As if they were a mirage.) meaning, they appear to the one who looks at them as if they are something, but they are actually nothing. After this they will be completely removed. Nothing will be seen of them, and there will be neither base nor trace of them. This is as Allah says,\nوَيَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْجِبَالِ فَقُلْ يَنسِفُهَا رَبِّي نَسْفًا - فَيَذَرُهَا قَاعًا صَفْصَفًا - لَّا تَرَىٰ فِيهَا عِوَجًا وَلَا أَمْتًا\n(And they ask you concerning the mountains, say: \"My Lord will blast them and scatter them as particles of dust. Then He shall leave them as a level smooth plain. You will see therein nothing crooked or curved.\")(20:105-107)\nAnd He says,\nوَيَوْمَ نُسَيِّرُ الْجِبَالَ وَتَرَى الْأَرْضَ بَارِزَةً\n(And the Day We shall cause the mountains to pass away, and you will see the earth as a leveled plain.)(18:47)\nAllah then says,\nإِنَّ جَهَنَّمَ كَانَتْ مِرْصَادًا\n(Truly, Hell is a place of ambush) meaning, it is waiting in preparation.\nلِّلطَّاغِينَ\n(for the Taghun) These are the disobedient rejectors who oppose the Messengers.\nمَآبًا\n(A dwelling place) meaning, a place of return, final destination, final outcome, and residence.\nAllah said,\nلَّابِثِينَ فِيهَا أَحْقَابًا\n(They will abide therein Ahqab.) meaning, they will remain in it for Ahqab, which is the plural of Huqb. Huqb means a period of time.\nKhalid bin Ma'dan said, \"This Ayah, and the Ayah,\nإِلَّا مَا شَاءَ رَبُّكَ\n(except your Lord wills.)(11:107) both refer to the people of Tawhid.\" Ibn Jar0r recorded this statement. Ibn Jarir also recorded from Salim that he heard Al-Hasan being asked about Allah's statement,\nلَّابِثِينَ فِيهَا أَحْقَابًا\n(They will abide therein Ahqab) \"In reference to Ahqab, it has no specific amount of time other than its general meaning of eternity in the Hellfire. However, they have mentioned that the Huqb is seventy years, and every day of it is like one thousand years according to your reckoning (in this life).\"\nSa'id reported from Qatadah that he said, \"Allah says,\nلَّابِثِينَ فِيهَا أَحْقَابًا\n(They will abide therein Ahqab.)(78:23)\nAnd it is that which has no end to it. Whenever one era comes to an end, a new era follows it. It has been mentioned to us that the Huqb is eighty years.\"\nAr-Rabi' bin Anas said,\nلَّابِثِينَ فِيهَا أَحْقَابًا\n(They will abide therein Ahqab) \"No one knows how much time this Ahqab is, except for Allah, the Mighty and Sublime. It has been mentioned to us that one Huqb is eighty years, and the year is three hundred and sixty days, and each day is equivalent to one thousand years according to your reckoning (in this life).\" Ibn Jarir has recorded both of these statements.\nAllah's statement:\nلَّا يَذُوقُونَ فِيهَا بَرْدًا وَلَا شَرَابًا\n(Nothing cool shall they taste therein, nor any drink.)\nmeaning, they will not find any coolness in Hell for their hearts, nor any good drink for them to partake of. Thus, Allah says,\nإِلَّا حَمِيمًا وَغَسَّاقًا\n(Except Hamim, and Ghassaq) Abu Al-'Aliyah said, \"The Hamim has been made an exception to the coolness, and Ghassaq is the exception to the drink.\" This has also been said by Ar-Rabi' bin Anas. In reference to the Hamim, it is the heat that has reached its maximum temperature and point of boiling. The Ghassaq is gathered from the pus, sweat, tears, and wounds of the people of Hellfire. It is unbearably cold with an intolerable stench. May Allah save us from that by His beneficence and grace. Then He continues,\nجَزَاءً وِفَاقًا\n(An exact recompense.) meaning, that which will happen to them of this punishment is in accordance with their wicked deeds, which they were doing in this life. Mujahid, Qatadah, and others have said this. Then Allah said,\nإِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا لَا يَرْجُونَ حِسَابًا\n(For verily, they used not to look for a reckoning.)(78:27)\nmeaning, they did not believe that there would be an abode in which they would be taken to account.\nوَكَذَّبُوا بِآيَاتِنَا كِذَّابًا\n(But they denied Our Ayat Kidhdhaba.) meaning, they used to deny the evidences of Allah and His proofs for His creation, which He revealed to His Messengers. So they met these proofs with rejection and obstinance. His statement,\nكِذَّابًا\n(Kidhdhaba) it means rejection, and it is considered a verbal noun that does not come from a verb. Allah said;\nوَكُلَّ شَيْءٍ أَحْصَيْنَاهُ كِتَابًا\n(And all things We have recorded in a Book.)\nmeaning, 'surely We know the deeds of all of the creatures, and We have written these deeds for them. We will reward them based upon this.' If their deeds were good then their reward will be good, and if their deeds were evil their reward will be evil. Allah then says,\nفَذُوقُوا فَلَن نَّزِيدَكُمْ إِلَّا عَذَابًا\n(So taste you. No increase shall We give you, except in torment.)\nThis means that it will be said to the people of the Hellfire, \"Taste that which you were in. We will never increase you in anything except torment according to its type (of sin), and something else similar to it.\" Qatadah reported from Abu Ayyub Al-Azdi, who reported from 'Abdullah bin 'Amr that he said, \"Allah did not reveal any Ayah against the people of the Hellfire worse than this Ayah,\nفَذُوقُوا فَلَن نَّزِيدَكُمْ إِلَّا عَذَابًا\n(So taste you. No increase shall We give you, except in torment.)\"\nThen he said, \"They will continue increasing in torment forever.\"","href":"/tafsir/78?verse=17","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:78:31","title":"Ibn Kathir · 78:31–40","text":"Verily, for those who have Taqwa, there will be a success (31)Hada'iq and vineyards (32)And Kawa'ib Atrab (33)And a cup Dihaq (34)No Laghw shall they hear therein, nor lying (35)Rewarded from your Lord with a sufficient gift (36)\nThe Great Success will be for Those Who have Taqwa\nAllah informs about the happy people and what He has prepared for them of esteem, and eternal pleasure. Allah says,\nإِنَّ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ مَفَازًا\n(Verily, for those who have Taqwa, there will be a success;)\nIbn 'Abbas and Ad-Dahhak both said, \"A place of enjoyable recreation.\" Mujahid and Qatadah both said, \"They are successful and thus, they are saved from the Hellfire.\" The most obvious meaning here is the statement of Ibn 'Abbas, because Allah says after this,\nحَدَائِقَ\n(Hada'iq) And Hada'iq are gardens of palm trees and other things.\nوَأَعْنَابًا - وَكَوَاعِبَ أَتْرَابًا\n(And vineyards, and Kawa'ib Atrab,) meaning, wide-eyed maidens with fully developed breasts. Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid and others have said,\nكَوَاعِبَ\n(Kawa'ib) \"This means round breasts. They meant by this that the breasts of these girls will be fully rounded and not sagging, because they will be virgins, equal in age. This means that they will only have one age.\" The explanation of this has already been mentioned in Surat Al-Waqi'ah. Concerning Allah's statement,\nوَكَأْسًا دِهَاقًا\n(And a cup Dihaq.) Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Continuously filled.\" 'Ikrimah said, \"Pure.\" Mujahid, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, and Ibn Zayd all said,\nدِهَاقًا\n(Dihaq) \"This means completely filled.\" Then Allah says,\nلَّا يَسْمَعُونَ فِيهَا لَغْوًا وَلَا كِذَّابًا\n(No Laghw shall they hear therein, nor lying;) This is similar to Allah's statement,\nلَّا لَغْوٌ فِيهَا وَلَا تَأْثِيمٌ\n(Free from any Laghw, and free from sin.)(52:23)\nmeaning, there will not be any vain, worthless speech therein, nor any sinful lying. Rather, it will be the abode of peace, and everything that is in it will be free of any shortcomings. Allah then says,\nجَزَاءً مِّن رَّبِّكَ عَطَاءً حِسَابًا\n(Rewarded from your Lord with a sufficient gift.)\nmeaning, 'this that We have mentioned to you is what Allah will reward them with, and they will be given it by His favor and from Him. It will be a kindness, mercy, gift, and recompense from Him. It will be sufficient, suitable, comprehensive and abundant.' The Arabs say, \"He gave me and he sufficed me.\" This means that he sufficiently provided for me.\" From this comes the saying, \"Allah is sufficient for me.\"\nرَّبِّ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا الرَّحْمَٰنِ ۖ لَا يَمْلِكُونَ مِنْهُ خِطَابًا - يَوْمَ يَقُومُ الرُّوحُ وَالْمَلَائِكَةُ صَفًّا ۖ لَّا يَتَكَلَّمُونَ إِلَّا مَنْ أَذِنَ لَهُ الرَّحْمَٰنُ وَقَالَ صَوَابًا - ذَٰلِكَ الْيَوْمُ الْحَقُّ ۖ فَمَن شَاءَ اتَّخَذَ إِلَىٰ رَبِّهِ مَآبًا - إِنَّا أَنذَرْنَاكُمْ عَذَابًا قَرِيبًا يَوْمَ يَنظُرُ الْمَرْءُ مَا قَدَّمَتْ يَدَاهُ وَيَقُولُ الْكَافِرُ يَا لَيْتَنِي كُنتُ تُرَابًا\n(37. The Lord of the heavens and the earth, and whatsoever is in between them, the Most Gracious, with Whom they cannot dare to speak.)(38. The Day that Ar-Ruh and the angels will stand forth in rows, they will not speak except him whom Ar-Rahman allows, and he will speak what is right.)(39. That is the True Day. So, whosoever wills, let him seek a place with His Lord!)(40. Verily, We have warned you of a near torment – the Day when man will see that which his hands have sent forth, and the disbeliever will say: \"Woe to me! Would that I were dust!\")\nNo one will dare to speak before Allah – not even the Angels - without first receiving Permission\nAllah informs of His magnificence and His majesty, and that He is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, and whatever is in them and between them. He explains that He is the Most Gracious, Whose mercy covers all things. Then He says,\nلَا يَمْلِكُونَ مِنْهُ خِطَابًا\n(With Whom they cannot dare to speak.) meaning, no one is able to begin addressing Him except by His permission. This is as Allah says,\nمَن ذَا الَّذِي يَشْفَعُ عِندَهُ إِلَّا بِإِذْنِهِ\n(Who is he that can intercede with Him except with His permission?)(2:255)\nIt is also similar to His statement,\nيَوْمَ يَأْتِ لَا تَكَلَّمُ نَفْسٌ إِلَّا بِإِذْنِهِ\n(On the Day when it comes, no person shall speak except by His leave.)(11:105)\nيَوْمَ يَقُومُ الرُّوحُ وَالْمَلَائِكَةُ صَفًّا ۖ لَّا يَتَكَلَّمُونَ\n(The Day that Ar-Ruh and the angels will stand forth in rows, they will not speak)(78:38)\nThe word Ruh here is referring to the angel Jibril. This has been said by Ash-Sha'bi, Sa'id bin Jubayr and Ad-Dahhak. This is as Allah says,\nنَزَلَ بِهِ الرُّوحُ الْأَمِينُ - عَلَىٰ قَلْبِكَ لِتَكُونَ مِنَ الْمُنذِرِينَ\n(Which the trustworthy Ruh has brought down. Upon your heart that you may be of the warners.)(26:193-194)\nMuqatil bin Hayyan said, \"The Ruh is the noblest of the angels, the closest of them to the Lord, and the one who delivers the revelation.\"\nAllah said;\nإِلَّا مَنْ أَذِنَ لَهُ الرَّحْمَٰنُ\n(except him whom Ar-Rahman allows,) This is similar to Allah's statement,\nيَوْمَ يَأْتِ لَا تَكَلَّمُ نَفْسٌ إِلَّا بِإِذْنِهِ\n(On the Day when it comes, no person shall speak except by His leave.)(11:105)\nThis is similar to what has been confirmed in the Sahih, that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nوَلَا يَتَكَلَّمُ يَوْمَئِذٍ إِلَّا الرُّسُل\n(And none will speak on that Day except the Messengers.)\"\nAllah said,\nوَقَالَ صَوَابًا\n(and he will speak what is right.) meaning, the truth. And from the truth is the fact that there is no god worthy of worship except Allah. This is as Abu Salih and 'Ikrimah both said. In reference to Allah's statement,\nذَٰلِكَ الْيَوْمُ الْحَقُّ\n(That is the True Day.)\nmeaning, it will come to pass and there is no avoiding it.\nفَمَن شَاءَ اتَّخَذَ إِلَىٰ رَبِّهِ مَآبًا\n(So, whosoever wills, let him seek a place with His Lord!)\nmeaning, a place of return, a path that leads to Him, and a way that he may pass by to get to Him.\nThe Day of Judgement is Near\nAllah said,\nإِنَّا أَنذَرْنَاكُمْ عَذَابًا قَرِيبًا\n(Verily, We have warned you of a near torment)\nmeaning, the Day of Judgement. It is mentioned here to emphasize the fact that its occurrence has become close, because everything that is coming will certainly come to pass.\nيَوْمَ يَنظُرُ الْمَرْءُ مَا قَدَّمَتْ يَدَاهُ\n(the Day when man will see that which his hands have sent forth,)\nmeaning, all of his deeds will be presented to him – the good and bad, and the old and new. This is similar to Allah's statement,\nوَوَجَدُوا مَا عَمِلُوا حَاضِرًا\n(And they will find all that they did, placed before them.)(18:49)\nIt is also similar to His statement,\nيُنَبَّأُ الْإِنسَانُ يَوْمَئِذٍ بِمَا قَدَّمَ وَأَخَّرَ\n(On that Day man will be informed of what he sent forward, and what he left behind.)(75:13)\nThen Allah says,\nوَيَقُولُ الْكَافِرُ يَا لَيْتَنِي كُنتُ تُرَابًا\n(and the disbeliever will say: \"Woe to me! Would that I were dust!\")\nmeaning, the disbeliever on that Day will wish that he had only been dust in the worldly life. He will wish that he had not been created and that he had never come into existence. This will be when he sees the torment of Allah and he looks at his wicked deeds that will be written down against him by the noble righteous scribes among angels. It has been said that he will only wish for that when Allah passes judgement between all of the animals that were in the worldly life. He will rectify matters between them with His just wisdom that does not wrong anyone. Even the hornless sheep will be allowed to avenge itself against the sheep with horns. Then, when the judgement between them is finished, He (Allah) will say to them (the animals), \"Be dust.\" So they will all become dust. Upon witnessing this the disbeliever will say,\nيَا لَيْتَنِي كُنتُ تُرَابًا\n(Would that I were dust!) meaning, 'I wish I was an animal so that I would be returned to dust.' Something of similar meaning to this has been reported in the well-known Hadith about the Sur. There are also narrations recorded from Abu Hurayrah, 'Abdullah bin 'Amr, and others concerning this.\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat An-Naba'. And all praise and thanks are due to Allah. He is the Giver of success and protection from error.","href":"/tafsir/78?verse=31","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:79:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 79:1–14","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nوَالنَّازِعَاتِ غَرْقًا - وَالنَّاشِطَاتِ نَشْطًا - وَالسَّابِحَاتِ سَبْحًا - فَالسَّابِقَاتِ سَبْقًا - فَالْمُدَبِّرَاتِ أَمْرًا - يَوْمَ تَرْجُفُ الرَّاجِفَةُ - تَتْبَعُهَا الرَّادِفَةُ - قُلُوبٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ وَاجِفَةٌ - أَبْصَارُهَا خَاشِعَةٌ - يَقُولُونَ أَإِنَّا لَمَرْدُودُونَ فِي الْحَافِرَةِ - أَإِذَا كُنَّا عِظَامًا نَّخِرَةً - قَالُوا تِلْكَ إِذًا كَرَّةٌ خَاسِرَةٌ - فَإِنَّمَا هِيَ زَجْرَةٌ وَاحِدَةٌ - فَإِذَا هُم بِالسَّاهِرَةِ\n(1. By those who pull out, drowning.)(2. By those who free briskly.)(3. And by the swimmers, swimming.)(4. And by the racers, racing.)(5. And by those who arrange affairs.)(6. On the Day the Rajifah shakes,)(7. Followed by the Radifah.)(8. Hearts that Day will tremble.)(9. Their vision humiliated.)(10. They say: \"Shall we indeed be brought back from Al-Hafirah?\")(11. \"Even after we are bones Nakhirah?\")(12. They say: \"It would in that case, be a return with loss!\")(13. But it will be only a single Zajrah.)(14. When behold, they are at As-Sahirah.)\nSwearing by Five Characteristics that the Day of Judgement will occur\nIbn Mas'ud, Ibn 'Abbas, Masruq, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Abu Salih, Abu Ad-Duha and As-Suddi all said,\nوَالنَّازِعَاتِ غَرْقًا\n(By those who pull out, drowning.) \"These are the angels who remove the souls from the Children of Adam.\"\nAmong them are those whose souls are removed by the angels with difficulty, as if he is being drowned during its removal. There are those people whose souls the angels remove with ease, as if they were unraveling him (i.e., his soul from him) due to their briskness. This is the meaning of Allah's statement,\nوَالنَّاشِطَاتِ نَشْطًا\n(By those who free briskly.) This has been mentioned by Ibn 'Abbas. In reference to Allah's statement,\nوَالسَّابِحَاتِ سَبْحًا\n(And by the swimmers, swimming.) Ibn Mas'ud said, \"They are the angels.\" Similar statements have been reported from 'Ali, Mujahid, Sa'id bin Jubayr, and Abu Salih. Concerning Allah's statement,\nفَالسَّابِقَاتِ سَبْقًا\n(And by the racers, racing.) It has been narrated from 'Ali, Masruq, Mujahid, Abu Salih, and Al-Hasan Al-Basri that this means the angels. Then Allah says,\nفَالْمُدَبِّرَاتِ أَمْرًا\n(And by those who arrange affairs.)\nAli, Mujahid, 'Ata', Abu Salih, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, and As-Suddi all said, \"They are the angels.\" Al-Hasan added, \"They control the affairs from the heaven to the earth, meaning by the command of their Lord, the Mighty and Majestic.\"\nThe Description of the Day of Judgement, the People, and what They will say\nThen Allah says,\nيَوْمَ تَرْجُفُ الرَّاجِفَةُ - تَتْبَعُهَا الرَّادِفَةُ\n(On the Day the Rajifah shakes, followed by the Radifah.)\nIbn 'Abbas said, \"These are the two blasts (of the Trumpet) – the first and the second.\" Mujahid, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak and others have made similar statements. It has been reported from Mujahid that he said, \"In reference to the first, it is the statement of Allah,\nيَوْمَ تَرْجُفُ الرَّاجِفَةُ\n(On the Day the Rajifah shakes,) This is similar to Allah's statement,\nيَوْمَ تَرْجُفُ الْأَرْضُ وَالْجِبَالُ\n(On the Day the earth and the mountains shake.)(73:14)\nThe second is Ar-Radifah, and it is like the Allah's statement,\nوَحُمِلَتِ الْأَرْضُ وَالْجِبَالُ فَدُكَّتَا دَكَّةً وَاحِدَةً\n(And the earth and mountains shall be removed from their places, and crushed with a single crushing.)(69:14)\"\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nقُلُوبٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ وَاجِفَةٌ\n(Hearts that Day will tremble.) Ibn 'Abbas said, \"This means afraid.\" Mujahid and Qatadah also said this.\nأَبْصَارُهَا خَاشِعَةٌ\n(Their vision humiliated.) meaning, the eyes of the people. It means that the eyes will be lowly and disgraced from what they will witness of terrors. Allah then says,\nيَقُولُونَ أَإِنَّا لَمَرْدُودُونَ فِي الْحَافِرَةِ\n(They say: \"Shall we indeed be brought back from Al-Hafirah?\")\nmeaning, the idolators of the Quraysh and whoever rejects the Hereafter as they did. They consider the occurrence of the resurrection after being placed in Al-Hafirah – which are the graves – as something farfetched. This has been said by Mujahid. They feel that this is something impossible after the destruction of their physical bodies and the disintegration of their bones and their decaying. Thus, Allah says,\nأَإِذَا كُنَّا عِظَامًا نَّخِرَةً\n(Even after we are bones Nakhirah?) It has also been recited:\n(نَاخِرَةً)\n(Nākhirah)\nIbn 'Abbas, Mujahid and Qatadah, all said, \"This means decayed.\" Ibn 'Abbas said, \"It is the bone when it has decayed and air enters into it.\" Concerning their saying,\nتِلْكَ إِذًا كَرَّةٌ خَاسِرَةٌ\n(It would in that case be a return with loss.)(79:12)\nMuhammad bin Ka'b said that the Quraysh said, \"If Allah brings us back to life after we die, then surely we will be losers.\" Allah then says,\nفَإِنَّمَا هِيَ زَجْرَةٌ وَاحِدَةٌ - فَإِذَا هُم بِالسَّاهِرَةِ\n(But it will be only a single Zajrah. When behold, they are at As-Sahirah.)\nmeaning, this is a matter that is from Allah that will not occur twice, nor will there be any opportunity to affirm it or verify it. The people will be standing and looking. This will be when Allah commands the angel Israfil to blow into the Sur, which will be the blowing of the resurrection. At that time the first people and the last people will all be standing before their Lord looking. This is as Allah says,\nيَوْمَ يَدْعُوكُمْ فَتَسْتَجِيبُونَ بِحَمْدِهِ وَتَظُنُّونَ إِن لَّبِثْتُمْ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا\n(On the Day when He will call you, and you will answer with His praise and obedience, and you will think that you have stayed but a little while!)(17:52)\nAllah has also said,\nوَمَا أَمْرُنَا إِلَّا وَاحِدَةٌ كَلَمْحٍ بِالْبَصَرِ\n(And our commandment is but one as the twinkling of an eye.)(54:50)\nAllah also says,\nوَمَا أَمْرُ السَّاعَةِ إِلَّا كَلَمْحِ الْبَصَرِ أَوْ هُوَ أَقْرَبُ\n(And the matter of the Hour is not but as a twinkling of the eye, or even nearer.)(16:77)\nAllah then says,\nفَإِذَا هُم بِالسَّاهِرَةِ\n(When behold, they are at As-Sahirah.) Ibn 'Abbas said, \"As-Sahirah means the entire earth.\" Sa'id bin Jubayr, Qatadah and Abu Salih have all said this as well. 'Ikrimah, Al-Hasan, Ad-Dahhak, and Ibn Zayd have all said, \"As-Sahirah means the face of the earth.\" Mujahid said, \"They will be at its (the earth's) lowest part, and they will be brought out to highest part.\" Then he said, \"As-Sahirah is a level place.\"\nAr-Rabi' bin Anas said,\nفَإِذَا هُم بِالسَّاهِرَةِ\n(When behold, they are at As-Sahirah.)\n\"Allah says,\nيَوْمَ تُبَدَّلُ الْأَرْضُ غَيْرَ الْأَرْضِ وَالسَّمَاوَاتُ ۖ وَبَرَزُوا لِلَّهِ الْوَاحِدِ الْقَهَّارِ\n(On the Day when the earth will be changed to another earth and so will be the heavens, and they will appear before Allah, the One, the Irresistible.)(14:48)\nand He says,\nوَيَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْجِبَالِ فَقُلْ يَنسِفُهَا رَبِّي نَسْفًا - فَيَذَرُهَا قَاعًا صَفْصَفًا - لَّا تَرَىٰ فِيهَا عِوَجًا وَلَا أَمْتًا\n(And they ask you concerning the mountains, say: \"My Lord will blast them and scatter them as particles of dust. Then He shall leave them as a level smooth plain. You will see therein nothing crooked or curved.\")(20:105-107)\nand Allah says,\nوَيَوْمَ نُسَيِّرُ الْجِبَالَ وَتَرَى الْأَرْضَ بَارِزَةً\n(And the Day We shall cause the mountains to pass away, and you will see the earth as a leveled plain.)(18:47)\nand the earth will be brought forth which will have mountains upon it, and it will not be considered from this earth (of this life). It will be an earth that no sin will be performed on it, nor will any blood be shed upon it.\"","href":"/tafsir/79?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:79:15","title":"Ibn Kathir · 79:15–33","text":"Has there come to you the story of Musa (15)When his Lord called him in the holy valley of Tuwa (16)Go to Fir'awn; verily, he has transgressed all bounds (17)And say to him: \"Would you purify yourself? (18)\"And that I guide you to your Lord, so you should fear Him? (19)Then he showed him the great sign (20)But he denied and disobeyed (21)Then he turned back, striving (22)So he gathered and called out (23)Saying: \"I am your lord, most high. (24)So Allah seized him with punishing example for the Hereafter and the first (life)(25)In this is a lesson for whoever fears (26)\nMentioning the Story of Musa and that it is a Lesson for Those Who fear Allah\nAllah informs His Messenger Muhammad ﷺ about His Messenger Musa. He mentions that he sent Musa to Fir'awn and He aided him with miracles. Yet, even after this, Fir'awn continued in his disbelief and transgression until Allah seized him with a mighty and powerful punishment. Thus is the punishment of whoever opposes you (Muhammad ﷺ) and rejects that which you have been sent with. This is why Allah says at the end of the story,\nإِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَعِبْرَةً لِّمَن يَخْشَىٰ\n(In this is a Lesson for whoever fears.)\nAllah begins by saying,\nهَلْ أَتَاكَ حَدِيثُ مُوسَىٰ\n(Has there come to you the story of Musa?)\nmeaning, have you heard of his story?\nإِذْ نَادَاهُ رَبُّهُ\n(When his Lord called him) meaning, He called out speaking to him.\nبِالْوَادِ الْمُقَدَّسِ\n(in the holy valley) meaning purified\nطُوًى\n(Tuwa) According to what is correct, it is the name of a valley, as preceded in Surah Ta Ha. So, He said to him:\nاذْهَبْ إِلَىٰ فِرْعَوْنَ إِنَّهُ طَغَىٰ\n(Go to Fir'awn; verily, he has transgressed all bounds.)\nmeaning, he has become haughty, rebellious and arrogant.\nفَقُلْ هَل لَّكَ إِلَىٰ أَن تَزَكَّىٰ\n(And say to him: \"Would you purify yourself'?')\nmeaning, say to him, \"Will you respond to the path and way that will purify you?\" This means, 'will you submit (accept Islam) and be obedient?'\nوَأَهْدِيَكَ إِلَىٰ رَبِّكَ\n(And that I guide to your Lord,) meaning, 'I will guide you to the worship of your Lord.'\nفَتَخْشَىٰ\n(so that you fear) meaning, 'so that your heart will become humble, obedient, and submissive to Him after it was hard, evil, and far away from goodness.'\nفَأَرَاهُ الْآيَةَ الْكُبْرَىٰ\n(Then he showed him the great sign.) This means that Musa showed him – along with this truthful call – a strong evidence and a clear proof of the truthfulness of what he had come up with from Allah.\nفَكَذَّبَ وَعَصَىٰ\n(But he denied and disobeyed.) meaning, he (Fir'awn) rejected the truth and opposed what Musa commanded him with of obedience. So what happened with him was that his heart disbelieved, and Musa (i.e., his call) could not internally or externally affect it. Along with this, his knowledge that what Musa had come to him with was the truth, did not necessitate his being a believer in it. This is because recognition is the knowledge of the heart, and faith is its action. And it (faith) is to comply with the truth and submit to it.\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nثُمَّ أَدْبَرَ يَسْعَىٰ\n(Then he turned back, striving.) meaning, in responding to the truth with falsehood. This was by his gathering the group of magicians in order to confront that which Musa had come up with of spectacular miracles.\nفَحَشَرَ فَنَادَىٰ\n(So he gathered (his people) and called out) meaning, among his people.\nفَقَالَ أَنَا رَبُّكُمُ الْأَعْلَىٰ\n(Saying; I am your lord, most high.\")\nIbn 'Abbas and Mujahid both said, \"This is the word which Fir'awn said after he said,\nمَا عَلِمْتُ لَكُم مِّنْ إِلَٰهٍ غَيْرِي\n('I have not known of any other god for you all other than me)(28:38) for the past forty years.'\" Allah then says,\nفَأَخَذَهُ اللَّهُ نَكَالَ الْآخِرَةِ وَالْأُولَىٰ\n(So Allah seized him with a punishing example for the Hereafter and the first (life).\nmeaning, Allah avenged Himself against him with a severe vengeance, and He made an example and admonition of him for those rebellious people in the world who are like him.\nوَيَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ ۚ بِئْسَ الرِّفْدُ الْمَرْفُودُ\n(And on the Day of Resurrection, evil indeed is the gift gifted [i.e., the curse (in this world) pursued by another curse (in this world) pursued by another curse (in the Hereafter)].)(11:99)\nThis is as Allah says,\nوَجَعَلْنَاهُمْ أَئِمَّةً يَدْعُونَ إِلَى النَّارِ ۖ وَيَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ لَا يُنصَرُونَ\n(And We made them leaders inviting to the Fire: and on the Day of Resurrection, they will not be helped.)(28:41)\nAllah said;\nإِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَعِبْرَةً لِّمَن يَخْشَىٰ\n(In this is a lesson for whoever fears.)\nأَأَنتُمْ أَشَدُّ خَلْقًا أَمِ السَّمَاءُ ۚ بَنَاهَا - رَفَعَ سَمْكَهَا فَسَوَّاهَا - وَأَغْطَشَ لَيْلَهَا وَأَخْرَجَ ضُحَاهَا - وَالْأَرْضَ بَعْدَ ذَٰلِكَ دَحَاهَا - أَخْرَجَ مِنْهَا مَاءَهَا وَمَرْعَاهَا - وَالْجِبَالَ أَرْسَاهَا - مَتَاعًا لَّكُمْ وَلِأَنْعَامِكُمْ\n(27. Are you more difficult to create or is the heaven that He constructed?)(28. He raised its height, and has perfected it.)(29. Its night He covers and He brings out its forenoon.)(30. And after that He spread the earth,)(31. And brought forth therefrom its water and its pasture.)(32. And the mountains He has fixed firmly,)(33. As provision and benefit for you and your cattle.)\nCreating the Heavens and the Earth is more difficult than repeating Creation\nIn refutation of the claim rejecting resurrection due to the renewal of creation after its original state, Allah says;\nأَأَنتُمْ\n(Are you) 'O people'\nأَشَدُّ خَلْقًا أَمِ السَّمَاءُ\n(more difficult to create or is the heaven…?)\nmeaning, 'rather the heaven is more difficult to create than you.' As Allah said;\nلَخَلْقُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ أَكْبَرُ مِنْ خَلْقِ النَّاسِ\n(the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind;)(40:57)\nAnd His saying;\nأَوَلَيْسَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ بِقَادِرٍ عَلَىٰ أَن يَخْلُقَ مِثْلَهُم ۚ بَلَىٰ وَهُوَ الْخَلَّاقُ الْعَلِيمُ\n(Is not the One Who created the heavens and the earth, capable of creating the similar to them. Yes, indeed! He is the Supreme Creator, the All-Knowing.)(36:81)\nThen Allah says,\nبَنَاهَا\n(He constructed) He explains this by His statement,\nرَفَعَ سَمْكَهَا فَسَوَّاهَا\n(He raised its height, and has perfected it.)\nmeaning, He made it a lofty structure, vast in its space, with equal sides, and adorned with stars at night and in the darkness. Then Allah says,\nوَأَغْطَشَ لَيْلَهَا وَأَخْرَجَ ضُحَاهَا\n(Its night He covers and He brings out its forenoon.)\nmeaning, He made its night dark and extremely black, and its day bright, luminous, shining and clear. Ibn 'Abbas said, \"He did Aghtasha of its night means that He made it dark.\" Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Sa'id bin Jubayr and a large group have said this as well. In reference to Allah's statement,\nوَأَخْرَجَ ضُحَاهَا\n(And He brings out its forenoon.) meaning, He illuminated its day. Then Allah says,\nوَالْأَرْضَ بَعْدَ ذَٰلِكَ دَحَاهَا\n(And after that He spread the earth,) He explains this statement by the statement that follows it,\nأَخْرَجَ مِنْهَا مَاءَهَا وَمَرْعَاهَا\n(And brought forth therefrom its water and its pasture.)\nIt already has been mentioned previously in Surat Ha Mim As-Sajdah that the earth was created before the heaven was created, but it was only spread out after the creation of the heaven. This means that He brought out what was in it with a forceful action. This is the meaning of what was said by Ibn 'Abbas and others, and it was the explanation preferred by Ibn Jarir.\nIn reference to the statement of Allah,\nوَالْجِبَالَ أَرْسَاهَا\n(And the mountains He has fixed firmly,) meaning, He settled them, made them firm, and established them in their places. And He is the Most Wise, the All-Knowing. He is Most Kind to His creation, Most Merciful.\nAllah then says,\nمَتَاعًا لَّكُمْ وَلِأَنْعَامِكُمْ\n(As provision and benefit for you and your cattle.)\nmeaning, He spread out the earth, caused its springs to gush forth, brought forth its hidden benefits, caused its rivers to flow, and caused its vegetation, trees, and fruits to grow. He also made its mountains firm so that it (the earth) would be calmly settled with its dwellers, and He stabilized its dwelling places. All of this is a means of beneficial enjoyment for His creatures (mankind) providing them of what cattle they need, which they eat and ride upon. He has granted them these beneficial things for the period that they need them, in this worldly abode, until the end of time and the expiration of this life.","href":"/tafsir/79?verse=15","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:79:34","title":"Ibn Kathir · 79:34–46","text":"But when there comes the Greatest Catastroph (34)The Day when man shall remember what he strove for (35)And Hell shall be made apparent for whoever sees (36)Then for him who transgresse (37)And preferred the life of this world (38)Verily, his abode will be the Hell (39)But as for him who feared standing before his Lord, and forbade himself from desire (40)Verily, Paradise will be his abode (41)They ask you about the Hour when will be its appointed tim (42)What do you have to mention of it (43)To your Lord it is limited (44)You are only a warner for those who fear it (45)The Day they see it (it will be) as if they had not tarried (in this world) except an ('Ashiyyah) afternoon or its (Duha) morning (46)\nThe Day of Judgement, its Pleasures and Hell, and that its Time is not known\nAllah says,\nفَإِذَا جَاءَتِ الطَّامَّةُ الْكُبْرَىٰ\n(But when there comes the Great Catastrophe)\nThis refers to the Day of Judgement. This has been said by Ibn 'Abbas. It has been called this because it will overcome every matter. It will be frightful and horrifying. As Allah says,\nوَالسَّاعَةُ أَدْهَىٰ وَأَمَرُّ\n(And the Hour will be more grievous and more bitter.)(54:46)\nThen Allah says,\nيَوْمَ يَتَذَكَّرُ الْإِنسَانُ مَا سَعَىٰ\n(The Day when man shall remember what he strove for.)\nmeaning, at that time the Son of Adam will reflect upon all of his deeds, both the good and the evil. This is as Allah says,\nيَوْمَئِذٍ يَتَذَكَّرُ الْإِنسَانُ وَأَنَّىٰ لَهُ الذِّكْرَىٰ\n(On the Day will man remember, but how will that remembrance avail him?)(89:23)\nThen Allah says,\nوَبُرِّزَتِ الْجَحِيمُ لِمَن يَرَىٰ\n(And Hell shall be made apparent for whoever sees.)\nmeaning, it will become apparent for the onlookers, so the people will see it with their own eyes.\nفَأَمَّا مَن طَغَىٰ\n(Then for him who transgressed) meaning, who rebels and behaves arrogantly.\nوَآثَرَ الْحَيَاةَ الدُّنْيَا\n(And preferred the life of this world,) meaning, he gives it precedence over the matters of his religion and his Hereafter.\nفَإِنَّ الْجَحِيمَ هِيَ الْمَأْوَىٰ\n(Verily his abode will be the Hell;) meaning, his final destination will be Hell, his food will be from the tree of Zaqqum, and his drink will be from Hamim.\nوَأَمَّا مَنْ خَافَ مَقَامَ رَبِّهِ وَنَهَى النَّفْسَ عَنِ الْهَوَىٰ\n(But as for him who feared standing before his Lord and forbade himself from desire.)\nmeaning, he fears the standing before Allah, he fears Allah's judgement of him, he prevents his soul from following its desires, and he compels it to obey its Master.\nفَإِنَّ الْجَنَّةَ هِيَ الْمَأْوَىٰ\n(Verily Paradise will be his abode.) meaning, his final abode, his destination, and his place of return will be the spacious Paradise. Then Allah says,\nيَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ السَّاعَةِ أَيَّانَ مُرْسَاهَا - فِيمَ أَنتَ مِن ذِكْرَاهَا - إِلَىٰ رَبِّكَ مُنتَهَاهَا\n(They ask you about the Hour – when will be its appointed time? What do you have to mention of it. To your Lord it is limited.)\nmeaning, its knowledge is not with you, nor with any creature. Rather the knowledge of it is with Allah. He is the One Who knows the exact time of its occurrence.\nثَقُلَتْ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ ۚ لَا تَأْتِيكُمْ إِلَّا بَغْتَةً ۗ يَسْأَلُونَكَ كَأَنَّكَ حَفِيٌّ عَنْهَا ۖ قُلْ إِنَّمَا عِلْمُهَا عِندَ اللَّهِ\n(Heavy is its burden through the heavens and the earth. It shall not come upon you except all of a sudden. They ask you as if you have a good knowledge of it. Say: \"The knowledge thereof is with Allah.\")(7:187)\nAllah says here,\nإِلَىٰ رَبِّكَ مُنتَهَاهَا\n(To your Lord it is limited.) Thus, when Jibril asked the Messenger of Allah ﷺ about the time of the last Hour he said,\nمَا الْمَسْؤُولُ عَنْهَا بِأَعْلَمَ مِنَ السَّائِلِ\n(The one questioned about it knows no more than the questioner.)\nAllah said,\nإِنَّمَا أَنتَ مُنذِرُ مَن يَخْشَاهَا\n(You are only a warner for those who fear it,) meaning, 'I sent you to warn mankind and caution them to beware of the torment and punishment of Allah. So whoever fears Allah, fears standing before Him, and His threat, then he will follow you, and thus be successful and victorious. However, whoever denies you and opposes you, then he will only suffer loss and failure.' Allah then says,\nكَأَنَّهُمْ يَوْمَ يَرَوْنَهَا لَمْ يَلْبَثُوا إِلَّا عَشِيَّةً أَوْ ضُحَاهَا\n(The Day they see it (it will be) as if they had not tarried (in this world) except an ('Ashiyyah) afternoon or its (Duha) morning.)\nmeaning, when they stand up from their graves to go to the place of Gathering, they will feel that the period of the worldy life was short, it will seem to them that it was only the afternoon of one day. Juwaybir reported from Ad-Dahhak from Ibn 'Abbas:\nكَأَنَّهُمْ يَوْمَ يَرَوْنَهَا لَمْ يَلْبَثُوا إِلَّا عَشِيَّةً أَوْ ضُحَاهَا\n(The Day they see it (it will be) as if they had not tarried (in this world) except an ('Ashiyyah) afternoon or its (Duha) morning.)\n\"As for 'Ashiyyah, it is the time between noon until the setting of the sun.\nأَوْ ضُحَاهَا\n(Or its (Duha) morning) what is between sunrise and midday (noon).\" Qatadah said, \"This refers to the time period of the worldly life in the eyes of the people when they see the Hereafter.\"\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat An-Nazi'at. And to Allah belongs all praise and thanks.","href":"/tafsir/79?verse=34","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:80:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 80:1–16","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nعَبَسَ وَتَوَلَّىٰ - أَن جَاءَهُ الْأَعْمَىٰ - وَمَا يُدْرِيكَ لَعَلَّهُ يَزَّكَّىٰ - أَوْ يَذَّكَّرُ فَتَنفَعَهُ الذِّكْرَىٰ - أَمَّا مَنِ اسْتَغْنَىٰ - فَأَنتَ لَهُ تَصَدَّىٰ - وَمَا عَلَيْكَ أَلَّا يَزَّكَّىٰ - وَأَمَّا مَن جَاءَكَ يَسْعَىٰ - وَهُوَ يَخْشَىٰ - فَأَنتَ عَنْهُ تَلَهَّىٰ - كَلَّا إِنَّهَا تَذْكِرَةٌ - فَمَن شَاءَ ذَكَرَهُ - فِي صُحُفٍ مُّكَرَّمَةٍ - مَّرْفُوعَةٍ مُّطَهَّرَةٍ - بِأَيْدِي سَفَرَةٍ - كِرَامٍ بَرَرَةٍ\n(1. He frowned and turned away.)(2. Because there came to him the blind man.)(3. And how can you know that he might become pure?)(4. Or he might receive admonition, and the admonition might profit him?)(5. As for him who thinks himself self-sufficient,)(6. To him you attend;)(7. What does it matter to you if he will not become pure?)(8. But as for him who came to you running,)(9. And is afraid.)(10. Of him you are neglectful and divert your attention to another.)(11. Nay; indeed it is an admonition.)(12. So, whoever wills, let him pay attention to Him (it).)(13. In Records held in honor,)(14. Exalted, purified.)(15. In the hands of ambassadors (Safarah),)(16. Honorable and obedient.)\nThe Prophet (ﷺ) being reprimanded because He frowned at a Weak Man\nMore than one of the scholars of Tafsir mentioned that one day the Messenger of Allah ﷺ was addressing one of the great leaders of the Quraysh while hoping that he would accept Islam. While he was speaking in direct conversation with him, Ibn Umm Maktum came to him, and he was of those who had accepted Islam in its earliest days. He (Ibn Umm Maktum) then began asking the Messenger of Allah ﷺ about something, urgently beseeching him. The Prophet ﷺ hoped that the man would be guided, so he asked Ibn Umm Maktum to wait for a moment so he could complete his conversation. He frowned in the face of Ibn Umm Maktum and turned away from him in order to face the other man. Thus, Allah revealed,\nعَبَسَ وَتَوَلَّىٰ - أَن جَاءَهُ الْأَعْمَىٰ - وَمَا يُدْرِيكَ لَعَلَّهُ يَزَّكَّى\n(He frowned and turned away. Because there came to him the blind man. And how can you know that he might become pure?)\nmeaning, he may attain purification and cleanliness in his soul.\nأَوْ يَذَّكَّرُ فَتَنفَعَهُ الذِّكْرَىٰ\n(Or he might receive admonition, and the admonition might profit him?)\nmeaning, he may receive admonition and abstain from the forbidden.\nأَمَّا مَنِ اسْتَغْنَىٰ - فَأَنتَ لَهُ تَصَدَّىٰ\n(As for him who thinks himself self-sufficient. To him you attend;)\nmeaning, 'you face the rich person so that perhaps he may be guided.'\nوَمَا عَلَيْكَ أَلَّا يَزَّكَّىٰ\n(What does it matter to you if he will not become pure?)\nmeaning, 'you are not responsible for him if he does not attain purification.'\nوَأَمَّا مَن جَاءَكَ يَسْعَىٰ - وَهُوَ يَخْشَىٰ\n(But as for him who came to you running. And is afraid.)\nmeaning, 'he is seeking you and he comes to you so that he may be guided by what you say to him.'\nفَأَنتَ عَنْهُ تَلَهَّىٰ\n(Of him you are neglectful and divert your attention to another.)\nmeaning, 'you are too busy.' Here Allah commands His Messenger ﷺ to not single anyone out with the warning. Rather, he should equal warn the noble and the weak, the poor and the rich, the master and the slave, the men and the women, the young and the old. Then Allah will guide whomever He chooses to a path that is straight. He has the profound wisdom and the decisive proof.\nAbu Ya'la and Ibn Jarir both recorded from 'A'ishah that she said about,\nعَبَسَ وَتَوَلَّىٰ\n(He frowned and turned away.) \"This was revealed about Ibn Umm Maktum, the blind man. He came to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and began saying, 'Guide me.' At the time the Messenger of Allah ﷺ had a man with him who was one of the great leaders of the idolators. So the Prophet ﷺ turned away from him (Ibn Umm Maktum) and faced the other man and said, \"Do you think that there is a problem with what I am saying?\" The man said, \"No!\" So it was about this that\nعَبَسَ وَتَوَلَّىٰ\n(He frowned and turned away.) was revealed.\"\nAt-Tirmirdhi recorded this Hadith but he did not mention that it was narrated by 'A'ishah. I say it is reported like this in Al-Muwatta' as well.\nThe Characteristics of the Qur'an\nAllah says,\nكَلَّا إِنَّهَا تَذْكِرَةٌ\n(Nay; indeed it is an admonition.) meaning, this Surah, or this advice in conveying knowledge equally among people, whether they are of noble or low class. Qatadah and As-Suddi both said,\nكَلَّا إِنَّهَا تَذْكِرَةٌ\n(Nay; indeed it is an admonition.) \"This means the Qur'an.\"\nفَمَن شَاءَ ذَكَرَهُ\n(So, whoever wills, let him pay attention to Him (it).)\nmeaning, so whoever wills, he remembers Allah in all of his affairs. The pronoun could also be understood to be referring to the revelation since the conversation is alluding to it.\nAllah said:\nفِي صُحُفٍ مُّكَرَّمَةٍ - مَّرْفُوعَةٍ مُّطَهَّرَةٍ\n(In Records held in honor, exalted, purified.)\nmeaning, this Surah or this admonition. Both meanings are connected to each other. Actually, all of the Qur'an is in honored pages, meaning respected and revered.\nمَّرْفُوعَةٍ\n(exalted) meaning, elevated in status.\nمُّطَهَّرَةٍ\n(purified) meaning, from impurity, additions and deficiency.\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nبِأَيْدِي سَفَرَةٍ\n(In the hands of ambassadors (Safarah),)\nIbn 'Abbas, Mujahid, Ad-Dahhak, and Ibn Zayd, all said, \"These are the angels.\"\nAl-Bukhari said, \"Safarah (ambassadors) refers to the angels. They travel around rectifying matters between themselves. The angels when they descend with the revelation of Allah, bringing it like the ambassador who rectifies matters between people.\"\nAllah said,\nكِرَامٍ بَرَرَةٍ\n(Honorable and obedient.) meaning, they are noble, handsome, and honorable in their creation. Their character and their deeds are righteous, pure and perfect. Here it should be noted that it is necessary for one who carries the Qur'an (i.e., the angel) to be following righteousness and guidance.\nImam Ahmad recorded from 'A'ishah that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nالَّذِي يَقْرَأُ الْقُرْآنَ وَهُوَ مَاهِرٌ بِهِ، مَعَ السَّفَرَةِ الْكِرَامِ الْبَرَرَةِ، وَالَّذِي يَقْرَؤُهُ وَهُوَ عَلَيْهِ شَاقٌّ، لَهُ أَجْرَانِ\n(He who recites the Qur'an proficiently, will be with the noble, righteous, ambassador angels, and the one who recites it with difficulty will receive two rewards.)\nThis Hadith was reported by the group.","href":"/tafsir/80?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:80:17","title":"Ibn Kathir · 80:17–32","text":"Qutila mankind! How ungrateful he is (17)From what thing did He create him (18)From a Nutfah He created him and then set him in due proportion (19)Then He made the path easy for him (20)Then He causes him to die and puts him in his grave (21)Then when it is His will, He will resurrect him (22)Nay, but he has not done what He commanded him (23)Then let man look at his food (24)We pour forth water in abundance (25)And We split the earth in clefts (26)And We cause therein Habb to grow (27)And grapes and Qadb (28)And olives and date palms (29)And Ghulb Hada'iq (30)And fruits (Fakihah) and herbage (Abb)(31)A provision and benefit for you and your cattle (32)\nThe Refutation against Whoever denies Life after Death\nAllah rebukes those who deny the Resurrection and the Final Gathering.\nقُتِلَ الْإِنسَانُ مَا أَكْفَرَهُ\n(Qutila mankind!) Ad-Dahhak reported from Ibn 'Abbas that he said,\nقُتِلَ الْإِنسَانُ\n(Qutila mankind!) \"May man be cursed.\" Abu Malik also made a similar statement. He said, \"This refers to the rejecting type of man, due to his abundant denial without any supporting argument. Rather he denies simply because he thinks it is farfetched and because he lacks knowledge of it.\" Ibn Jurayj said,\nمَا أَكْفَرَهُ\n(How ungrateful he is!) \"This means none is worse in disbelief than he is.\" Qatadah said,\nمَا أَكْفَرَهُ\n(How ungrateful he is!) \"This means none is more cursed than he is.\"\nThen Allah explains how He created him from something despised and that He is able to bring him back to life just as He created him initially. Allah says,\nمِنْ أَيِّ شَيْءٍ خَلَقَهُ - مِن نُّطْفَةٍ خَلَقَهُ فَقَدَّرَهُ\n(From what thing did He create him? From a Nutfah He created him, and then set him in due proportion.)\nmeaning, He decreed his life span, his sustenance, his deeds, and whether he would be miserable or happy.\nثُمَّ السَّبِيلَ يَسَّرَهُ\n(Then He made the path easy for him.) Al-'Awfi reported from Ibn 'Abbas, \"Then He made his coming out of his mother's belly easy for him.\" This was also said by 'Ikrimah, Ad-Dahhak, Abu Salih, Qatadah, As-Suddi, and it was the explanation preferred by Ibn Jarir. Mujahid said, \"This is similar to Allah's statement,\nإِنَّا هَدَيْنَاهُ السَّبِيلَ إِمَّا شَاكِرًا وَإِمَّا كَفُورًا\n(Verily, We guided him on the path, he is either grateful or ungrateful.)(76:3)\nmeaning, We explained it to him, clarified it, and made it easy for him to act upon.\" Al-Hasan and Ibn Zayd both said the same. This is the most correct view and Allah knows best. Concerning Allah's statement,\nثُمَّ أَمَاتَهُ فَأَقْبَرَهُ\n(Then He causes him to die and puts him in his grave.)\nAfter creating man, Allah causes him to die and makes him the inhabitant of a grave.\nAllah said;\nثُمَّ إِذَا شَاءَ أَنشَرَهُ\n(Then when it is His will, He will resurrect him.)\nmeaning, He resurrects him after his death and this is called Al-Ba'th (resurrection) and An-Nushur (resuscitation).\nوَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ أَنْ خَلَقَكُم مِّن تُرَابٍ ثُمَّ إِذَا أَنتُم بَشَرٌ تَنتَشِرُونَ\n(And among His signs is this that He created you from dust, and then behold, you are human beings scattered.)(30:20)\nوَانظُرْ إِلَى الْعِظَامِ كَيْفَ نُنشِزُهَا ثُمَّ نَكْسُوهَا لَحْمًا\n(And look at the bones, how We bring them together and clothe them with flesh.)(2:259)\nIn the Two Sahihs it is narrated by way of Al-A'mash from Abu Salih, from Abu Hurayrah that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nكُلُّ ابْنِ آدَمَ يَبْلَى إِلَّا عَجْبَ الذَّنَبِ، مِنْهُ خُلِقَ، وَفِيهِ يُرَكَّبُ\n(All of the Sons of Adam (men) will decay except for the bone of coccyx (tailbone). From it he (man) was created and by it he will be reconstructed.)\"\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nكَلَّا لَمَّا يَقْضِ مَا أَمَرَهُ\n(Nay, but has not done what He commanded him.)\nIbn Jarir said, \"Allah is saying, 'Nay, the matter is not as this disbelieving man says. He claims that he has fulfilled Allah's right upon him regarding himself and his wealth.\nلَمَّا يَقْضِ مَا أَمَرَهُ\n(But he has not done what He commanded him.) Allah is saying that man has not fulfilled for his Lord the obligations that were imposed upon him.\" What seems apparent to me of its actual meaning – and Allah knows best – is that the Ayah\nثُمَّ إِذَا شَاءَ أَنشَرَهُ\n(Then when it is His will, He will resurrect him.) means, He will resurrect him.\nكَلَّا لَمَّا يَقْضِ مَا أَمَرَهُ\n(Nay! But he has not done what He commanded him.)\nmeans, He has not done it (resurrected them) as of yet, until the time period has expired and the extent of the earthly life of humanity is complete, according to the lives of all whom Allah has written it to exist from the time they are brought into existence into the world. Verily, Allah has decreed the existence of mankind, and its duration, therefore, when that is finished with Allah, He resurrects the creatures and repeats their creation just as He initially created them.\nThe Growth of the Seed and Other Things is a Proof of Life after Death\nفَلْيَنظُرِ الْإِنسَانُ إِلَىٰ طَعَامِهِ\n(Then let man look at his food) This is a call to reflect upon Allah's favor. It also contains an evidence in the vegetation's coming to life from the lifeless earth, that the bodies can be brought to life after being decayed bones and scattered dust.\nأَنَّا صَبَبْنَا الْمَاءَ صَبًّا\n(We pour forth water in abundance.) meaning, 'We sent it down from the sky to the earth.'\nثُمَّ شَقَقْنَا الْأَرْضَ شَقًّا\n(And We split the earth in clefts.) meaning, 'We cause it (the water) to settle in it (the earth), and it enters into its boundaries, and mingles with the parts of the seeds that are left in the earth. From this the seeds grow, rise up and appear on the surface of the earth (in the form of vegetation).'\nفَأَنبَتْنَا فِيهَا حَبًّا - وَعِنَبًا وَقَضْبًا\n(And We cause therein Habb to grow. And grapes and Qadb,)\nAl-Habb refers to all types of seeds (or grains). Grapes are well-known. Al-Qadb are the moist (green) herbal plants that animals graze on. It is also called Al-Qat. Ibn 'Abbas, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak and As-Suddi, all said this. Al-Hasan Al-Basri said, \"Al-Qadb is fodder.\"\nوَزَيْتُونًا\n(And olives) It is well-known, and it is a food just as its juice is a food. It is eaten for breakfast and used as an oil.\nوَنَخْلًا\n(And date palms,) It (i.e., its fruit) is eaten as Balah, Busr, Rutab and Tamr, Niya' and Matbukh, all of which are varieties of dates that range from unripe, ripe and dried in their textures. Its juice is also extracted to make pulpy fruit drinks and vinegar.\nوَحَدَائِقَ غُلْبًا\n(And Ghulb Hada'iq,) meaning, gardens. Al-Hasan and Qatadah both said, \"Ghulb are gardens of date palms that are thick and handsome.\" Ibn 'Abbas and Mujahid both said, \"It means everything that is gathered and collected.\" Allah said,\nوَفَاكِهَةً وَأَبًّا\n(And fruits (Fakihah) and herbage (Abb).) Fakihah includes every type of fruit. Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Al-Fakihah is everything that is eaten ripe, and Al-Abb is what the earth grows that is eaten by grazing animals and not people.\" In one narration reported from him he said, \"It is the grass for the livestock animals.\"\nAbu 'Ubayd Al-Qasim bin Sallam reported from Ibrahim At-Taymi that he said, \"Abu Bakr As-Siddiq was asked about Allah's statement,\nوَفَاكِهَةً وَأَبًّا\n(And fruits (Fakihah) and herbage (Abb).) and he said, 'What sky would shade me and what earth would carry me if I said about the Book of Allah that which I did not have knowledge of.'\"\nIn reference to what Ibn Jarir recorded from Anas, that he said, \"Umar bin Al-Khattab recited\nعَبَسَ وَتَوَلَّىٰ\n(He frowned and turned away.) then when he reached this Ayah\nوَفَاكِهَةً وَأَبًّا\n(And fruits (Fakihah) and herbage (Abb).) he said, 'We already know what Al-Fakihah is, but what is Al-Abb'? Then he said, 'By your life, O Ibn Al-Khattab, this is something over burdensome (i.e., unnecessary to ask about).'\"\nThis report has an authentic chain of narration. More than one person has narrated it from Anas. The meaning of the narration is that 'Umar wanted to know how it looks, its type and its exact description, because he ('Umar) and everyone who reads this Ayah knows that it is one of the plants that grows from the earth. This is clear due to the Allah's saying,\nفَأَنبَتْنَا فِيهَا حَبًّا - وَعِنَبًا وَقَضْبًا - وَزَيْتُونًا وَنَخْلًا - وَحَدَائِقَ غُلْبًا - وَفَاكِهَةً وَأَبًّا\n(And We cause therein the Habb to grow. And grapes and Qadb, and olives and date palms. And Ghulb Hada'iq. And fruits (Fakihah) and herbage (Abb).) And then He says,\nمَّتَاعًا لَّكُمْ وَلِأَنْعَامِكُمْ\n(A provision and benefit for you and your cattle.) meaning, a means of livelihood for you all and your cattle in this life until the (coming of) the Day of Judgement.","href":"/tafsir/80?verse=17","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:80:33","title":"Ibn Kathir · 80:33–42","text":"Then when there comes As-Sakhkha (33)That Day shall a man flee from his brother (34)And from his mother and his father (35)And from his wife and his children (36)Every man that Day will have enough to make him careless of others (37)Some faces that Day will be bright (38)Laughing, rejoicing at good news (39)And other faces that Day will be dust-stained (40)Darkness will cover them (41)Such will be the disbelieving, the wicked evil doers (42)\n\n## The Day of Judgement and the fleeing of the People from Their Relatives during it\n\nIbn 'Abbas said, \"As-Sakhkhah is one of the names of the Day of Judgement that Allah has magnified and warned His servants of.\" Ibn Jarir said, \"Perhaps it is a name for the blowing into Trumpet.\" Al-Baghawi said, \"As-Sakhkhah means the thunderous shout of the Day of Judgement. It has been called this because it will deafen the ears. This means that it pierces the hearing to such an extent that it almost deafens the ears.\"\n\nيَوْمَ يَفِرُّ الْمَرْءُ مِنْ أَخِيهِ - وَأُمِّهِ وَأَبِيهِ - وَصَٰحِبَتِهِۦ وَبَنِيهِ\n\n(That Day shall a man flee from his brother. And from his mother and his father. And from his wife and his children.) meaning, he will see them and then flee from them, and seek to get away from them because horror will be so great and the matter will be so weighty. There is an authentic Hadith related concerning the intercession that states that every one of the great Messengers of firm resolve will be requested to intercede with Allah on behalf of the creation, but each of them will say, \"O myself! O myself! Today I will not ask You (O Allah) concerning anyone but myself.\" Even 'Isa bin Maryam will say, \"I will not ask Him (Allah) concerning anyone but myself today. I will not even ask Maryam, the woman who gave birth to me.\" Thus, Allah says,\n\nيَوْمَ يَفِرُّ الْمَرْءُ مِنْ أَخِيهِ - وَأُمِّهِ وَأَبِيهِ - وَصَٰحِبَتِهِۦ وَبَنِيهِ\n\n(That Day shall a man flee from his brother, and from his mother and his father, and from his wife and his children.) Qatadah said, \"The most beloved and then the next most beloved, and the closest of kin and then the next closest of kin – due to the terror of that Day.\" Allah said,\n\nلِكُلِّ امْرِئٍ مِّنْهُمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ شَأْنٌ يُغْنِيهِ\n\n(Every man that Day will have enough to make him careless of others.) meaning, he will be preoccupied in his business and distracted from the affairs of others. Ibn Abi Hatim recorded from Ibn 'Abbas that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\n\nتُحْشَرُونَ حُفَاةً عُرَاةً مُشَاةً غُرْلًا\n\n(You will all be gathered barefoot, naked, walking and uncircumcised.) So his wife said, \"O Messenger of Allah! Will we look at or see each other's nakedness?\" The Prophet ﷺ replied,\n\nلِكُلِّ امْرِىءٍ مِنْهُمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ شَأْنٌ يُغْنِيهِ - أو قال: - مَا أَشْغَلَهُ عَنِ النَّظَرِ\n\n(Every man among them on that Day will have enough (worries) to make him careless of others) – or he said: (he will be too busy to look.) Ibn 'Abbas narrated that the Prophet ﷺ said,\n\nتُحْشَرُونَ حُفَاةً عُرَاةً غُرْلًا\n\n(You will all be gathered barefoot, naked and uncircumcised.) So a woman said, \"Will we see or look at each others nakedness?\" He replied,\n\nيَا فُلَانَةُ، لِكُلِّ امْرِىءٍ مِنْهُمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ شَأْنٌ يُغْنِيهِ\n\n(O so-and-so woman! Every man among them on that Day will have enough (worries) to make him careless of others.) At-Tirmidhi said, \"This Hadith is Hasan Sahih.\"\n\n## The Faces of the People of Paradise and the People of the Fire on the Day of Judgement\n\nAllah says;\n\nوُجُوهٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ مُّسْفِرَةٌ - ضَاحِكَةٌ مُّسْتَبْشِرَةٌ\n\n(Some faces that Day will be bright (Musfirah), laughing, rejoicing at good news.) meaning, the people will be divided into two parties. There will be faces that are Musfirah, which means bright.\n\nضَاحِكَةٌ مُّسْتَبْشِرَةٌ\n\n(Laughing, rejoicing at good news.) meaning, happy and pleased due to the joy that will be in their hearts. The good news will be apparent on their faces. These will be the people of Paradise.\n\nوَوُجُوهٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ عَلَيْهَا غَبَرَةٌ - تَرْهَقُهَا قَتَرَةٌ\n\n(And other faces that Day will be dust-stained. Darkness (Qatarah) will cover them.) meaning, they will be overcome and covered with Qatarah, which is darkness. Ibn 'Abbas said,\n\nتَرْهَقُهَا قَتَرَةٌ\n\n(Darkness (Qatarah) will cover them.) \"This means that they (the faces) will be overcome with darkness.\" Allah said,\n\nأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْكَفَرَةُ الْفَجَرَةُ\n\n(Such will be the disbelieving, the wicked evildoers.) meaning, they are disbelievers in their hearts, evildoers in their actions. This is as Allah says,\n\nوَلَا يَلِدُوا إِلَّا فَاجِرًا كَفَّارًا\n\n(And they will beget none but wicked disbelievers.)(71:27)\n\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat 'Abasa, and to Allah all praise and thanks are due.","href":"/tafsir/80?verse=33","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:81:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 81:1–14","text":"What has been narrated about This Surah\nImam Ahmad recorded from Ibn 'Umar that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَنْ سَرَّهُ أَنْ يَنْظُرَ إِلى يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ كَأَنَّهُ رَأْيُ عَيْنٍ فَلْيَقْرَأْ:\nإِذَا الشَّمْسُ كُوِّرَتْ\nو\nإِذَا السَّمَآءُ انفَطَرَتْ\nو\nإِذَا السَّمَآءُ انشَقَّتْ\n(Whoever wishes to look at the Day of Judgement as if he is seeing it with his own eyes, then let him read, (When the sun is wound round.)(81:1)(and; (When the heaven is cleft asunder.)(82:1)(and; (When the heaven is split asunder.)(84:1)) Likewise, At-Tirmidhi has also recorded this Hadith.\nبِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nإِذَا الشَّمْسُ كُوِّرَتْ - وَإِذَا النُّجُومُ انكَدَرَتْ - وَإِذَا الْجِبَالُ سُيِّرَتْ - وَإِذَا الْعِشَارُ عُطِّلَتْ - وَإِذَا الْوُحُوشُ حُشِرَتْ - وَإِذَا الْبِحَارُ سُجِّرَتْ - وَإِذَا النُّفُوسُ زُوِّجَتْ - وَإِذَا الْمَوْءُودَةُ سُئِلَتْ - بِأَيِّ ذَنبٍ قُتِلَتْ - وَإِذَا الصُّحُفُ نُشِرَتْ - وَإِذَا السَّمَاءُ كُشِطَتْ - وَإِذَا الْجَحِيمُ سُعِّرَتْ - وَإِذَا الْجَنَّةُ أُزْلِفَتْ - عَلِمَتْ نَفْسٌ مَّا أَحْضَرَتْ\n(1.When the sun is Kuwwirat.)(2. And when the stars Inkadarat.)(3. And when the mountains are made to pass away;)(4. And when the pregnant she-camels are neglected;)(5. And when the wild beasts are gathered together.)(6. And when the seas become as blazing fire.)(7. And when the souls are joined with their mates.)(8. And when the female infant (Al-Maw'udah) buried alive is questioned (Su'ilat):)(9. For what sin was she killed?)(10. And when the pages are laid open.)(11. And when the heaven is Kushitat;)(12. And when Hell is Su'irat.)(13. And when Paradise is brought near.)(14. Every person will know what he has brought.)\nWhat will happen on the Day of Judgement, and that is the rolling up of the Sun\nAli bin Abi Talhah reported from Ibn 'Abbas:\nإِذَا الشَّمْسُ كُوِّرَتْ\n(When the sun is Kuwwirat.) \"This means it will be darkened.\" Al-'Awfi reported from Ibn 'Abbas; \"It will go away.\" Qatadah said, \"Its light will go away.\" Sa'id bin Jubayr said, \"Kuwwirat means it will sink in.\" Abu Salih said, \"Kuwwirat means it will be thrown down.\" At-Takwir means to gather one part of something with another part of it (i.e., folding). From it comes the folding of the turban ('Imamah) and the folding of clothes together. Thus, the meaning of Allah's statement,\nكُوِّرَتْ\n(Kuwwirat) is that part of it will be folded up into another part of it. Then it will be rolled up and thrown away. When this is done to it, its light will go away.\nAl-Bukhari recorded from Abu Hurayrah that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nالشَّمْسُ وَالْقَمَرُ يُكَوَّرَانِ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ\n(The sun and the moon will be rolled up on the Day of Judgement.) Al-Bukhari was alone in recording this Hadith and this is his wording of it.\nDispersing the Stars\nوَإِذَا النُّجُومُ انكَدَرَتْ\n(And when the stars Inkadarat.) meaning, when they are scattered. This is as Allah says,\nوَإِذَا الْكَوَاكِبُ انتَثَرَتْ\n(And when the stars have fallen and scattered.)(82:2)\nThe basis of the word Inkidar is Insibab, which means to be poured out.\nAr-Rabi' bin Anas reported from Abu Al-'Aliyah, who reported from Ubayy bin Ka'b that he said, \"Six signs will take place before the Day of Judgement. The people will be in their marketplaces when the sun's light will go away. When they are in that situation, the stars will be scattered. When they are in that situation, the mountains will fall down upon the face of the earth, and the earth will move, quake and be in a state of mixed up confusion. So the Jinns will then flee in fright to the humans and the humans will flee to the Jinns. The domestic beasts, birds and wild animals will mix together, and they will surge together in a wave (of chaos).\nوَإِذَا الْوُحُوشُ حُشِرَتْ\n(And when the wild beasts are gathered together.) This means they will be mixed.\nوَإِذَا الْعِشَارُ عُطِّلَتْ\n(And when the pregnant she camels are neglected;) This means their owners will neglect them.\nوَإِذَا الْبِحَارُ سُجِّرَتْ\n(And when the seas become as blazing fire)\" Then he (Ubayy) went on to say, \"The Jinns will say, 'We come to you with news.' So they will all go to the sea, and it will be a blazing fire. While they are in that state, the earth will be split with one huge crack that will extend from the lowest, seventh earth to the highest, seventh heaven. So while they are in that state, a wind will come that will kill all of them.\" Ibn Jarir recorded this narration with this wording.\nMoving of the Mountains, abandoning of the Pregnant She-Camels, and the gathering of the Wild Beasts\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nوَإِذَا الْجِبَالُ سُيِّرَتْ\n(And when the mountains are made to pass away;) meaning, they will not remain in their places and they will be destroyed. Then the earth will be left as a flat, level plain. Then Allah says,\nوَإِذَا الْعِشَارُ عُطِّلَتْ\n(And when the pregnant she-camels ('Ishar) are neglected ('Uttilat);)\nIkrimah and Mujahid said, \"'Ishar are (pregnant she-) camels.\" Mujahid said, \"'Uttilat means abandoned and left.\" Ubayy bin Ka'b and Ad-Dahhak both said, \"Their owners will neglect them.\" Ar-Rabi' bin Khuthaym said, \"They will not be milked or tied up. Their masters will leave them abandoned.\" Ad-Dahhak said, \"They will be left with no one to tend to them.\" And the meaning of all of these statements is similar.\nWhat is intended is that the 'Ishar is a type of camel. It is actually the best type of camel, and particularly the pregnant females of them when they have reached the tenth month of their pregnancies. One of them is singularly referred to as 'Ushara', and she keeps that name until she gives birth. So the people will be too busy to tend to her, take care of her or benefit from her, after she used to be the most important thing to them. This will be due to what will suddenly overtake them of the great, terrifying and horrible situation. This is the matter of the Day of Judgement, the coming together of its causes, and the occurrence of those things that will happen before it.\nوَإِذَا الْوُحُوشُ حُشِرَتْ\n(And when the wild beasts are gathered together.) meaning, gathered. This is as Allah says,\nوَمَا مِن دَابَّةٍ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَلَا طَائِرٍ يَطِيرُ بِجَنَاحَيْهِ إِلَّا أُمَمٌ أَمْثَالُكُم ۚ مَّا فَرَّطْنَا فِي الْكِتَابِ مِن شَيْءٍ ۚ ثُمَّ إِلَىٰ رَبِّهِمْ يُحْشَرُونَ\n(There is not a moving creature on earth, nor a bird that flies with its two wings, but are communities like you. We have neglected nothing in the Book, then unto their Lord they shall be gathered.)(6:38)\nIbn 'Abbas said, \"Everything will be gathered, even the flies.\" This statement was recorded by Ibn Abi Hatim. Allah also says,\nوَالطَّيْرَ مَحْشُورَةً\n(And (so did) the birds assembled.)(38:19) meaning, gathered.\nThe Blazing of the Seas\nAllah says,\nوَإِذَا الْبِحَارُ سُجِّرَتْ\n(And when the seas become as blazing fire.) Ibn Jarir recorded from Sa'id bin Al-Musayyib that 'Ali said to a Jewish man, \"Where is the Hell?\" The man said, \"The sea.\" 'Ali then said, \"I think he is truthful, as Allah says\nوَالْبَحْرِ الْمَسْجُورِ\n(And by the seas kindled (Masjur).)(52:6) and;\nوَإِذَا الْبِحَارُ سُجِّرَتْ\n(And when the seas become as blazing fire.)\" This has already been discussed previously with the explanation of Allah's statement,\nوَالْبَحْرِ الْمَسْجُورِ\n(And by the seas kindled (Masjur).)(52:6)\nJoining the Souls\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nوَإِذَا النُّفُوسُ زُوِّجَتْ\n(And when the souls are joined with their mates.) meaning, every type (of soul) will be gathered with its peer (or mate). This is as Allah says,\nاحْشُرُوا الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا وَأَزْوَاجَهُمْ\n(It will be said to the angels): \"Assemble those who did wrong, together with their companions (from the devils).) (37:22)\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded from An-Nu'man bin Bashir that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nوَإِذَا النُّفُوسُ زُوِّجَتْ\nالضُّرَبَاءُ: كُلُّ رَجُلٍ مَعَ كُلِّ قَوْمٍ كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ عَمَلَهُ وَذَلِكَ بِأَنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ يَقُولُ:\nوَكُنتُمْ أَزْوَاجًا ثَلَاثَةً - فَأَصْحَابُ الْمَيْمَنَةِ مَا أَصْحَابُ الْمَيْمَنَةِ - وَأَصْحَابُ الْمَشْأَمَةِ مَا أَصْحَابُ الْمَشْأَمَةِ - وَالسَّابِقُونَ السَّابِقُونَ\nهُمُ الضُّرَبَاءُ\n((And When the souls are joined with their mates.) Those who are alike. Every man will be with every group of people who performed the same deeds that he did. This is because Allah says,\n(And you (all) will be in three groups. So those on the Right Hand - how (fortunate) will be those on Right Hand! And those on the Left Hand - how (unfortunate) will be those on the Left Hand!)(56:7-10) They are those who are alike.)\nQuestioning the Female Infant Who was buried Alive\nAllah says,\nوَإِذَا الْمَوْءُودَةُ سُئِلَتْ - بِأَيِّ ذَنبٍ قُتِلَتْ\n(And when the female infant (Al-Maw'udah) buried alive is questioned: For what sin was she killed) The majority have recited it as Su'ilat (she is questioned), as it is here. Al-Maw'udah is the female infant that the people of the pre-Islamic time of ignorance would bury in the dirt due to their hatred of girls. Therefore, on the Day of Judgement, the female infant will be asked what sin she committed that caused here to be murdered. This will be a means of frightening her murderer. For verily, if the one who was wronged is questioned, what does the wrongdoer (the one who is guilty of the oppression) think then? 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas said,\nوَإِذَا الْمَوْءُودَةُ سُئِلَتْ\n(And when the female infant (Al-Maw'udah) buried alive Su'ilat:)\n\"This means that she will ask.\" Abu Ad-Duha made a similar statement when he said, \"She will ask, meaning she will demand restitution for her blood.\" The same has been reported from As-Suddi and Qatadah.\nHadiths have been reported concerning the Maw'udah. Imam Ahmad recorded from 'A'ishah, who reported from Judamah bint Wahb, the sister of 'Ukkashah, that she said, \"I was in the presence of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ when he was with some people, and he said,\nلَقَدْ هَمَمْتُ أَنْ أَنْهَى عَنِ الْغِيلَةِ فَنَظَرْتُ فِي الرُّومِ وَفَارِسَ، فَإِذَا هُمْ يُغِيلُونَ أَوْلَادَهُمْ، وَلَا يَضُرُّ أَوْلَادَهُمْ ذٰلِكَ شَيْئًا\n(I was about to prohibit sexual relations with breast feeding women, but then I saw that the Romans and the Persians have sexual relations with their women who breast feed their children and it does not harm the children at all.) Then they asked him about interruption of sexual intercourse to prevent the male discharge from entering the womb of the woman, and he said,\nذَٰلِكَ الْوَأْدُ الْخَفِيُّ، وَهُوَ الْمَوْءُودَةُ سُئِلَت\n(That is the minor infanticide and it is the female infant buried alive (Maw'udah) that will be questioned.)\" Muslim, Ibn Majah, Abu Dawud, At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa'i, all recorded this Hadith as well.\nThe Atonement for burying Infant Girls Alive\nAbdur-Razzaq said that Isra'il informed them from Simak bin Harb, from An-Nu'man bin Bashir, who reported from 'Umar bin Al-Khattab that he said concerning Allah's statement,\nوَإِذَا الْمَوْءُودَةُ سُئِلَتْ\n(And when the female infant buried alive is questioned.) \"Qays bin 'Asim came to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and said, 'O Messenger of Allah! Verily, I buried some daughters of mine alive in the period of pre-Islamic ignorance.' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nأَعْتِقْ عَنْ كُلِّ وَاحِدَةٍ مِنْهُنَّ رَقَبَةً\n(Free a slave for each one of them.) Then Qays said, 'O Messenger of Allah! Verily, I am an owner of camels.' The Prophet ﷺ said,\nفَانْحَرْ عَنْ كُلِّ وَاحِدَةٍ مِنْهُنَّ بَدَنَةً\n(Then sacrifice a camel for each one of them.)\"\nThe Distribution of the Pages\nAllah says,\nوَإِذَا الصُّحُفُ نُشِرَتْ\n(And when the pages are laid open.) Ad-Dahhak said, \"Every person will be given his paper in his right hand or in his left hand.\" Qatadah said, \"O Son of Adam! It (your paper) is written in, then it is rolled up, then it will be distributed to you on the Day of Judgement. So let each man look at what he himself dictated to be written in his paper.\"\nRemoving the Heavens, kindling Hellfire, and Paradise being brought near\nAllah says,\nوَإِذَا السَّمَاءُ كُشِطَتْ\n(And when the heaven is Kushitat;) Mujahid said, \"It drawns away.\" As-Suddi said, \"Stripped off.\" Concerning Allah's statement,\nوَإِذَا الْجَحِيمُ سُعِّرَتْ\n(And when Hell is Su'irat.) As-Suddi said, \"It is heated.\" In reference to Allah's statement,\nوَإِذَا الْجَنَّةُ أُزْلِفَتْ\n(And when Paradise is brought near.) Ad-Dahhak, Abu Malik, Qatadah, and Ar-Rabi' bin Khuthaym, all said, \"This means it will be brought near to its inhabitants.\"\nEveryone will know what He has brought on the Day of Judgement\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nعَلِمَتْ نَفْسٌ مَّا أَحْضَرَتْ\n(Every person will know what he has brought.) This is the conclusive response of the previous statements, meaning at the time these matters occur, every soul will know what it has done, and that will be brought forth for it, as Allah says,\nيَوْمَ تَجِدُ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَّا عَمِلَتْ مِنْ خَيْرٍ مُّحْضَرًا وَمَا عَمِلَتْ مِن سُوءٍ تَوَدُّ لَوْ أَنَّ بَيْنَهَا وَبَيْنَهُ أَمَدًا بَعِيدًا\n(On the Day when every person will be confronted with all the good he has done, and all the evil he has done, he will wish that there were a great distance between him and his evil.)(3:30) Allah also says,\nيُنَبَّأُ الْإِنسَانُ يَوْمَئِذٍ بِمَا قَدَّمَ وَأَخَّرَ\n(On that Day man will be informed of what he sent forward, and what he left behind.)(75:13)","href":"/tafsir/81?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:81:15","title":"Ibn Kathir · 81:15–29","text":"But nay! I swear by Al-Khunnas (15)Al-Jawar Al-Kunnas (16)And by the night when it 'As'as (17)And by the day when it Tanaffas (18)Verily, this is the Word a most honorable messenger (19)Dhi Quwwah, with the Lord of the Throne – Makin (20)Obeyed there, trustworthy (21)And your companion is not a madman (22)And indeed he saw him in the clear horizon (23)And he withholds not a knowledge of the Unseen (24)And it is not the word of the outcast Shaytan (25)Then where are you going (26)Verily, this is no less than a Reminder for the creatures (27)To whomsoever among you who wills to walk straight (28)And you cannot will unless that Allah wills – the Lord of all that exists (29)\nThe Explanation of the Words Al-Khunnas and Al-Kunnas\nMuslim recorded in his Sahih, and An-Nasa'i in his Book of Tafsir, in explaining this Ayah, from 'Amr bin Hurayth that he said, \"I prayed the Morning prayer behind the Prophet ﷺ, and I heard him reciting,\nفَلَا أُقْسِمُ بِالْخُنَّسِ - الْجَوَارِ الْكُنَّسِ - وَالَّيْلِ إِذَا عَسْعَسَ - وَالصُّبْحِ إِذَا تَنَفَّسَ\n(But nay! I swear by Al-Khunnas, Al-Jawar Al-Kunnas, and by the night when it 'As'as, and by the day when it Tanaffas.)\" Ibn Jarir recorded from Khalid bin 'Ar'arah that he heard 'Ali being asked about the Ayah;\nلَا أُقْسِمُ بِالْـخُـنَّسِ - الْجَوَارِ الْكُنَّسِ\n(Nay! I swear by Al-Khunnas, Al-Jawar Al-Kunnas.) and he said, \"These are the stars that withdraw (disappear) during the day and sweep across the sky (appear) at night.\" Concerning Allah's statement,\nوَالَّيْلِ إِذَا عَسْعَسَ\n(And by the night when it 'As'as.) There are two opinions about this statement. One of them is that this refers to its advancing with its darkness. Mujahid said, \"It means its darkening.\" Sa'id bin Jubayr said, \"When it begins.\" Al-Hasan Al-Basri said, \"When it covers the people.\" This was also said by 'Atiyah Al-'Awfi. 'Ali bin Abi Talhah and Al-'Awfi both reported from Ibn 'Abbas:\nإِذَا عَسْعَسَ\n(when it 'As'as) \"This means when it goes away.\" Mujahid, Qatadah and Ad-Dahhak, all said the same. Zayd bin Aslam and his son 'Abdur-Rahman also made a similar statement, when they said,\nإِذَا عَسْعَسَ\n(when it 'As'as) \"This means when it leaves, and thus it turns away.\" I believe that the intent in Allah's saying,\nإِذَا عَسْعَسَ\n(when it 'As'as) is when it approaches, even though it is correct to use this word for departing also. However, approachment is a more suitable usage here. It is as if Allah is swearing by the night and its darkness when it approaches, and by the morning and its light when it shines from the east. This is as Allah says,\nوَالَّيْلِ إِذَا يَغْشَىٰ - وَالنَّهَارِ إِذَا تَجَلَّىٰ\n(By the night as it envelops. By the day as it appears in brightness)(92:1-2) and He also says,\nوَالضُّحَىٰ - وَالَّيْلِ إِذَا سَجَىٰ\n(By the forenoon. By the night when it darkens.)(93:1-2) Allah also says,\nفَالِقُ الْإِصْبَاحِ وَجَعَلَ اللَّيْلَ سَكَنًا\n(Cleaver of the daybreak. He has appointed night for resting.)(6:96) And there are other similar Ayat that mention this. Many of the scholars of the fundamentals of language have said that the word 'As'as is used to mean advancing and retreating, with both meanings sharing the same word.\nTherefore, it is correct that the intent could be both of them, and Allah knows best.\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nوَالصُّبْحِ إِذَا تَنَفَّسَ\n(And by the day when it Tanaffas.) Ad-Dahhak said, \"When it rises.\" Qatadah said, \"When it brightens and advances.\"\nJibril descended with the Qur'an and it is not the Result of Insanity\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nإِنَّهُ لَقَوْلُ رَسُولٍ كَرِيمٍ\n(Verily, this is the Word of a most honorable messenger.) meaning, indeed this Qur'an is being conveyed by a noble messenger, which is referring to an honorable angel, who has good character and a radiant appearance, and he is Jibril.\nIbn 'Abbas, Ash-Sha'bi, Maymun bin Mihran, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, Ad-Dahhak and others have said this.\nذِي قُوَّةٍ\n(Dhi Quwwah) This is similar to Allah's statement,\nعَلَّمَهُ شَدِيدُ الْقُوَىٰ - ذُو مِرَّةٍ\n(He has been taught by one mighty in power, Dhu Mirrah.)(53:5-6) meaning, mighty in creation, mighty in strength and mighty in actions.\nعِندَ ذِي الْعَرْشِ مَكِينٍ\n(with the Lord of the Throne Makin,) meaning, he has high status and lofty rank with Allah.\nمُّطَاعٍ ثَمَّ\n(Obeyed there,) meaning, he has prestige, his word is listened to, and he is obeyed among the most high gathering (of angels). Qatadah said,\nمُّطَاعٍ ثَمَّ\n(Obeyed there) \"This means in the heavens. He is not one of the lower ranking (ordinary) angels. Rather he is from the high ranking, prestigious angels. He is respected and has been chosen for (the delivery of) this magnificent Message.\" Allah then says,\nأَمِينٍ\n(trustworthy.) This is a description of Jibril as being trustworthy. This is something very great, that the Almighty Lord has commended His servant and angelic Messenger, Jibril, just as He has commended His servant and human Messenger, Muhammad ﷺ by His statement,\nوَمَا صَاحِبُكُم بِمَجْنُونٍ\n(And your companion is not a madman.) Ash-Sha'bi, Maymun bin Mihran, Abu Salih and others who have been previously mentioned, all said, \"This refers to Muhammad ﷺ.\" Allah said,\nوَلَقَدْ رَآهُ بِالْأُفُقِ الْمُبِينِ\n(And indeed he saw him in the clear horizon.) meaning, indeed Muhammad ﷺ saw Jibril, who brought him the Message from Allah, in the form that Allah created him in (i.e., his true form), and he had six hundred wings.\nبِالْأُفُقِ الْمُبِينِ\n(in the clear horizon.) meaning, clear. This refers to the first sighting which occurred at Al-Batha' (Makkah). This incident is mentioned in Allah's statement,\nعَلَّمَهُ شَدِيدُ الْقُوَىٰ - ذُو مِرَّةٍ فَاسْتَوَىٰ - وَهُوَ بِالْأُفُقِ الْأَعْلَىٰ - ثُمَّ دَنَا فَتَدَلَّىٰ - فَكَانَ قَابَ قَوْسَيْنِ أَوْ أَدْنَىٰ - فَأَوْحَىٰ إِلَىٰ عَبْدِهِ مَا أَوْحَىٰ\n(He has been taught by one mighty in power (Jibril). Dhu Mirrah, then he rose. While he was in the highest part of the horizon. Then he approached and came closer. And was at a distance of two bows' length or less. So (Allah) revealed to His servant what He revealed.)(53:5-10)\nThe explanation of this and its confirmation has already preceded, as well as the evidence that proves that it is referring to Jibril. It seems apparent – and Allah knows best – that this Surah (At-Takwir) was revealed before the Night Journey (Al-Isra'), because nothing has been mentioned in it except this sighting (of Jibril), and it is the first sighting. The second sighting has been mentioned in Allah's statement,\nوَلَقَدْ رَآهُ نَزْلَةً أُخْرَىٰ - عِندَ سِدْرَةِ الْمُنتَهَىٰ - عِندَهَا جَنَّةُ الْمَأْوَىٰ - إِذْ يَغْشَى السِّدْرَةَ مَا يَغْشَىٰ\n(And indeed he saw him (Jibril) at a second descent. Near Sidrah Al-Muntaha. Near it is the Paradise of Abode. When that covered the lote tree which did cover it!)(53:13-16)\nAnd these Ayat have only been mentioned in Surat An-Najm, which was revealed after Surat Al-Isra' (The Night Journey).\nThe Prophet (ﷺ) is not Stingy in conveying the Revelation\n(وَمَا هُوَ عَلَى الْغَيْبِ بِظَنِينٍ)\n(He is not Zanin over the Unseen)\n[Note: Ibn Kathir presents this recitation of the Ayah, and refers to the version of Hafs; \"Some recite it…\"]\nmeaning Muhammad ﷺ is not following false conjecture about what Allah revealed. Others have recited this Ayah with the 'Dad' in the word Danin, which means that he is not stingy, but rather he conveys it to everyone.\nSufyan bin 'Uyaynah said, \"Zanin and Danin both have the same meaning. They mean that he is not a liar, nor is he a wicked, sinful person. The Zanin is one who follows false supposition, and the Danin is one who is stingy.\"\nQatadah said, \"The Qur'an was unseen and Allah revealed it to Muhammad ﷺ, and he did not withhold it from the people. Rather he announced it, conveyed it, and offered it to everyone who wanted it.\" 'Ikrimah, Ibn Zayd and others have made similar statements. Ibn Jarir preferred the recitation Danin.\nI say that both of recitations have been confirmed by numerous routes of transmission, and its meaning is correct either way, as we have mentioned earlier.\nThe Qur'an is a Reminder for all the Worlds and It is not the Inspiration of Shaytan\nAllah says,\nوَمَا هُوَ بِقَوْلِ شَيْطَانٍ رَّجِيمٍ\n(And it is not the word of the outcast Shaytan.) meaning, this Qur'an is not the statement of an outcast Shaytan. This means that he is not able to produce it, nor is it befitting of him to do so. This is as Allah says,\nوَمَا تَنَزَّلَتْ بِهِ الشَّيَاطِينُ - وَمَا يَنبَغِي لَهُمْ وَمَا يَسْتَطِيعُونَ - إِنَّهُمْ عَنِ السَّمْعِ لَمَعْزُولُونَ\n(And it is not the Shayatin who have brought it down. Neither would it suit them nor they can. Verily, they have been removed far from hearing it.)(26:210-212) Then Allah says,\nفَأَيْنَ تَذْهَبُونَ\n(Then where are you going?) meaning, where has your reason gone, in rejecting this Qur'an, while it is manifest, clear, and evident that it is the truth from Allah. This is as Abu Bakr As-Siddiq said to the delegation of Bani Hanifah when they came to him as Muslims and he commanded them to recite (something from the Qur'an). So they recited something to him from the so called Qur'an of Musaylimah the Liar, that was total gibberish and terribly poor in style. Thus, Abu Bakr said, \"Woe unto you! Where have your senses gone? By Allah, this speech did not come from a god.\" Qatadah said,\nفَأَيْنَ تَذْهَبُونَ\n(Then where are you going?) meaning, from the Book of Allah and His obedience. Then Allah says,\nإِنْ هُوَ إِلَّا ذِكْرٌ لِّلْعَالَمِينَ\n(Verily, this is no less than a Reminder to the creatures.) meaning, this Qur'an is a reminder for all of mankind. They are reminded by it and receive admonition from it.\nلِمَن شَاءَ مِنكُمْ أَن يَسْتَقِيمَ\n(To whomsoever among you who wills to walk straight.) meaning, whoever seeks guidance, then he must adhere to this Qur'an, for verily it is his salvation and guidance. There is no guidance in other than it.\nوَمَا تَشَاءُونَ إِلَّا أَن يَشَاءَ اللَّهُ رَبُّ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(And you cannot will unless (it be) that Allah wills – the Lord of all that exists.)\nThis means that the will is not left to you all, so that whoever wishes to be guided, then he is guided, and whoever wishes to be astray, then he goes astray, rather, all of this is according to the will of Allah the Exalted, and He is the Lord of all that exists.\nIt is reported from Sulayman bin Musa that when this Ayah was revealed,\nلِمَن شَاءَ مِنكُمْ أَن يَسْتَقِيمَ\n(To whomsoever among you who wills to walk straight.) Abu Jahl said, \"The matter is up to us. If we wish, we will stand straight, and we do not wish, we will not stand straight.\" So Allah revealed,\nوَمَا تَشَاءُونَ إِلَّا أَن يَشَاءَ اللَّهُ رَبُّ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(And you cannot will unless (it be) that Allah wills the Lord of the all that exists.)\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat At-Takwir, and all praise and thanks are due to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/81?verse=15","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:82:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 82:1–12","text":"The Virtues of Surat Al-Infitar\nAn-Nasa'i recorded from Jabir that Mu'adh stood and lead the people in the Night prayer, and he made the recitation of his prayer long. So the Prophet ﷺ said,\nأَفَتَّانٌ أَنْتَ يَا مُعَاذُ؟ أَيْنَ كُنْتَ عَنْ\nسَبِّحِ اسْمَ رَبِّكَ الْأَعْلَى\nوَالضُّحَىٰ\nوَ\nإِذَا السَّمَآءُ انفَطَرَتْ\n(Are you putting the people to trial O Mu'adh? Why don't you recite (Glorify the Name of your Lord the Most High)(87), (By the forenoon)(93), and (When the heaven is cleft asunder)(82)?)\"\nThe basis of this Hadith is found in the Two Sahihs, however the mentioning of\nإِذَا السَّمَآءُ انفَطَرَتْ\n(When the heaven is cleft asunder.) has only been mentioned by An-Nasa'i. It has been previously mentioned in a narration from 'Abdullah bin 'Umar that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nمَنْ سَرَّهُ أَنْ يَنْظُرَ إِلَى الْقِيَامَةِ رَأْيَ عَيْنٍ فَلْيَقْرَأْ:\nإِذَا الشَّمْسُ كُوِّرَتْ\nوَ\nإِذَا السَّمَآءُ انفَطَرَتْ\nوَ\nإِذَا السَّمَآءُ انشَقَّتْ\n(Whoever would be pleased to look at the Day of Resurrection with his own eyes, then let him recite, (When the sun is Kuwwirat.)(81) and; (When the heaven is cleft asunder)(82) and; (When the heaven is split asunder)(84).)\nبِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nإِذَا السَّمَاءُ انفَطَرَتْ - وَإِذَا الْكَوَاكِبُ انتَثَرَتْ - وَإِذَا الْبِحَارُ فُجِّرَتْ - وَإِذَا الْقُبُورُ بُعْثِرَتْ - عَلِمَتْ نَفْسٌ مَّا قَدَّمَتْ وَأَخَّرَتْ - يَا أَيُّهَا الْإِنسَانُ مَا غَرَّكَ بِرَبِّكَ الْكَرِيمِ - الَّذِي خَلَقَكَ فَسَوَّاكَ فَعَدَلَكَ - فِي أَيِّ صُورَةٍ مَّا شَاءَ رَكَّبَكَ - كَلَّا بَلْ تُكَذِّبُونَ بِالدِّينِ - وَإِنَّ عَلَيْكُمْ لَحَافِظِينَ - كِرَامًا كَاتِبِينَ - يَعْلَمُونَ مَا تَفْعَلُونَ\n(1. When the heaven is cleft asunder (Infatarat).)(2. And when the stars Intatharat.)(3. And when the seas Fujjirat.)(4. And when the graves Bu'thirat.)(5. A person will know what he has sent forward and left behind.)(6. O man! What has made you careless about your Lord, the Most Generous?)(7. Who created you, fashioned you perfectly, and gave you due proportion.)(8. In whatever form He willed, He put you together.)(9. Nay! But you deny (the Day of) Ad-Din.)(10. But verily, over you to watch you)(11. Kiraman Katibin,)(12. They know all that you do.)\nWhat will happen on the Day of Judgement\nAllah says,\nإِذَا السَّمَاءُ انفَطَرَتْ\n(When the heaven is cleft asunder (Infatarat).) meaning, it splits. This is as Allah says,\nالسَّمَاءُ مُنفَطِرٌ بِهِ\n(Whereon the heaven will be cleft asunder (Munfatir))(73:18) Then Allah says,\nوَإِذَا الْكَوَاكِبُ انتَثَرَتْ\n(And when the stars Intatharat.) meaning, fallen.\nوَإِذَا الْبِحَارُ فُجِّرَتْ\n(And when the seas Fujjirat.) 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported from Ibn 'Abbas that he said, \"Allah will cause some of it to burst forth over other parts of it.\" Al-Hasan said, \"Allah will cause some parts of it to burst forth over other parts of it, and its water will go away.\" Qatadah said, \"Its fresh water will mix with its salt water.\"\nوَإِذَا الْقُبُورُ بُعْثِرَتْ\n(And when the graves Bu'thirat.) Ibn 'Abbas said, \"searched.\" As-Suddi said, \"Tub'athiru means that they will be moved and those who are in them will come out.\"\nعَلِمَتْ نَفْسٌ مَّا قَدَّمَتْ وَأَخَّرَتْ\n(A person will know what he has sent forward and left behind.) meaning, when this happens then this will occur.\nMankind should not forget about Allah\nAllah says,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الْإِنسَانُ مَا غَرَّكَ بِرَبِّكَ الْكَرِيمِ\n(O man! What has made you careless about your Lord, the Most Generous?)\nThis is a threat. It is not an attempt to get a reply as some people mistakenly think. They consider it as if the Most Generous is asking them so that they will say, \"His honor deceived him (or made him careless of his Lord).\" rather the meaning of this Ayah is, \"O Son of Adam! What has deceived you from your Lord, the Most Generous – meaning the Most Great – so that you went forth disobeying Him, and you met Him with that which was unbefitting.\" This is similar to what has been reported in the Hadith,\nيَقُولُ اللهُ تَعَالَىٰ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ: يَا ابْنَ آدَمَ مَا غَرَّكَ بِي؟ يَا ابْنَ آدَمَ مَاذَا أَجَبْتَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ؟\n(Allah will say on the Day of Judgement: \"O Son of Adam! What has deceived you concerning Me? O Son of Adam What was your response to the Messengers?\")\nAl-Baghawi mentioned that Al-Kalbi and Muqatil said, \"This Ayah was revealed about Al-Aswad bin Shariq who struck the Prophet ﷺ and he was not punished in retaliation. So Allah revealed,\nمَا غَرَّكَ بِرَبِّكَ الْكَرِيمِ\n(What has made you careless about your Lord, the Most Generous?)\" Then Allah said,\nالَّذِي خَلَقَكَ فَسَوَّاكَ فَعَدَلَكَ\n(Who created you, fashioned you perfectly, and gave you due proportion.) meaning, 'what has deceived you concerning the Most Generous Lord?'\nالَّذِي خَلَقَكَ فَسَوَّاكَ فَعَدَلَكَ\n(Who created you, fashioned you perfectly, and gave you due proportion.) meaning, 'He made you complete, straight, and perfectly balanced and proportioned in stature. He fashioned you in the best of forms and shapes.'\nImam Ahmad recorded from Busr bin Jahhash Al-Qurashi that one day the Messenger of Allah ﷺ spat in his palm and placed his finger on it. Then he said,\nقَالَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ: يَا ابْنَ آدَمَ أَنّٰى تُعْجِزُنِي وَقَدْ خَلَقْتُكَ مِنْ مِثْلِ هٰذِهِ؟ حَتّٰى إِذَا سَوَّيْتُكَ وَعَدَلْتُكَ مَشَيْتَ بَيْنَ بُرْدَيْنِ، وَلِلْأَرْضِ مِنْكَ وَئِيدٌ، فَجَمَعْتَ وَمَنَعْتَ حَتّٰى إِذَا بَلَغَتِ التَّرَاقِيَ قُلْتَ: أَتَصَدَّقُ وَأَنَّى أَوَانُ الصَّدَقَةِ؟\n(Allah the Mighty and Sublime says: \"O Son of Adam! How can you escape Me when I created you from something similar to this (spit)? Then I fashioned you and made your creation balanced so that you walked between the two outer garments. And the earth has a burial place for you. So you gathered (wealth) and withheld it until your soul reached your collarbone (i.e., death comes). Then, at that time you say, 'I will give charity now.' But how will there be time for charity?\") This Hadith has also been recorded by Ibn Majah.\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nفِي أَيِّ صُورَةٍ مَّا شَاءَ رَكَّبَكَ\n(In whatever form He willed, He put you together.) Mujahid said, \"In which resemblance: the father, the mother, the paternal uncle, or the maternal uncle.\" In the Two Sahihs it is recorded from Abu Hurayrah that a man said, \"O Messenger of Allah! Verily, my wife has given birth to a black boy.\" The Prophet ﷺ said,\nهَلْ لَكَ مِنْ إِبِلٍ؟\n(Do you have any camels?) The man said, \"Yes.\" The Prophet ﷺ then said,\nفَمَا أَلْوَانُهَا\n(What color are they?) The man said, \"Red.\" The Prophet ﷺ said,\nفَهَلْ فِيهَا مِنْ أَوْرَقَ\n(Do any of them have patches of gray?) The man said, \"Yes.\" The Prophet ﷺ asked him,\nفَأَنّٰى أَتَاهَا ذٰلِكَ\n(How did this happen to them?) The man replied, \"It is probably an inherited genetical strain.\" The Prophet ﷺ then said,\nوَهَذَا عَسَىٰ أَنْ يَكُونَ نَزَعَهُ عِرْقٌ\n(Likewise, this (with your son) is probably an inherited genetical strain.)\nThe Cause of Deception and alerting to the Fact that Angels record the Deeds of the Children of Adam\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nكَلَّا بَلْ تُكَذِّبُونَ بِالدِّينِ\n(Nay! But you deny (the Day of) Ad-Din.) meaning, 'you are only compelled to oppose the Most Generous and meet Him with disobedience, by your rejection in your hearts of the Hereafter, the recompense and the reckoning.' Concerning Allah's statement,\nوَإِنَّ عَلَيْكُمْ لَحَافِظِينَ - كِرَامًا كَاتِبِينَ - يَعْلَمُونَ مَا تَفْعَلُونَ\n(But verily, over you to watch you (are) Kiraman Katibin, they know all that you do.)(82:10-12) meaning, 'indeed there are noble guardian angels over you, so do not meet them with evil deeds, because they write down all that you do.'","href":"/tafsir/82?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:82:13","title":"Ibn Kathir · 82:13–19","text":"Verily, the Abrar (the righteous believers) will be in Delight (13)And verily, the wicked will be in the blazing Fire (Hell)(14)Therein they will enter, and taste its burning flame on the Day of Recompense (15)And they will not be absent therefrom (16)And what will make you know what the Day of Recompense is (17)Again, what will make you know what the Day of Recompense is (18)(It will be) the Day when no person shall have power for another, and the Decision, that Day, will be with Allah (19)\nThe Reward of the Righteous and the Sinners\nAllah informs of what the righteous will receive of delight. They are those who obeyed Allah and did not meet Him with disobedience (sins). Then He mentions that the evildoers will be in Hell and eternal torment. Due to this He says,\nيَصْلَوْنَهَا يَوْمَ الدِّينِ\n(Therein they will enter, and taste its burning flame on the Day of Recompense,) meaning, the Day of Reckoning, Recompense, and Judgement.\nوَمَا هُمْ عَنْهَا بِغَائِبِينَ\n(And they will not be absent therefrom.) meaning, they will not be absent for even one hour from the torment. The torment will not be lightened from them, nor will they be granted the death that they will be requesting, or any rest – not even for a single day. Allah then says,\nوَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا يَوْمُ الدِّينِ\n(And what will make you know what the Day of Recompense is?) This is a magnification of the affair of the Day of Judgement. Then Allah affirms it by saying,\nثُمَّ مَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا يَوْمُ الدِّينِ\n(Again, what will make you know what the Day of Recompense is?) Then He explains this by saying,\nيَوْمَ لَا تَمْلِكُ نَفْسٌ لِّنَفْسٍ شَيْئًا\n((It will be) the Day when no person shall have power for another,) meaning, no one will be able to benefit anyone else, or help him out of that which he will be in, unless Allah gives permission to whomever He wishes and is pleased with. We will mention here a Hadith (where the Prophet ﷺ said),\nيَا بَنِي هَاشِم، أَنْقِذُوا أَنْفُسَكُمْ مِنَ النَّارِ لَا أَمْلِكُ لَكُمْ مِنَ اللهِ شَيْئًا\n(O children of Hashim! Save yourselves from the Fire, for I have no power to cause you any benefit from Allah.) This has been mentioned previously at the end of the Tafsir of Surat Ash-Shu'ara' (see 26:214). Thus, Allah says,\nوَالْأَمْرُ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِّلَّهِ\n(and the Decision, that Day, will be with Allah.)\nThis is similar to Allah's statement,\nلِّمَنِ الْمُلْكُ الْيَوْمَ ۖ لِلَّهِ الْوَاحِدِ الْقَهَّارِ\n(Whose is the kingdom this Day? It is Allah's, the One, the Irresistible!)(40:16)\nIt is also similar to His statement,\nالْمُلْكُ يَوْمَئِذٍ الْحَقُّ لِلرَّحْمَٰنِ\n(The sovereignty on that Day will be for the Most Gracious)(25:26)\nIt is also similar to His saying,\nمَالِكِ يَوْمِ الدِّينِ\n(The Only Owner of the Day of Recompense)(1:4)\nQatadah said,\nيَوْمَ لَا تَمْلِكُ نَفْسٌ لِّنَفْسٍ شَيْئًا ۖ وَالْأَمْرُ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِّلَّهِ\n((It will be) the Day when no person shall have power for another, and the Decision, that Day, will be with Allah.)\n\"By Allah, the Decision is for Allah today (now), but on that Day no one will try to dispute with Him about it.\"\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Al-Infitar. All praise and blessings are due to Allah, and He is the Giver of success and freedom from error.","href":"/tafsir/82?verse=13","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:83:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 83:1–6","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nوَيْلٌ لِّلْمُطَفِّفِينَ - الَّذِينَ إِذَا اكْتَالُوا عَلَى النَّاسِ يَسْتَوْفُونَ - وَإِذَا كَالُوهُمْ أَو وَّزَنُوهُمْ يُخْسِرُونَ - أَلَا يَظُنُّ أُولَٰئِكَ أَنَّهُم مَّبْعُوثُونَ - لِيَوْمٍ عَظِيمٍ - يَوْمَ يَقُومُ النَّاسُ لِرَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(1. Woe to Al-Mutaffifin.)(2. Those who, when they have to receive by measure from men, demand full measure,)(3. And when they have to give by measure or weight to men, give less than due.)(4. Do they not think that they will be resurrected,)(5. On a Great Day?)(6. The Day when (all) mankind will stand before the Lord of all that exists?)\nIncreasing and decreasing in the Measure and Weight will be a Cause for Regret and Loss\nAn-Nasa'i and Ibn Majah both recorded from Ibn 'Abbas that he said, \"When the Prophet ﷺ came to Al-Madinah, the people of Al-Madinah were the most terrible people in giving measurement (i.e., they used to cheat). Thus, Allah revealed,\nوَيْلٌ لِّلْمُطَفِّفِينَ\n(Woe to Al-Mutaffifin.) After this, they began to give good measure.\" The meaning of the word Tatfif here is to be stingy with measurement and weight, either by increasing it if it is due from the others, or decreasing it if it is a debt. Thus, Allah explains that the Mutaffifin those whom He has promised loss and destruction, whom are meant by \"Woe\" - are\nالَّذِينَ إِذَا اكْتَالُوا عَلَى النَّاسِ\n(Those who, when they have to receive by measure from men,) meaning, from among the people.\nيَسْتَوْفُونَ\n(demand full measure,) meaning, they take their right by demanding full measure and extra as well.\nوَإِذَا كَالُوهُمْ أَو وَّزَنُوهُمْ يُخْسِرُونَ\n(And when they have to give by measure or weight to (other) men, give less than due.) meaning, they decrease.\nVerily, Allah commanded that the measure and weight should be given in full. He says in another Ayah,\nوَأَوْفُوا الْكَيْلَ إِذَا كِلْتُمْ وَزِنُوا بِالْقِسْطَاسِ الْمُسْتَقِيمِ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ خَيْرٌ وَأَحْسَنُ تَأْوِيلًا\n(And give full measure when you measure, and weigh with a balance that is straight. That is good and better in the end.)(17:35) Allah also says,\nوَأَوْفُوا الْكَيْلَ وَالْمِيزَانَ بِالْقِسْطِ ۖ لَا نُكَلِّفُ نَفْسًا إِلَّا وُسْعَهَا\n(And give full measure and full weight with justice. We burden not any person, but with that which he can bear.)(6:152) and He says,\nوَأَقِيمُوا الْوَزْنَ بِالْقِسْطِ وَلَا تُخْسِرُوا الْمِيزَانَ\n(And observe the weight with equity and do not make the balance deficient.)(55:9)\nAllah destroyed the people of Shu'ayb and wiped them out because of their cheating in weights and measurements.\nThreatening the Mutaffifin with standing before the Lord of all that exists\nThen Allah says as a threat to them,\nأَلَا يَظُنُّ أُولَٰئِكَ أَنَّهُم مَّبْعُوثُونَ - لِيَوْمٍ عَظِيمٍ\n(Do they not think that they will be resurrected, on a Great Day?) meaning, do these people not fear the resurrection and standing before He Who knows the hidden matters and the innermost secrets, on a Day that contains great horror and tremendous fright? Whoever loses on this Day will be made to enter into a blazing fire. Then Allah says,\nيَوْمَ يَقُومُ النَّاسُ لِرَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(The Day when (all) mankind will stand before the Lord of all that exists?) meaning, they will stand barefooted, naked and uncircumcised at a station that will be difficult, hard, and distressful for the criminals. They will be covered by the command from Allah, and it will be that, which the strength and the senses will not be able to bare.\nImam Malik reported from Nafi' who reported from Ibn 'Umar that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nيَوْمَ يَقُومُ النَّاسُ لِرَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ، حَتّٰى يَغِيبَ أَحَدُهُمْ فِي رَشْحِهِ إِلَى أَنْصَافِ أُذُنَيْهِ\n(This will be the Day that mankind will stand before the Lord of all that exists, until one of them will sink up to the middle of his ears in sweat.) Al-Bukhari recorded this Hadith from Malik and 'Abdullah bin 'Awn, both of whom reported it from Nafi'. Muslim also recorded it from two routes.\nAnother Hadith:  Imam Ahmad recorded from Al-Miqdad, who was Ibn Al-Aswad Al-Kindi, that he heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ saying,\nإِذَا كَانَ يَوْمُ الْقِيَامَةِ أُدْنِيَتِ الشَّمْسُ مِنَ الْعِبَادِ حَتّٰى تَكُونَ قَدْرَ مِيلٍ أَوْ مِيلَيْنِ - قال - فَتَصْهَرُهُمُ الشَّمْسُ فَيَكُونُونَ فِي الْعَرَقِ كَقَدْرِ أَعْمَالِهِمْ، مِنْهُمْ مَنْ يَأْخُذُهُ إِلَى عَقِبَيْهِ، وَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ يَأْخُذُهُ إِلَى رُكْبَتَيْهِ، وَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ يَأْخُذُهُ إِلَى حَقْوَيْهِ، وَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ يُلْجِمُهُ إِلْجَامًا\n(On the Day of Judgement, the sun will draw near the servants until it is a mile or two away from them. Then the sun will burn them, and they will be submersed in sweat based upon the amount of their deeds. From among them there will be those whose sweat will come up to their two heels. From among them there will be those whose sweat will come up to their two knees. From among them there will be those whose sweat will come up to their groins. From among them there will be those who will be bridled in sweat (up to their necks).)\nThis Hadith was recorded by Muslim and At-Tirmidhi.\nIn Sunan Abu Dawud it is recorded that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to seek refuge with Allah from the hardship of standing on the Day of Judgement. It has been reported from Ibn Mas'ud that they will be standing for forty years with their heads raised toward the sky. No one will speak to them, and the righteous and wicked among them will all be bridled in sweat. It has been reported from Ibn 'Umar that they will be standing for one hundred years. Both of these statements have been recorded by Ibn Jarir. In the Sunans of Abu Dawud, An-Nasa'i, and Ibn Majah, it is recorded from 'A'ishah that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to begin his late night prayer by declaring Allah's greatness ten times, praising Allah ten times, glorifying Allah ten times, and seeking Allah's forgiveness ten times. Then he would say,\nاللْهُمَّ اغْفِرْ لِي وَاهْدِنِي وَارْزُقْنِي وَعَافِنِي\n(O Allah! Forgive me, guide me, provide for me, and protect me.) Then he would seek refuge from the hardship of the standing on the Day of Judgement.","href":"/tafsir/83?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:83:7","title":"Ibn Kathir · 83:7–17","text":"Nay! Truly, the Record of the wicked is in Sijjin (7)And what will make you know what Sijjin is (8)A Register inscribed (9)Woe, that Day, to those who deny (10)Those who deny the Day of Recompense (11)And none can deny it except every transgressor beyond bounds, the sinner (12)When Our Ayat are recited to him, he says: \"Tales of the ancients! (13)Nay! But on their hearts is the Ran (covering) which they used to earn (14)Nay! Surely, they will be veiled from seeing their Lord that Day (15)Then verily, they will indeed enter the burning flame of Hell (16)Then, it will be said to them: \"This is what you used to deny! (17)\nThe Record of the Wicked and some of what happens to Them\nAllah says truly,\nإِنَّ كِتَابَ الْفُجَّارِ لَفِي سِجِّينٍ\n(Nay! Truly, the Record of the wicked is in Sijjin.) meaning, that their final destination and their abode will be in Sijjin, which is derived from the word prison (Sijn), and here it means straitened circumstances. Thus, Allah expresses the greatness of this matter, saying;\nوَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا سِجِّينٌ\n(And what will make you know what Sijjin is?) meaning, it is a great matter, an eternal prison, and a painful torment. Some have said that it is beneath the seventh earth. It has been mentioned previously in the lengthy Hadith of Al-Bara' bin 'Azib that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nيَقُول اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ فِي رُوحِ الْكَافِرِ اكْتُبُوا كِتَابَهُ فِي سِجِّينٍ. وَسِجِّينٌ هِيَ تَحْتُ الْأَرْضِ السَّابِعَة\n(Allah says concerning the soul of the disbeliever, 'Record his book in Sijjin.' And Sijjin is beneath the seventh earth.)\" it is known that the destination of the wicked people will be Hell, and it is the lowest of the low. For Allah says,\nثُمَّ رَدَدْنَاهُ أَسْفَلَ سَافِلِينَ - إِلَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ\n(Then We reduced him to the lowest of the low. Save those who believe and do righteous deeds.)(95:5-6) Here Allah says,\nكَلَّا إِنَّ كِتَابَ الْفُجَّارِ لَفِي سِجِّينٍ - وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا سِجِّينٌ\n(Nay! Truly, the Record of the wicked is in Sijjin. And what will make you know what Sijjin is?) and it is full of hardship and misery. Allah says,\nوَإِذَا أُلْقُوا مِنْهَا مَكَانًا ضَيِّقًا مُّقَرَّنِينَ دَعَوْا هُنَالِكَ ثُبُورًا\n(And when they shall be thrown into a narrow place thereof, chained together, they will exclaim therein for destruction.)(25:13) Then Allah says,\nكِتَابٌ مَّرْقُومٌ\n(A Register inscribed.) This is not an explanation of His statement,\nوَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا سِجِّينٌ\n(And what will make you know what Sijjin is?) It is only an explanation of the destination that will be recorded for them, which is Sijjin. Meaning, it is inscribed, written, and completed. No one can add to it and no one can remove anything from it. This was said by Muhammad bin Ka'b Al-Qurazi. Then Allah said,\nوَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِّلْمُكَذِّبِينَ\n(Woe, that Day, to those who deny.) meaning, when they come to the imprisonment, Allah threatened them with, on the Day of Judgement, and the disgraceful torment. The statement, \"Woe,\" has already been discussed previously and there is no need to repeat it here. Basically, it means destruction and devastation. This is like what is said, \"Woe to so-and-so.\" This is similar to what has been recorded in the Musnad and the Sunan collections on the authority of Bahz bin Hakim bin Mu'awiyah bin Haydah, who reported from his father, who reported from his grandfather that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nوَيْلٌ لِلَّذِي يُحَدِّثُ فَيَكْذِبُ لِيُضْحِكَ النَّاسَ، وَيْلٌ لَهُ وَيْلٌ لَهُ\n(Woe unto whoever speaks, and lies in order to make the people laugh. Woe unto him, woe unto him.) Then Allah says, in explaining who are the wicked, disbelieving deniers,\nالَّذِينَ يُكَذِّبُونَ بِيَوْمِ الدِّينِ\n(Those who deny the Day of Recompense.) meaning, they do not believe it will happen, and they do not believe in its existence. Thus, they consider it a matter that is farfetched. Allah then says,\nوَمَا يُكَذِّبُ بِهِ إِلَّا كُلُّ مُعْتَدٍ أَثِيمٍ\n(And none can deny it except every transgressor, sinner.) meaning, transgressive in his actions by doing that which is forbidden and exceeding the limits when acquiring the permissible. He is a sinner in his statements, because he lies whenever he speaks, he breaks his promises whenever he makes them, and he behaves in an abusive and wicked manner whenever he argues. Concerning Allah's statement,\nإِذَا تُتْلَىٰ عَلَيْهِ آيَاتُنَا قَالَ أَسَاطِيرُ الْأَوَّلِينَ\n(When Our Ayat are recited to him, he says: \"Tales of the ancients!\") meaning, whenever he hears the Words of Allah from the Messenger ﷺ, he denies it and has ill thoughts about it. Thus, he believes that it is a collection gathered from the books of the ancients. This is as Allah says,\nوَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُم مَّاذَا أَنزَلَ رَبُّكُمْ ۙ قَالُوا أَسَاطِيرُ الْأَوَّلِينَ\n(And when it is said to them: \"What is it that your Lord has sent down?\" They say: \"Tales of the men of old!\")(16:24) Similarly Allah says,\nوَقَالُوا أَسَاطِيرُ الْأَوَّلِينَ اكْتَتَبَهَا فَهِيَ تُمْلَىٰ عَلَيْهِ بُكْرَةً وَأَصِيلًا\n(And they say: \"Tales of the ancients, which he has written down: and they are dictated to him morning and afternoon.\")(25:5) Then Allah continues saying,\nكَلَّا ۖ بَلْ ۜ رَانَ عَلَىٰ قُلُوبِهِم مَّا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ\n(Nay! But on their hearts is the Ran (covering) which they used to earn.)\nmeaning, the matter is not as they claim, nor as they say: \"Verily, this Qur'an is tales of the ancients.\" Rather, it is the Word of Allah, His inspiration and His revelation to His Messenger ﷺ. The only thing that blocked their hearts from believing in it is the dark covering cast over it from the many sins and wrong they committed that has covered up their hearts. Thus, Allah says,\nكَلَّا ۖ بَلْ ۜ رَانَ عَلَىٰ قُلُوبِهِم مَّا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ\n(Nay! But on their hearts is the Ran (covering) which they used to earn.)\nThis dark covering known as Rayn overcomes the hearts of the disbelievers, the covering of Ghaym is for the righteous, and the covering of Ghayn is for those who are near to Allah.\nIbn Jarir, At-Tirmidhi, An-Nisa'i, and Ibn Majah all recorded from Abu Hurayrah that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ الْعَبْدَ إِذَا أَذْنَبَ ذَنْبًا كَانَتْ نُكْتَةٌ سَوْدَاءُ فِي قَلْبِهِ، فَإِنْ تَابَ مِنْهَا صُقِلَ قَلْبُهُ، وَإِنْ زَادَ زَادَتْ، فَذٰلِكَ قَوْلُ اللهِ تَعَالَىٰ\nكَلَّا ۖ بَلْ ۜ رَانَ عَلَىٰ قُلُوبِهِم مَّا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ\n(Verily, when the servant commits a sin, a black spot appears in his heart. If he repents from it, his heart is polished clean. However, if he increases (in the sin), the spot will continue to increase. That is the statement of Allah: ((Nay! But on their hearts is the Ran (covering) which they used to earn.))\nAt-Tirmidhi said, \"Hasan Sahih.\" The wording of An-Nasa'i says,\nإِنَّ الْعَبْدَ إِذَا أَخْطَأَ خَطِيئَةً نُكِتَ فِي قَلْبِهِ نُكْتَةٌ سَوْدَاءُ، فَإِنْ هُوَ نَزَعَ وَاسْتَغْفَرَ وَتَابَ صُقِلَ قَلْبُهُ، فَإِنْ عَادَ زِيدَ فِيهَا حَتَّى تَعْلُو قَلْبَهُ فَهُوَ الرَّانُ الَّذِي قَالَ اللهُ تَعَالَىٰ:\nكَلَّا ۖ بَلْ ۜ رَانَ عَلَىٰ قُلُوبِهِم مَّا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ\n(Whenever the servant commits a wrong, a black spot is put in his heart. So, if he refrains from it, seeks forgiveness and repents, his heart is polished clean. But if he returns to the sin, the spot will increase until it overcomes his (entire) heart, and this is the Ran that Allah mentions when He says: (Nay, but on their hearts is the Ran (covering) which they used to earn.)) Concerning Allah's statement,\nكَلَّا إِنَّهُمْ عَن رَّبِّهِمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ لَّمَحْجُوبُونَ\n(Nay! Surely, they will be veiled from seeing their Lord that Day.) meaning, they will have a place on the Day of Judgement, and lodging in Sijjin. Along with this they will be veiled from seeing their Lord and Creator on the Day of Judgement. Imam Abu 'Abdullah Ash-Shafi'i said, \"In this Ayah is a proof that the believers will see Him (Allah), the Mighty and Sublime, on that Day.\"\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nثُمَّ إِنَّهُمْ لَصَالُو الْجَحِيمِ\n(Then verily, they will indeed enter the burning flame of Hell.) meaning, along with this being prevented from seeing the Most Gracious, they will also be among the people of the Fire.\nثُمَّ يُقَالُ هَٰذَا الَّذِي كُنتُم بِهِ تُكَذِّبُونَ\nThen, it will be said to them: \"This is what you used to deny!\") (83:17) meaning, this will be said to them by way of scolding, rebuking, belittling, and humiliation.","href":"/tafsir/83?verse=7","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:83:18","title":"Ibn Kathir · 83:18–28","text":"Nay! Verily, the Record of Al-Abrar (the righteous believers) is (preserved) in 'Illiyyin (18)And what will make you know what 'Illiyyin is (19)A Register inscribed (20)To which bear witness those nearest (21)Verily, Al-Abrar (the righteous believers) will be in Delight (22)On thrones, looking (23)You will recognize in their faces the brightness of delight (24)They will be given to drink of pure sealed Rahiq (25)Sealed with musk, and for this let those strive who want to strive (26)It will be mixed with Tasnim (27)A spring whereof drink those nearest to Allah (28)\nThe Record Book of the Righteous and Their Reward\nAllah says that truly,\nإِنَّ كِتَابَ الْأَبْرَارِ\n(Verily, the Record of Al-Abrar (the righteous believers)) These people are in a situation that is the opposite of the wicked people.\nلَفِي عِلِّيِّينَ\n(is in 'Illiyyin.) meaning, their final destination is 'Illiyyin, which is the opposite of Sijjin. It has been reported from Hilal bin Yasaf that Ibn 'Abbas asked Ka'b about Sijjin while he was present, and Ka'b said, \"It is the seventh earth and in it are the souls of the disbelievers.\" Then Ibn 'Abbas asked him about 'Illiyyin, so he said, \"It is the seventh heaven and it contains the souls of the believers.\" This statement – that it is the seventh heaven – has been said by others as well. 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas said concerning Allah's statement,\nكَلَّا إِنَّ كِتَابَ الْأَبْرَارِ لَفِي عِلِّيِّينَ\n(Nay! Verily, the Record of Al-Abrar (the righteous believers) is in 'Illiyyin.)\n\"This means Paradise.\" Others besides him have said, \"'Iliyyin is located at Sidrat Al-Muntaha.\" The obvious meaning is that the word 'Illiyyin is taken from the word 'Uluw, which means highness. The more something ascends and rises, the more it becomes greater and increases. Thus, Allah magnifies its affair and extols its matter by saying,\nوَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا عِلِّيُّونَ\n(And what will make you know what 'Illiyyin is?) Then He says by way of affirming what will be written for them,\nكِتَابٌ مَّرْقُومٌ - يَشْهَدُهُ الْمُقَرَّبُونَ\n(A Register inscribed. To which bear witness those nearest.) They are the angels. This was stated by Qatadah. Al-'Awfi reported from Ibn 'Abbas that he said, \"Those nearest to Allah in each heaven will witness it.\" Then Allah says,\nإِنَّ الْأَبْرَارَ لَفِي نَعِيمٍ\n(Verily, Al-Abrar (the righteuos believers) will be in Delight.) meaning, on the Day of Judgement they will be in eternal pleasure and gardens that contain comprehensive bounties.\nعَلَى الْأَرَائِكِ\n(On thrones,) These are thrones beneath canopies from which they will be gazing. It has been said, \"This means that they will be gazing at their kingdom and what Allah has given them of good and bounties that will not end or perish. It has also been said,\nعَلَى الْأَرَائِكِ يَنظُرُونَ\n(On thrones, looking.) \"This means that they will be looking at Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.\" This is the opposite of what those wicked people have been described with,\nكَلَّا إِنَّهُمْ عَن رَّبِّهِمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ لَّمَحْجُوبُونَ\n(Nay! Surely, they (evildoers) will be veiled from seeing their Lord that Day.)(83:15) Thus, it has been mentioned that these (righteous people) will be allowed to look at Allah while they are upon their thrones and elevated couches. Concerning Allah's statement,\nتَعْرِفُ فِي وُجُوهِهِمْ نَضْرَةَ النَّعِيمِ\n(You will recognize in their faces the brightness of delight.) meaning, 'you will notice a glow of delight in their faces when you look at them.' This is a description of opulence, decorum, happiness, composure, and authority that they will be experiencing from this great delight. Concerning Allah's statement,\nيُسْقَوْنَ مِن رَّحِيقٍ مَّخْتُومٍ\n(They will be given to drink of pure sealed Rahiq.) meaning, they will be given drink from the wine of Paradise. Ar-Rahiq is one of the names of the wine (in Paradise). Ibn Mas'ud, Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, Al-Hasan, Qatadah and Ibn Zayd all said this.\nIbn Mas'ud said concerning Allah's statement,\nخِتَامُهُ مِسْكٌ\n(Sealed with musk,) \"This means it will be mixed with musk.\" Al-'Awfi reported from Ibn 'Abbas that he said, \"Allah will make the wine have a pleasant aroma for them, so the last thing that He will place in it will be musk. Thus, it will be sealed with musk.\" Qatadah and Ad-Dahhak both said the same. Then Allah says,\nوَفِي ذَٰلِكَ فَلْيَتَنَافَسِ الْمُتَنَافِسُونَ\n(and for this let (all) those strive who want to strive.) meaning, for a situation like this, let the boasters boast, compete, and strive to gain more. Let the competitors compete and race toward the likes of this. This is similar to Allah's statement,\nلِمِثْلِ هَٰذَا فَلْيَعْمَلِ الْعَامِلُونَ\n(For the like of this let the workers work.)(37:61) Allah then says,\nوَمِزَاجُهُ مِن تَسْنِيمٍ\n(It will be mixed with Tasnim.) meaning, this wine that is being described is mixed with Tasnim. This refers to a drink called Tasnim, and it is the most excellent and exalted drink of the people of Paradise. This was said by Abu Salih and Ad-Dahhak. Thus, Allah says,\nعَيْنًا يَشْرَبُ بِهَا الْمُقَرَّبُونَ\n(A spring whereof drink those nearest to Allah.)(83:28) meaning, those who are near to Allah, will drink from it as they wish, and the companions of the right hand will be given a drink that is mixed with it. This has been said by Ibn Mas'ud, Ibn 'Abbas, Masruq, Qatadah and others.","href":"/tafsir/83?verse=18","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:83:29","title":"Ibn Kathir · 83:29–36","text":"Verily, those who committed crimes used to laugh at those who believed (29)And, whenever they passed by them, used to wink one to another (30)And when they returned to their own people, they would return jesting (31)And when they saw them, they said: \"Verily, these have indeed gone astray! (32)But they were not sent as watchers over them (33)But this Day those who believe will laugh at the disbeliever (34)On thrones, looking (35)Are not the disbelievers paid for what they used to do (36)\nThe Wicked Behavior of the Criminals and Their mocking of the Believers\nAllah informs that the criminals used to laugh at the believers in the worldly life. In other words, they would mock them and despise them. Whenever they would pass by the believers, they would wink at each other about them, meaning in contempt of them.\nوَإِذَا انقَلَبُوا إِلَىٰ أَهْلِهِمُ انقَلَبُوا فَكِهِينَ\n(And when they returned to their own people, they would return jesting.) meaning, when these criminals turn back, or return to their homes, they go back pleased. This means that whatever they request, they find it. Yet, with this, they still are not grateful for Allah's favor upon them. Rather they busy themselves with despising and envying the believers.\nوَإِذَا رَأَوْهُمْ قَالُوا إِنَّ هَٰؤُلَاءِ لَضَالُّونَ\n(And when they saw them, they said: \"Verily, these have indeed gone astray!\") meaning, 'because they are upon a religion other than their own religion.' Allah then says,\nوَمَا أُرْسِلُوا عَلَيْهِمْ حَافِظِينَ\n(But they were not sent as watchers over them.) meaning, these criminals have not been sent as guardians over the deeds and statements of these believers. These wrongdoers have not been made responsible for them. So, why are they so concerned with them, and why have they made them the focus of their attention? This is as Allah says,\nقَالَ اخْسَئُوا فِيهَا وَلَا تُكَلِّمُونِ - إِنَّهُ كَانَ فَرِيقٌ مِّنْ عِبَادِي يَقُولُونَ رَبَّنَا آمَنَّا فَاغْفِرْ لَنَا وَارْحَمْنَا وَأَنتَ خَيْرُ الرَّاحِمِينَ - فَاتَّخَذْتُمُوهُمْ سِخْرِيًّا حَتَّىٰ أَنسَوْكُمْ ذِكْرِي وَكُنتُم مِّنْهُمْ تَضْحَكُونَ - إِنِّي جَزَيْتُهُمُ الْيَوْمَ بِمَا صَبَرُوا أَنَّهُمْ هُمُ الْفَائِزُونَ\n(He (Allah) will say: \"Remain you in it with ignominy! And speak you not to Me!\" Verily there was a party of My servants, who used to say: \"Our Lord! We believe, so forgive us, and have mercy on us, for You are the Best of all who show mercy!\" But you took them for a laughing stock, so much so that they made you forget My remembrance while you used to laugh at them! Verily, I have rewarded them this Day for their patience: they are indeed the ones that are successful.)(23:108-111)\nThus, Allah says here,\nفَالْيَوْمَ\n(But this Day) meaning, the Day of Judgement.\nالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مِنَ الْكُفَّارِ يَضْحَكُونَ\n(those who believe will laugh at the disbelievers) meaning, as retribution for how those people laughed at them.\nعَلَى الْأَرَائِكِ يَنظُرُونَ\n(On thrones, looking.) meaning, looking at Allah as reward for bearing the false claims against them that they were misguided. They were not misguided at all. Rather they were the close Awliya' of Allah, who will be looking at their Lord in the place of His honor. Concerning Allah's statement,\nهَلْ ثُوِّبَ الْكُفَّارُ مَا كَانُوا يَفْعَلُونَ\n(Are not the disbelievers paid for what they used to do?) meaning, 'will the disbelievers be recompensed for their mockery and belittlement against the believers, or not?' This means that they surely will be paid in full, completely and perfectly (for their behavior).\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Al-Mutaffifin, and all praise and thanks are due to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/83?verse=29","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:84:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 84:1–15","text":"The Prostration of Recitation in Surat Al-Inshiqaq\nIt is reported from Abu Salamah that while leading them in prayer, Abu Hurayrah recited,\nإِذَا السَّمَاءُ انشَقَّتْ\n(When the heaven is split asunder.) and he prostrated during its recitation. Then when he completed the prayer, he informed them that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ prostrated during its recitation. This was recorded by Muslim and An-Nasa'i on the authority of Malik.\nAl-Bukhari recorded from Abu Rafi' that he prayed the Night prayer with Abu Hurayrah) recited,\nإِذَا السَّمَاءُ انشَقَّتْ\n(When the heaven is split asunder.) then he prostrated. So Abu Rafi' said something to him about it (questioning it). Abu Hurayrah replied, \"I prostrated behind Abul-Qasim (the Prophet ﷺ), and I will never cease prostrating during its recitation until I meet him.\"\nبِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nإِذَا السَّمَاءُ انشَقَّتْ - وَأَذِنَتْ لِرَبِّهَا وَحُقَّتْ - وَإِذَا الْأَرْضُ مُدَّتْ - وَأَلْقَتْ مَا فِيهَا وَتَخَلَّتْ - وَأَذِنَتْ لِرَبِّهَا وَحُقَّتْ - يَا أَيُّهَا الْإِنسَانُ إِنَّكَ كَادِحٌ إِلَىٰ رَبِّكَ كَدْحًا فَمُلَاقِيهِ - فَأَمَّا مَنْ أُوتِيَ كِتَابَهُ بِيَمِينِهِ - فَسَوْفَ يُحَاسَبُ حِسَابًا يَسِيرًا - وَيَنقَلِبُ إِلَىٰ أَهْلِهِ مَسْرُورًا - وَأَمَّا مَنْ أُوتِيَ كِتَابَهُ وَرَاءَ ظَهْرِهِ - فَسَوْفَ يَدْعُو ثُبُورًا - وَيَصْلَىٰ سَعِيرًا - إِنَّهُ كَانَ فِي أَهْلِهِ مَسْرُورًا - إِنَّهُ ظَنَّ أَن لَّن يَحُورَ - بَلَىٰ إِنَّ رَبَّهُ كَانَ بِهِ بَصِيرًا\n(1. When the heaven is split asunder,)(2. And listens to and obeys its Lord – and it must do so.)(3. And when the earth is stretched forth,)(4. And has cast out all that was in it and became empty.)(5. And listens to and obeys its Lord – and it must do so.)(6. O man! Verily, you are returning towards your Lord with your deeds and actions, a sure returning, and you will meet.)(7. Then as for him who will be given his Record in his right hand,)(8. He surely will receive an easy reckoning,)(9. And will return to his family Masrur (in joy)!)(10. But whosoever is given his Record behind his back,)(11. He will invoke destruction,)(12. And he shall enter a blazing Fire, and made to taste its burning.)(13. Verily, he was among his people in joy!)(14. Verily, he thought that he would never return!)(15. Yes! Verily, his Lord has been ever beholding him!)\nSplitting the Heavens asunder and stretching the Earth forth on the Day of Resurrection\nAllah says,\nإِذَا السَّمَاءُ انشَقَّتْ\n(When the heaven is split asunder,) This refers to the Day of Judgement.\nوَأَذِنَتْ لِرَبِّهَا\n(And listens to and obeys its Lord) meaning, it listens to its Lord and obeys His command to split apart. This will occur on the Day of Judgement.\nوَحُقَّتْ\n(and it must do so.) meaning, it is right for it to obey the command of its Lord, because it is great and cannot be rejected, nor overcome. Rather it overpowers everything and everything is submissive to it. Then Allah says,\nوَإِذَا الْأَرْضُ مُدَّتْ\n(And when the earth is stretched forth,) meaning, when the earth is expanded, spread out and extended. Then He says,\nوَأَلْقَتْ مَا فِيهَا وَتَخَلَّتْ\n(And has cast out all that was in it and became empty.) meaning, it throws out the dead inside of it, and it empties itself of them. This was said by Mujahid, Sa'id, and Qatadah.\nوَأَذِنَتْ لِرَبِّهَا وَحُقَّتْ\n(And listens to and obeys its Lord, and it must do so.) The explanation of this is the same as what has preceded.\nThe Recompense for Deeds is True\nAllah says,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الْإِنسَانُ إِنَّكَ كَادِحٌ إِلَىٰ رَبِّكَ كَدْحًا\n(O man! Verily, you are returning towards your Lord with your deeds and actions, a sure returning,) meaning, 'verily you are hastening to your Lord and working deeds.'\nفَمُلَاقِيهِ\n(and you will meet.) 'Then you will meet that which you did of good or evil.' A proof for this is what Abu Dawud At-Tayalisi recorded from Jabir, that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nقَالَ جِبْرِيلُ: يَا مُحَمَّدُ، عِشْ مَا شِئْتَ فَإِنَّكَ مَيِّتٌ، وَأَحْبِبْ (مَنْ) شِئْتَ فَإِنَّكَ مُفَارِقُهُ، وَاعْمَلْ مَا شِئْتَ فَإِنَّكَ مُلَاقِيهِ\n(Jibril said, \"O Muhammad! Live how you wish, for verily you will die; love what you wish, for verily you will part with it; and do what you wish, for verily you will meet it (your deed).)\nThere are some people who refer the pronoun back to the statement \"your Lord.\" Thus, they hold the Ayah to mean, \"and you will meet your Lord.\" This means that He will reward you for your work, and pay you for your efforts. Therefore, both of these two views are connected. Al-'Awfi recorded from Ibn 'Abbas that he said explaining,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الْإِنسَانُ إِنَّكَ كَادِحٌ إِلَىٰ رَبِّكَ كَدْحًا\n(O man! Verily, you are returning towards your Lord with your deeds and actions, a sure returning,) \"Whatever deed you do, you will meet Allah with it, whether it is good or bad.\"\nThe Presentation and the Discussion that will take place during the Reckoning\nThen Allah says,\nفَأَمَّا مَنْ أُوتِيَ كِتَابَهُ بِيَمِينِهِ - فَسَوْفَ يُحَاسَبُ حِسَابًا يَسِيرًا\n(Then as for him who will be given his Record in his right hand, he surely, will receive an easy reckoning,)(84:7-8) meaning, easy without any difficulty. This means that he will not be investigated for all the minute details of his deeds. For verily, whoever is reckoned like that, he will certainly be destroyed.\nImam Ahmad recorded from 'A'ishah that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَنْ نُوقِشَ الْحِسَابَ عُذِّبَ\n(Whoever is interrogated during the reckoning, then he will be punished.)\nA'ishah then said, \"But didn't Allah say,\nفَسَوْفَ يُحَاسَبُ حِسَابًا يَسِيرًا\n(He surely will receive an easy reckoning,)?\" The Prophet ﷺ replied,\nلَيْسَ ذَاكِ بِالْحِسَابِ، وَلَٰــكِنْ ذٰلِكِ الْعَرْضُ، مَنْ نُوقِشَ الْحِسَابَ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ عُذِّبَ\n(That is not during to the Reckoning, rather it is referring to the presentation. Whoever is interrogated during the Reckoning on the Day of Judgement, then he will be punished.) This Hadith has also been recorded by Al-Bukhari, Muslim, At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa'i and Ibn Jarir.\nIn reference to Allah's statement,\nوَيَنقَلِبُ إِلَىٰ أَهْلِهِ مَسْرُورًا\n(And will return to his family Masrur!) This means that he will return to his family in Paradise. This was said by Qatadah and Ad-Dahhak. They also said, \"Masrur means happy and delighted by what Allah has given him.\" Allah said;\nوَأَمَّا مَنْ أُوتِيَ كِتَابَهُ وَرَاءَ ظَهْرِهِ\n(But whosoever is given his Record behind his back,) meaning, he will be given his Book in his left hand, behind his back, while his hand is bent behind him.\nفَسَوْفَ يَدْعُو ثُبُورًا\n(He will invoke destruction,) meaning, loss and destruction.\nوَيَصْلَىٰ سَعِيرًا - إِنَّهُ كَانَ فِي أَهْلِهِ مَسْرُورًا\n(And he shall enter a blazing Fire, and made to taste its burning. Verily, he was among his people in joy!)\nmeaning, happy. He did not think about the consequences, nor feared what (future) was in front of him. His light happiness will be followed by long grief.\nإِنَّهُ ظَنَّ أَن لَّن يَحُورَ\n(Verily, he thought that he would never return!)\nmeaning, he used to believe that he would not return to Allah, nor would Allah bring him back (to life) after his death. This was said by Ibn 'Abbas, Qatadah and others. Allah then says,\nبَلَىٰ إِنَّ رَبَّهُ كَانَ بِهِ بَصِيرًا\n(Yes! Verily, his Lord has been ever beholding him!)\nmeaning, certainly Allah will repeat his creation just as he began his creation, and He will reward him based upon his deeds, whether they were good or bad. He was ever watchful of him, meaning All-Knowing and All-Aware.","href":"/tafsir/84?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:84:16","title":"Ibn Kathir · 84:16–25","text":"But no! I swear by Ash-Shafaq (16)And the night and what it Wasaqa (17)And the moon when it Ittasaq (18)You shall certainly travel from stage to stage (19)What is the matter with them, that they believe not (20)And when the Qur'an is recited to them, they fall not prostrate (21)Nay, those who disbelieve deny (22)And Allah knows best what they gather (23)So, announce to them a painful torment (24)Save those who believe and do righteous good deeds, for them is a reward that will never come to an end (25)\nSwearing by the Various Stages of Man's Journey\nIt has been reported from 'Ali, Ibn 'Abbas, 'Ubadah bin As-Samit, Abu Hurayrah, Shaddad bin Aws, Ibn 'Umar, Muhammad bin 'Ali bin Al-Husayn, Makhul, Bakr bin 'Abdullah Al-Muzani, Bukayr bin Al-Ashaj, Malik, Ibn Abi Dhi'b, and 'Abdul-'Aziz bin Abi Salamah Al-Majishun, they all said, \"Ash-Shafaq is the redness (in the sky)\nAbdur-Razzaq recorded from Abu Hurayrah that he said, \"Ash-Shafaq is the whiteness.\" So Ash-Shafaq is the redness of the horizon, either before sunset, as Mujahid said or after sunset, as is well known with the scholars of the Arabic Language.\nAl-Khalil bin Ahmad said, \"Ash-Shafaq is the redness that appears from the setting of sun until the time of the last 'Isha' (when it is completely dark). When that redness goes away, it is said, 'Ash-Shafaq has disappeared.'\"\nAl-Jawhari said, \"Ash-Shafaq is the remaining light of the sun and its redness at the beginning of the night until it is close to actual nighttime (darkness).\" 'Ikrimah made a similar statement when he said, \"Ash-Shafaq is that what is between Al-Maghrib and Al-'Isha'.\"\nIn the Sahih of Muslim, it is recorded from 'Abdullah bin 'Amr that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nوَقْتُ الْمَغْرِبِ مَا لَمْ يَغِبِ الشَّفَقُ\n(The time of Al-Maghrib is as long as Ash-Shafaq has not disappeared.)\"\nIn all of this, there is a proof that Ash-Shafaq is as Al-Jawhari and Al-Khalil have said.\nIbn 'Abbas, Mujahid, Al-Hasan and Qatadah, all said that,\nوَمَا وَسَقَ\n(and what it Wasaqa) means \"What it gathers.\" Qatadah said, \"The stars and animals it gathers.\"\nIkrimah said,\nوَالَّيْلِ وَمَا وَسَقَ\n(And by the night and what it Wasaqa,)\n\"What it drives into due to its darkness, because when it is nighttime everything goes to its home.\" Concerning Allah's statement,\nوَالْقَمَرِ إِذَا اتَّسَقَ\n(And by the moon when it Ittasaqa.) Ibn 'Abbas said, \"When it comes together and becomes complete.\" Al-Hasan said, \"When it comes together and becomes full.\"\nQatadah said, \"When it completes its cycle.\" These statements refer to its light when it is completed and becomes full, as the idea was initiated with \"The night and what it gathers.\" Allah said,\nلَتَرْكَبُنَّ طَبَقًا عَن طَبَقٍ\n(You shall certainly travel from stage to stage.) Al-Bukhari recorded from Mujahid that Ibn 'Abbas said,\nلَتَرْكَبُنَّ طَبَقًا عَن طَبَقٍ\n(You shall certainly travel from stage to stage.) \"Stage after stage. Your Prophet ﷺ has said this.\" Al-Bukhari recorded this statement with this wording.\nIkrimah said,\nطَبَقًا عَن طَبَقٍ\n(From stage to stage.) \"Stage after stage. Weaned after he was breast feeding, and an old man after he was a young man.\" Al-Hasan Al-Basri said,\nطَبَقًا عَن طَبَقٍ\n(From stage to stage.) \"Stage after stage. Ease after difficulty, difficulty after ease, wealth after poverty, poverty after wealth, health after sickness, and sickness after health.\"\nThe Disapproval of Their Lack of Faith, giving Them Tidings of the Torment, that the Ultimate Pleasure will be for the Believers\nAllah said,\nفَمَا لَهُمْ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ - وَإِذَا قُرِئَ عَلَيْهِمُ الْقُرْآنُ لَا يَسْجُدُونَ ۩\n(What is the matter with them, that they believe not? And when the Qur'an is recited to them, they fall not prostrate.)\nmeaning, what prevents them from believing in Allah, His Messenger ﷺ and the Last Day, and what is wrong with them that when Allah's Ayat and His Words are recited to them they do not prostrate due to awe, respect and reverence? Concerning Allah's statement,\nبَلِ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا يُكَذِّبُونَ\n(Nay, those who disbelieve deny.) meaning, from their mannerism is rejection, obstinacy, and opposition to the truth.\nوَاللَّهُ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا يُوعُونَ\n(And Allah knows best what they gather,) Mujahid and Qatadah both said, \"What they conceal in their chests.\"\nفَبَشِّرْهُم بِعَذَابٍ أَلِيمٍ\n(So, announce to them a painful torment.) meaning, 'inform them, O Muhammad, that Allah has prepared for them a painful torment.' Then Allah says,\nإِلَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ\n(Save those who believe and do righteous good deeds,)\nThis is a clear exception meaning, 'but those who believe.' This refers to those who believe in their hearts. Then the statement, \"and do righteous good deeds,\" is referring to that which they do with their limbs.\nلَهُمْ أَجْرٌ\n(for them is a reward) meaning, in the abode of the Hereafter.\nغَيْرُ مَمْنُونٍ\n(that will never come to an end.) Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Without being decreased.\" Mujahid and Ad-Dahhak both said, \"Without measure.\" The result of their statements is that it (the reward) is without end. This is as Allah says,\nعَطَاءً غَيْرَ مَجْذُوذٍ\n(A gift without an end.)(11:108) As-Suddi said, \"Some of them have said that this means without end and without decrease.\"\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Al-Inshiqaq. All praise and thanks are due to Allah, and He is the giver of success and freedom from error.","href":"/tafsir/84?verse=16","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:85:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 85:1–10","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nوَالسَّمَاءِ ذَاتِ الْبُرُوجِ - وَالْيَوْمِ الْمَوْعُودِ - وَشَاهِدٍ وَمَشْهُودٍ - قُتِلَ أَصْحَابُ الْأُخْدُودِ - النَّارِ ذَاتِ الْوَقُودِ - إِذْ هُمْ عَلَيْهَا قُعُودٌ - وَهُمْ عَلَىٰ مَا يَفْعَلُونَ بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ شُهُودٌ - وَمَا نَقَمُوا مِنْهُمْ إِلَّا أَن يُؤْمِنُوا بِاللَّهِ الْعَزِيزِ الْحَمِيدِ - الَّذِي لَهُ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ ۚ وَاللَّهُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ شَهِيدٌ - إِنَّ الَّذِينَ فَتَنُوا الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتِ ثُمَّ لَمْ يَتُوبُوا فَلَهُمْ عَذَابُ جَهَنَّمَ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابُ الْحَرِيقِ\n(1. By the heaven holding the Buruj.)(2. And by by the Promised Day.)(3. And by the Witness and by the Witnessed.)(4. Cursed were the People of the Ditch.)(5. Of fire fed with fuel.)(6. When they sat by it.)(7. And they witnessed what they were doing against the believers.)(8. And they had no fault except that they believed in Allah, the Almighty, Worthy of all praise!)(9. To Whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth! And Allah is Witness over everything.)(10. Verily, those who put into trial the believing men and believing women, and then do not turn in repentance, then they will have the torment of Hell, and they will have the punishment of the burning Fire.)\nThe Interpretation of the Word Buruj\nAllah swears by the heaven and its Buruj. The Buruj are the giant stars, as Allah says,\nتَبَارَكَ الَّذِي جَعَلَ فِي السَّمَاءِ بُرُوجًا وَجَعَلَ فِيهَا سِرَاجًا وَقَمَرًا مُّنِيرًا\n(Blessed is He Who has placed in the heaven Buruj, and has placed therein a great lamp (the sun), and a moon giving light.)(25:61)\nIbn 'Abbas, Mujahid, Ad-Dahhak, Al-Hasan, Qatadah and As-Suddi, all said, \"Al-Buruj are the stars.\" Al-Minhal bin 'Amr said,\nوَالسَّمَاءِ ذَاتِ الْبُرُوجِ\n(By the heaven holding the Buruj.) \"The beautiful creation.\" Ibn Jarir chose the view that it means the positions of the sun and the moon, which are twelve Buruj. The sun travels through each one of these \"Burj\" (singular of Buruj) in one month. The moon travels through each one of these Burj in two-and-a-third days, which makes a total of twenty-eight positions, and it is hidden for two nights.\nThe Explanation of the Promised Day and the Witness and the Witnessed\nAllah says,\nوَالْيَوْمِ الْمَوْعُودِ - وَشَاهِدٍ وَمَشْهُودٍ\n(And by the Promised Day. And by the Witness, and by the Witnessed.)\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded from Abu Hurayrah that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nوَالْيَوْمِ الْمَوْعُودِ\nيَوْمُ الْقِيَامَةِ\nوَشَاهِدٍ\nيَوْمُ الْجُمُعَةِ، وَمَا طَلَعَتْ شَمْسٌ وَلَا غَرَبَتْ عَلَى يَوْمٍ أَفْضَلَ مِنْ يَوْمِ الْجُمُعَةِ، وَفِيهِ سَاعَةٌ لَا يُوَافِقُهَا عَبْدٌ مُسْلِمٌ يَسْأَلُ اللهَ فِيهَا خَيْرًا إِلَّا أَعْطَاهُ إِيَّاهُ، وَلَا يَسْتَعِيذُ فِيهَا مِنْ شَرِّ إِلَّا أَعَاذَهُ.\nوَمَشْهُودٍ\nيَوْمُ عَرَفَةَ\n\"(And by the Promised Day.) This refers to the Day of Judgement. (And by the Witness.) This refers to Friday, and the sun does not rise or set on a day that is better than Friday. During it there is an hour that no Muslim servant catches while asking Allah from some good except that Allah will give it to him. He does not seek refuge from any evil in it except that Allah will protect him. (And by the Witnessed.) This refers to the day of 'Arafah (in Hajj).\"\nIbn Khuzaymah also recorded the same Hadith. It has also been recorded as a statement of Abu Hurayrah and it is similar (to this Hadith).\nIt has also been reported from Abu Hurayrah, Ibn 'Abbas, Al-Hasan bin 'Ali, Al-Hasan Al-Basri, Sa'id bin Al-Musayyib, Mujahid, 'Ikrimah and Ad-Dahhaak that they all said that here the Witnessed refers to the Day of Judgement.\nAl-Baghawi said, \"The majority considers the Witness to be Friday, and the Witnessed to be the day of 'Arafah.\"\nThe Oppression of the People of the Ditch against the Muslims\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nقُتِلَ أَصْحَابُ الْأُخْدُودِ\n(Cursed were (Qutila) the People of the Ditch (Ukhdud).)\nmeaning, the companions of the Ukhdud were cursed. The plural of Ukhdud is Akhadid, which means ditches in the ground.\nThis is information about a group of people who were among the disbelievers. They went after those among them who believed in Allah and they attempted to force them to give up their religion. However, the believers refused to recant, so they dug a ditch for them in the ground. Then they lit a fire in it and prepared some fuel for it in order to keep it ablaze. Then they tried to convince them (the believers) to apostate from their religion (again), but they still refused them. So they threw them into the fire. Thus, Allah says,\nقُتِلَ أَصْحَابُ الْأُخْدُودِ - النَّارِ ذَاتِ الْوَقُودِ - إِذْ هُمْ عَلَيْهَا قُعُودٌ - وَهُمْ عَلَىٰ مَا يَفْعَلُونَ بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ شُهُودٌ\n(Cursed were the People of the Ditch. Of fire fed with fuel. When they sat by it. And they witnessed what they were doing against the believers.)\nmeaning, they were witnesses to what was done to these believers. Allah said,\nوَمَا نَقَمُوا مِنْهُمْ إِلَّا أَن يُؤْمِنُوا بِاللَّهِ الْعَزِيزِ الْحَمِيدِ\n(And they had no fault except that they believed in Allah, the Almighty, Worthy of all praise!)\nmeaning, they did not commit any sin according to these people, except for their faith in Allah the Almighty, Who does not treat unjustly those who desire to be with Him. He is the Most Mighty and Most Praiseworthy in all of His statements, actions, legislation, and decrees. He decreed what happened to these servants of His at the hands of the disbelievers - and He is the Most Mighty, the Most Praiseworthy - even though the reason for this decree is unknown to many people. Then Allah says,\nالَّذِي لَهُ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ\n(To Whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth!)\nAmong His perfect Attributes is that He is the Owner of all of the heavens, the earth, whatever is in them, and whatever is between them.\nوَاللَّهُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ شَهِيدٌ\n(And Allah is Witness over everything.)\nmeaning, nothing is concealed from Him in all of the heavens and the earth, nor is anything hidden from Him.\nThe Story of the Sorcerer, the Monk, the Boy and those who were Forced to Enter the Ditch\nImam Ahmad recorded from Suhayb that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nكَانَ فِيمَنْ كَانَ قَبْلَكُمْ مَلِكٌ وَكَانَ لَهُ سَاحِرٌ، فَلَمَّا كَبِرَ السَّاحِرُ قَالَ لِلْمَلِكِ: إِنِّي قَدْ كَبُرَ سِنِّي وَحَضَرَ أَجَلِي، فَادْفَعْ إِلَيَّ غُلَامًا لِأُعَلِّمَهُ السِّحْرَ، فَدَفَعَ إِلَيْهِ غُلَامًا فَكَانَ يُعَلِّمُهُ السِّحْرَ، وَكَانَ بَينَ السَّاحِرِ وَ بَينَ الْمَلِكِ رَاهِبٌ فَأَتَى الْغُلَامُ عَلَى الرَّاهِبِ فَسَمِعَ مِنْ كَلَامِهِ فَأَعْجَبَهُ نَحْوُهُ وَكَلَامُهُ، وَكَانَ إِذَا أَتَى السَّاحِرَ ضَرَبَهُ وَقَالَ: مَا حَبَسَكَ؟ وَإِذَا أَتَى أَهْلَهُ ضَرَبُوهُ وَقَالُوا: مَا حَبَسَكَ؟ فَشَكَا ذٰلِكَ إِلَى الرَّاهِبِ فَـقَالَ: إِذَا أَرَادَ السَّاحِرُ أَنْ يَضْرِبَكَ فَقُلْ: حَبَسَنِي أَهْلِي، وَإِذَا أَرَادَ أَهْلُكَ أَنْ يَضْرِبُوكَ فَقُلْ: حَبَسَنِي السَّاحِرُ، قَالَ: فَبَيْنَمَا هُوَ ذَاتَ يَوْمٍ إِذْ أَتَى عَلَى دَابَّةٍ فَظِيعَةٍ عَظِيمَةٍ قَدْ حَبَسَتِ النَّاسَ فَلَا يَسْتَطِيعُونَ أَنْ يَجُوزُوا. فَقَالَ: الْيَوْمَ أَعْلَمُ أَمْرُ الرَّاهِبِ أَحَبُّ إِلَى اللهِ أَمْ أَمْرُ السَّاحِرِ؟ قَالَ فَأَخَذَ حَجَرًا فَـقَالَ: اللْهُمَّ إِنْ كَانَ أَمْرُ الرَّاهِبِ أَحَبَّ إِلَيْكَ وَأَرْضَى مِنْ أَمْرِ السَّاحِرِ فَاقْتُلْ هذِهِ الدَّابَّةَ حَتّٰى يَجُوزَ النَّاسُ، ورَمَاهَا فَقَتَلَهَا وَمَضَىٰ النَّاسُ.\n(Among the people who came before you, there was a king who had a sorcerer, and when that sorcerer became old, he said to the king, \"I have become old and my time is nearly over, so please send me a boy whom I can teach magic.\" So, he sent him a boy and the sorcerer taught him magic. Whenever the boy went to the sorcerer, he sat with a monk who was on the way and listened to his speech and admired them. So, when he went to the sorcerer, he passed by the monk and sat there with him; and on visiting the sorcerer the latter would thrash him. So, the boy complained about this to the monk. The monk said to him, \"Whenever you are afraid of the sorcerer, say to him: 'My people kept me busy.' And whenever you are afraid of your people, say to them: 'The sorcerer kept me busy.'\" So the boy carried on like that (for some time). Then a huge terrible creature appeared on the road and the people were unable to pass by. The boy said, \"Today I shall know whether the sorcerer is better or the monk is better.\" So, he took a stone and said, \"O Allah! If the deeds and actions of the monk are liked by You better than those of the sorcerer, then kill this creature so that the people can cross (the road).\" Then he struck it with a stone killing it and the people passed by on the road.\nفَأَخْبَرَ الرَّاهِبَ بِذٰلِكَ فَـقَالَ: أَيْ بُنَيَّ، أَنْتَ أَفْضَلُ مِنِّي وَإِنَّكَ سَتُبْتَلَىٰ، فَإِنِ ابْتُلِيتَ فَلَا تَدُلَّ عَلَيَّ، فَكَانَ الْغُلَامُ يُبْرِىءُ الْأَكْمَهَ وَالْأَبْرَصَ وَسَائِرَ الْأَدْوَاءِ وَيَشْفِيهِمْ، وَكَانَ لِلْمَلِكِ جَلِيسٌ فَعَمِيَ فَسَمِعَ بِهِ فَأَتَاهُ بِهَدَايَا كَثِيرَةٍ فَقَالَ: اشْفِنِي وَلَكَ مَا هٰهُنَا أَجْمَعُ، فَـقَالَ: مَا أَنَا أَشْفِي أَحَدًا، إِنَّمَا يَشْفِي اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ، فَإِنْ آمَنْتَ بِهِ دَعَوْتُ اللهَ فَشَفَاكَ، فَآمَنَ فَدَعَا اللهَ فَشَفَاهُ.\nThe boy came to the monk and informed him about it. The monk said to him, \"O my son! Today you are better than I, and you have achieved what I see! You will be put to trial. And in case you are put to trial, do not inform (them) about me.\" The boy used to treat the people suffering from congenital blindness, leprosy, and other diseases. There was a courtier of the king who had become blind and he heard about the boy. He came and brought a number of gifts for the boy and said, \"All these gifts are for you on the condition that you cure me.\" The boy said, \"I do not cure anybody; it is only Allah who cures people. So, if you believe in Allah and supplicate to Him, He will cure you.\" So, he believed in and supplicated to Allah, and Allah cured him.\nثُمَّ أَتَى الْمَلِكَ فَجَلَسَ مِنْهُ نَحْوَ مَا كَانَ يَجْلِسُ فَقَالَ لَهُ الْمَلِكُ: يَا فُلَانُ، مَنْ رَدَّ عَلَيْكَ بَصَرَكَ؟ فَـقَالَ: رَبِّي. فَـقَالَ: أَنَا؟ قَالَ: لَا، رَبِّي وَرَبُّكَ اللهُ، قَالَ: وَلَكَ رَبٌّ غَيْرِي؟ قَالَ: نَعَمْ رَبِّي وَرَبُّكَ اللهُ، فَلَمْ يَزَلْ يُعَذِّبُهُ حَتّٰى دَلَّ عَلَى الْغُلَامِ، فَبَعَثَ إِلَيْهِ فَـقَالَ: أَيْ بُنَيَّ بَلَغَ مِنْ سِحْرِكَ أَنْ تُبْرِىءَ الْأَكْمَهَ وَالْأَبْرَصَ وَهٰذِهِ الْأَدْوَاءَ! قَالَ: مَا أَشْفِي أَحَدًا إِنَّمَا يَشْفِي اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ، قَالَ: أَنَا؟ قَالَ: لَا. قَالَ: أَوَلَكَ رَبٌّ غَيْرِي؟ قَالَ: رَبِّي وَرَبُّكَ اللهُ، فَأَخَذَهُ أَيْضًا بِالْعَذَابِ فَلَمْ يَزَلْ بِهِ حَتّٰى دَلَّ عَلَى الرَّاهِبِ فَأُتِيَ بِالرَّاهِبِ فَقَالَ: ارْجِعْ عَنْ دِينِكَ فَأَبَىٰ، فَوَضَعَ الْمِنْشَارَ فِي مَفْرِقِ رَأْسِهِ حَتّٰى وَقَعَ شِقَّاهُ، وَقَالَ لِلْأَعْمَىٰ: ارْجِعْ عَنْ دِينِكَ، فَأَبَىٰ، فَوَضَعَ الْمِنْشَارَ فِي مَفْرِقِ رَأْسِهِ حَتّٰى وَقَعَ شِقَّاهُ إِلَى الْأَرْضِ. وَقَالَ لِلْغُلَام: ارْجِعْ عَنْ دِينِكَ، فَأَبَى، فَبَعَثَ بِهِ مَعَ نَفَرٍ إِلىٰ جَبَلِ كَذَا وَكَذَا وَقَالَ: إِذَا بَلَغْتُمْ ذرْوَتَهُ فَإِنْ رَجَعَ عَنْ دِينِهِ وَإِلَّا فَدَهْدِهُوهُ، فَذَهَبُوا بِهِ فَلَمَّا عَلَوْا بِهِ الْجَبَلَ قَالَ: اللّٰهُمَّ اكْفِنِيهِمْ بِمَا شِئْتَ، فَرَجَفَ بِهِمُ الْجَبَلُ فَدُهْدِهُوا أَجْمَعُونَ، وَجَاءَ الْغُلَامُ يَتَلَمَّسُ حَتَّى دَخَلَ عَلَى الْمَلِكِ فَقَالَ: مَا فَعَلَ أَصْحَابُكَ؟ فَقَالَ: كَفَانِيهِمُ اللهُ تَعَالَى، فَبَعَثَ بِهِ مَعَ نَفَرٍ فِي قُرْقُورٍ فَقَالَ: إِذَا لَجَجْتُمْ بِهِ الْبَحْرَ فَإِنْ رَجَعَ عَنْ دِينِهِ، وَإِلَّا فَغَرِّقُوهُ فِي الْبَحْرِ، فَلَجَّجُوا بِهِ الْبَحْرَ فَـقَالَ الْغُلَامُ: اللّٰهُمَّ اكْفِنِيهِمْ بِمَا شِئْتَ، فَغَرِقُوا أَجْمَعُونَ.\nLater, the courtier came to the king and sat at the place where he used to sit before. The king said, \"Who gave you back your sight?\" The courtier replied, \"My Lord.\" The king then said, \"I did?\" The courtier said, \"No, my Lord and your Lord - Allah\" The king said, \"Do you have another Lord beside me?\" The courtier said, \"Yes, your Lord and my Lord is Allah.\" The king tortured him and did not stop until he told him about the boy. So, the boy was brought to the king and he said to him, \"O boy! Has your magic reached to the extent that you cure congenital blindness, leprosy and other diseases?\" He said, \"I do not cure anyone. Only Allah can cure.\" The king said, \"Me?\" The boy replied, \"No.\" The king asked, \"Do you have another Lord besides me?\" The boy answered, \"My Lord and your Lord is Allah.\" So, he tortured him also until he told about the monk. Then the monk was brought to him and the king said to him, \"Abandon your religion.\" The monk refused and so the king ordered a saw to be brought which was placed in the middle of his head and he fell, sawn in two. Then it was said to the man who used to be blind, \"Abandon your religion.\" He refused to do so, and so a saw was brought and placed in the middle of his head and he fell, sawn in two. Then the boy was brought and it was said to him, \"Abandon your religion.\" He refused and so the king sent him to the top of such and such mountain with some people. He told the people, \"Ascend up the mountain with him till you reach its peak, then see if he abandons his religion; otherwise throw him from the top.\" They took him and when they ascended to the top, he said, \"O Allah! Save me from them by any means that You wish.\" So, the mountain shook and they all fell down and the boy came back walking to the king. The king said, \"What did your companions (the people I sent with you) do?\" The boy said, \"Allah saved me from them.\" So, the king ordered some people to take the boy on a boat to the middle of the sea, saying, \"If he renounces his religion (well and good), but if he refuses, drown him.\" So, they took him out to sea and he said, \"O Allah! Save me from them by any means that you wish.\" So they were all drowned in the sea.\nوَجَاءَ الْغُلَامُ حَتّٰى دَخَلَ عَلَى الْمَلِكِ فَـقَالَ: مَا فَعَلَ أَصْحَابُكَ؟ فَقَالَ: كَفَانِيهِمُ اللهُ تَعَالَىٰ ثُمَّ قَالَ لِلْمَلِكِ: إِنَّكَ لَسْتَ بِقَاتِلي حَتّٰى تَفْعَلَ مَا آمُرُكَ بِهِ، فَإِنْ أَنْتَ فَعَلْتَ مَا آمُرُكَ بِهِ قَتَلْتَنِي، وَإِلَّا فَإِنَّكَ لَا تَسْتَطِيعُ قَتْلِي، قَالَ: وَمَا هُوَ؟ قَالَ: تَجْمَعُ النَّاسَ فِي صَعِيدٍ وَاحِدٍ ثُمَّ تَصْلُبُنِي عَلَى جذع وَتَأْخُذُ سَهْمًا مِنْ كِنَانَتِي، ثُمَّ قُلْ: بِاسْمِ اللهِ رَبِّ الْغُلَامِ. فَإِنَّكَ إِذَا فَعَلْتَ ذٰلِكَ قَـتَلْتَنِـي. فَفَعَلَ وَوَضَعَ السَّهْمَ فِي كَبِدِ قَوْسِهِ ثُمَّ رَمَاهُ وَقَالَ: بِاسْمِ اللهِ رَبِّ الْغُلَامِ، فَوَقَعَ السَّهْمُ فِي صُدْغِهِ، فَوَضَعَ الْغُلَامُ يَدَهُ عَلَى مَوْضِعِ السَّهْمِ وَمَاتَ، فَـقَالَ النَّاسُ: آمَنَّا بِرَبِّ الْغُلَامِ. فَقِيلَ لِلْمَلِكِ: أَرَأَيْتَ مَا كُنْتَ تَحْذَرُ؟ فَقَدْ وَاللهِ نَزَلَ بِكَ، قَدْ آمَنَ النَّاسُ كُلُّهُمْ، فَأَمَرَ بِأَفْوَاهِ السِّكَكِ، فَخُدَّتْ فِيهَا الْأَخَادِيدُ وَأُضْرِمَتْ فِيهَا النِّيرَانُ، وَقَالَ: مَنْ رَجَعَ عَنْ دِينِهِ فَدَعُوهُ، وَإِلَّا فَأَقْحِمُوهُ فِيهَا، قَالَ: فَكَانُوا يَتَعَادُّونَ فِيهَا وَيَتَدَافَعُونَ، فَجَاءَتِ امْرأَةٌ بابْنٍ لَهَا تُرْضِعُهُ، فَكَأَنَّهَا تَقَاعَسَتْ أَنْ تَقَعَ فِي النَّارِ فَـقَالَ الصَّبِيُّ: اصْبِرِي يَا أُمَّاهْ فَإِنَّكِ عَلَى الْحَقِّ\nThen the boy returned to the king and the king said, \"What did your companions do?\" The boy replied, \"Allah, saved me from them.\" Then he said to the king, \"You will not be able to kill me until you do as I order you. And if you do as I order you, you will be able to kill me.\" The king asked, \"And what is that?\" The boy said, \"Gather the people in one elevated place and tie me to the trunk of a tree; then take an arrow from my quiver and say: 'In the Name of Allah, the Lord of the boy.' If you do this, you will be able to kill me.\" So he did this, and placing an arrow in the bow, he shot it, saying, \"In the Name of Allah, the Lord of the boy.\" The arrow hit the boy in the temple, and the boy placed his hand over the arrow wound and died. The people proclaimed, \"We believe in the Lord of the boy!\" Then it was said to the king, \"Do you see what has happened? That which you feared has taken place. By Allah, all the people have believed (in the Lord of the boy).\" So he ordered that ditches be dug at the entrances to the roads and it was done, and fires were kindled in them. Then the king said, \"Whoever abandons his religion, let him go, and whoever does not, throw him into the fire.\" They were struggling and scuffling in the fire, until a woman and her baby whom she was breast feeding came and it was as if she was being somewhat hesitant of falling into the fire, so her baby said to her, \"Be patient mother! For verily, you are following the truth!\")\nMuslim also recorded this Hadith at the end of the Sahih. Muhammad bin Ishaq bin Yasar related this story in his book of Sirah in another way that has some differences from that which has just been related.\nThen, after Ibn Ishaq explained that the people of Najran began following the religion of the boy after his murder, which was the religion of Christianity, he said, \"Then (the king) Dhu Nuwas came to them with his army and called them to Judaism. He gave them a choice to either accept Judaism or be killed, so they chose death. Thus, he had a ditch dug and burned (some of them) in the fire (in the ditch), while others he killed with the sword. He made an example of them (by slaughtering them) until he had killed almost twenty thousand of them. It was about Dhu Nuwas and his army that Allah revealed to His Messenger ﷺ:\nقُتِلَ أَصْحَابُ الْأُخْدُودِ - النَّارِ ذَاتِ الْوَقُودِ - إِذْ هُمْ عَلَيْهَا قُعُودٌ - وَهُمْ عَلَىٰ مَا يَفْعَلُونَ بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ شُهُودٌ - وَمَا نَقَمُوا مِنْهُمْ إِلَّا أَن يُؤْمِنُوا بِاللَّهِ الْعَزِيزِ الْحَمِيدِ - الَّذِي لَهُ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ ۚ وَاللَّهُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ شَهِيدٌ\n(Cursed were the People of the Ditch. Of fire fed with fuel. When they sat by it. And they witnessed what they were doing against the believers. And they had no fault except that they believed in Allah, the Almighty, Worthy of all praise! To Whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth! And Allah is Witness over everything.)(85:4-9)\"\nThis is what Muhammad bin Ishaq said in his book of Sirah – that the one who killed the People of the Ditch was Dhu Nuwas, and his name was Zur'ah. In the time of his kingdom he was called Yusuf. He was the son of Tuban As'ad Abi Karib, who was the Tubba' who invaded Al-Madinah and put the covering over the Ka'bah. He kept two rabbis with him from the Jews of Al-Madinah. After this some of the people of Yemen accepted Judaism at the hands of these two rabbis, as Ibn Ishaq mentions at length.\nSo Dhu Nuwas killed twenty thousand people in one morning in the Ditch. Only one man among them escaped. He was known as Daws Dhu Tha'laban. He escaped on a horse and they set out after him, but they were unable to catch him. He went to Caesar, the emperor of Ash-Sham. So, Caesar wrote to An-Najashi, the King of Abyssinia. So, he sent with him an army of Abyssinian Christians, who were lead by Aryat and Abrahah. They rescued Yemen from the hands of the Jews. Dhu Nuwas tried to flee but eventually fell into the sea and drowned. After this, the kingdom of Abyssinia remained under Christian power for seventy years. Then the power was divested from the Christians by Sayf bin Dhi Yazin Al-Himyari when Kisra, the king of Persia sent an army there (to Yemen). He (the king) sent with him (Sayf Al-Himyari) those people who were in the prisons, and they were close to seven hundred in number. So, he (Sayf Al-Himyari) conquered Yemen with them and returned the kingdom back to the people of Himyar (Yemenis). We will mention a portion of this – if Allah wills – when we discuss the Tafsir of the Surah:\nأَلَمْ تَرَ كَيْفَ فَعَلَ رَبُّكَ بِأَصْحَابِ الْفِيلِ\n(Have you not seen how your Lord dealt with the Owners of the Elephant?)(105:1)\nThe Punishment of the People of the Ditch\nAllah said,\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ فَتَنُوا الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتِ\n(Verily, those who put into trial the believing men and believing women,)\nmeaning, they burned (them). This was said by Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak, and Ibn Abza.\nثُمَّ لَمْ يَتُوبُوا\n(and then do not turn in repentance,)\nmeaning, 'they do not cease from what they are doing, and do not regret what they had done before.'\nفَلَهُمْ عَذَابُ جَهَنَّمَ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابُ الْحَرِيقِ\n(then they will have the torment of Hell, and they will have the punishment of the burning Fire.)\nThis is because the recompense is based upon the type of deed performed. Al-Hasan Al-Basri said, \"Look at this generosity and kindness. These people killed Allah's Awliya' and He still invites them to make repentance and seek forgiveness.\"","href":"/tafsir/85?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:85:11","title":"Ibn Kathir · 85:11–22","text":"Verily, those who believe and do righteous good deeds, for them will be Gardens under which rivers flow. That is the supreme success (11)Verily, the punishment of your Lord is severe and painful (12)Verily, He it is Who begins and repeats (13)And He is Oft-Forgiving, Al-Wadud (14)Owner of the Throne, Al-Majid (the Glorious)(15)Doer of what He intends (16)Has the story reached you of the hosts (17)Of Fir'awn and Thamud (18)Nay! The disbelievers (persisted) in denying (19)And Allah encompasses them from behind (20)Nay! This is a Glorious Qur'an (21)In Al-Lawh Al-Mahfuz (22)\nThe Reward of the Righteous, and the Harsh Seizing of the Disbelieving Enemies of Allah\nAllah informs about His believing servants that\nلَهُمْ جَنَّاتٌ تَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ\n(for them will be Gardens under which rivers flow.)\nThis is the opposite of what he has prepared for His enemies of Fire and Hell. Thus, He says,\nذَٰلِكَ الْفَوْزُ الْكَبِيرُ\n(That is the supreme success.) Then Allah says,\nإِنَّ بَطْشَ رَبِّكَ لَشَدِيدٌ\n(Verily, the punishment of your Lord is severe and painful.)\nmeaning, indeed His punishment and His vengeance upon His enemies, who have rejected His Messengers, and opposed His command, is severe, great and strong. For verily, He is the Owner of power, Most Strong. He is the One that whatever He wants, then it will be however He wants it to be, in the matter of a blinking of an eye, or even swifter. Thus, Allah says,\nإِنَّهُ هُوَ يُبْدِئُ وَيُعِيدُ\n(Verily, He it is Who begins and repeats.)\nmeaning, from His perfect strength and power is that He begins the creation, and He repeats it just as He began it, without opposition or resistance.\nوَهُوَ الْغَفُورُ الْوَدُودُ\n(And He is Oft-Forgiving, Al-Wadud.) meaning, He forgives the sin of whoever repents to Him and humbles himself before Him, no matter what the sin may be. Ibn 'Abbas and others have said about the name Al-Wadud, \"It means Al-Habib (the Loving).\"\nذُو الْعَرْشِ\n(Owner of the Throne,) meaning, the Owner of the Mighty Throne that is above all of the creation. Then He says,\nالْمَجِيدُ\n(Al-Majid (the Glorious).) This word has been recited in two different ways: either with a Dhammah over its last letter (Al-Majidu), which is an attribute of the Lord, or with a Kasrah under its last letter (Al-Majid), which is a description of the Throne. Nevertheless, both meanings are correct.\nفَعَّالٌ لِّمَا يُرِيدُ\n(Doer of what He intends.) meaning, whatever He wants He does it, and there is no one who can counter His ruling. He is not asked about what He does due to His greatness, His power, His wisdom and His justice. This is as we have related previously from Abu Bakr As-Siddiq, that it was said to him during the illness of (his) death, \"Has a doctor seen you?\" He replied, \"Yes.\" They said, \"What did he say to you?\" He replied, \"He said, 'I am the Doer of whatever I intend.'\"\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nهَلْ أَتَاكَ حَدِيثُ الْجُنُودِ - فِرْعَوْنَ وَثَمُودَ\n(Has the story reached you of the hosts. Of Fir'awn and Thamud?)\nmeaning, has the news reached you of what Allah caused to befall them of torment, and that He sent down upon them the punishment that no one was able to ward off from them? This is the affirmation of His statement,\nإِنَّ بَطْشَ رَبِّكَ لَشَدِيدٌ\n(Verily, the punishment of your Lord is severe and painful.)\nmeaning, when He seizes the wrongdoer, He seizes him with a severe and painful punishment. It is the seizing punishment of One Most Mighty, and Most Powerful. Then Allah says,\nبَلِ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا فِي تَكْذِيبٍ\n(Nay! The disbelievers (persisted) in denying.)\nmeaning, they are in doubt, suspicion, disbelief and rebellion.\nوَاللَّهُ مِن وَرَائِهِم مُّحِيطٌ\n(And Allah encompasses them from behind!)\nmeaning, He has power over them, and is able to compel them. They cannot escape Him or evade Him.\nبَلْ هُوَ قُرْآنٌ مَّجِيدٌ\n(Nay! This is a Glorious Qur'an.) meaning, magnificent and noble.\nفِي لَوْحٍ مَّحْفُوظٍ\n(In Al-Lawh Al-Mahfuz!) meaning, among the most high gathering, guarded from any increase, decrease, distortion, or change.\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Al-Buruj, and all praise and blessings are due to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/85?verse=11","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:86:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 86:1–10","text":"The Virtues of Surat At-Tariq\nAn-Nasa'i recorded that Jabir said, \"Mu'adh lead the Maghrib prayer and he recited Al-Baqarah and An-Nisa'. So the Prophet ﷺ said,\nأَفَتَّانٌ أَنْتَ يَا مُعَاذُ، مَا كَانَ يَكْفِيكَ أَنْ تَقْرَأَ بِالسَّمَاءِ وَالطَّارِقِ وَالشَّمْسِ وَضُحَاهَا وَنَحْوِهَا؟\n(Are you putting the people to trial O Mu'adh? Was it not sufficient for you to recite As-Sama'i wat-Tariq, and Ash-Shamsi wa Duhaha, and something like them?)\nبِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nوَالسَّمَاءِ وَالطَّارِقِ - وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا الطَّارِقُ - النَّجْمُ الثَّاقِبُ - إِن كُلُّ نَفْسٍ لَّمَّا عَلَيْهَا حَافِظٌ - فَلْيَنظُرِ الْإِنسَانُ مِمَّ خُلِقَ - خُلِقَ مِن مَّاءٍ دَافِقٍ - يَخْرُجُ مِن بَيْنِ الصُّلْبِ وَالتَّرَائِبِ - إِنَّهُ عَلَىٰ رَجْعِهِ لَقَادِرٌ - يَوْمَ تُبْلَى السَّرَائِرُ - فَمَا لَهُ مِن قُوَّةٍ وَلَا نَاصِرٍ\n(1. By the heaven, and At-Tariq;)(2. And what will make you to know what At-Tariq is?)(3. The star, Ath-Thaqib.)(4. There is no human being but has a protector over him.)(5. So, let man see from what he is created!)(6. He is created from a water gushing forth,)(7. Proceeding from between the backbone and the ribs.)(8. Verily, He is Able to bring him back!)(9. The Day when all the secrets will be examined.)(10. Then he will have no power, nor any helper.)\nSwearing by the Existence of Humanity surrounded by the Organized System of Allah\nAllah swears by the heaven and what He has placed in it of radiant stars. Thus, He says,\nوَالسَّمَاءِ وَالطَّارِقِ\n(By the heaven, and At-Tariq;) Then He says,\nوَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا الطَّارِقُ\n(And what will make you to know what At-Tariq is?)\nThen He explains it by His saying,\nالنَّجْمُ الثَّاقِبُ\n(The star of Ath-Thaqib.) Qatadah and others have said, \"The star has been named Tariq because it is only seen at night and it is hidden during the day.\" His view is supported by what has been mentioned in the authentic Hadith that prohibits a man to come to his family Taruq. This means that he comes to them unexpectedly at nighttime.\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nالثَّاقِبُ\n(Ath-Thaqib.) Ibn 'Abbas said, \"The illuminating.\" 'Ikrimah said, \"It is illuminating and it burns the Shaytan\" Then Allah says,\nإِن كُلُّ نَفْسٍ لَّمَّا عَلَيْهَا حَافِظٌ\n(There is no human being but has a protector over him.)\nmeaning, every soul has a guardian over it from Allah that protects it from the calamities. This is as Allah says,\nلَهُ مُعَقِّبَاتٌ مِّن بَيْنِ يَدَيْهِ وَمِنْ خَلْفِهِ يَحْفَظُونَهُ مِنْ أَمْرِ اللَّهِ\n(For Him, there are angels in succession, before and behind him. They guard him by the command of Allah.)(13:11)\nHow Man is Created is a Proof of Allah's Ability to Return Him to Him\nAllah says,\nفَلْيَنظُرِ الْإِنسَانُ مِمَّ خُلِقَ\n(So, let man see from what he is created!) This is alerting man to the weakness of his origin from which he was created. The intent of it is to guide man to accept (the reality of) the Hereafter, because whoever is able to begin the creation then he is also able to repeat it in the same way. This is as Allah says,\nوَهُوَ الَّذِي يَبْدَأُ الْخَلْقَ ثُمَّ يُعِيدُهُ وَهُوَ أَهْوَنُ عَلَيْهِ\n(And He it is Who originates the creation, then He will repeat it; and this is easier for Him.)(30:27) Then Allah says,\nخُلِقَ مِن مَّاءٍ دَافِقٍ\n(He is created from a water gushing forth.) meaning, the sexual fluid that comes out bursting forth from the man and the woman. Thus, the child is produced from both of them by the permission of Allah. Due to this Allah says,\nيَخْرُجُ مِن بَيْنِ الصُّلْبِ وَالتَّرَائِبِ\n(Proceeding from between the backbone and the ribs.)\nmeaning, the backbone (or loins) of the man and the ribs of the woman, which is referring to her chest. Shabib bin Bishr reported from 'Ikrimah who narrated from Ibn 'Abbas that he said,\nيَخْرُجُ مِن بَيْنِ الصُّلْبِ وَالتَّرَائِبِ\n(Proceeding from between the backbone and the ribs.)\n\"The backbone of the man and the ribs of the woman. It (the fluid) is yellow and fine in texture. The child will not be born except from both of them (i.e., their sexual fluids).\"\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nإِنَّهُ عَلَىٰ رَجْعِهِ لَقَادِرٌ\n(Verily, He is Able to bring him back (to life)!)\nThis means that He is able to return this man that is created from fluid gushed forth. In other words, He is able to repeat his creation and resurrect him to the final abode. This is clearly possible, because whoever is able to begin the creation then he surely is able to repeat it. Indeed Allah has mentioned this proof in more than one place in the Qur'an.\nOn the Day of Judgement, Man will have no Power or Assistance\nIn this regard Allah says,\nيَوْمَ تُبْلَى السَّرَائِرُ\n(The Day when all the secrets will be examined.)\nmeaning, on the Day of Judgement the secrets will be tested. This means that they will be exposed and made manifest. Thus, the secret will be made open and that which is concealed will be well known. It is confirmed in the Two Sahihs on the authority of Ibn 'Umar that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nيُرْفَعُ لِكُلِّ غَادِرٍ لِوَاءٌ عِنْدَ اسْتِهِ يُقَالُ: هٰذِهِ غَدْرَةُ فُلَانِ بْنِ فُلَانٍ\n(Every betrayer will have a flag raised for him behind his back, and it will be said, 'This is the betrayal of so-and-so, the son of so-and-so.') Concerning Allah's statement,\nفَمَا لَهُ\n(Then he will have no) meaning, man on the Day of Judgement.\nمِن قُوَّةٍ\n(any power) meaning, within himself.\nوَلَا نَاصِرٍ\n(nor any helper.) meaning, from other than himself. This statement means that he will not be able to save himself from the torment of Allah, and nor will anyone else be able to save him.","href":"/tafsir/86?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:86:11","title":"Ibn Kathir · 86:11–17","text":"By the sky which gives rain, again and again (11)And the earth which splits (12)Verily, this is the Word that separates (13)And it is not a thing for amusement (14)Verily, they are but plotting a plot (15)And I am planning a plan (16)So, give a respite to the disbelievers; deal gently with them for a while (17)\nSwearing to the Truthfulness of the Qur'an and the Failure of Those Who oppose it\nIbn 'Abbas said, \"Ar-raj' means rain.\" It has also been narrated from him that he said, \"It means the clouds that contain rain.\" He also said,\nوَالسَّمَاءِ ذَاتِ الرَّجْعِ\n(By the sky (having rain clouds) which gives rain, again and again.)\n\"This means that it rains and then it rains (again).\" Qatadah said, \"It returns the sustenance of the servants (creatures) every year. Were it not for this, they would all be destroyed and so would their cattle.\"\nوَالْأَرْضِ ذَاتِ الصَّدْعِ\n(And the earth which splits.) Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Splitting to bring forth plant growths.\" This was also said by Sa'id bin Jubayr, 'Ikrimah, Abu Malik, Ad-Dahhak, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, As-Suddi and others. Concerning Allah's statement,\nإِنَّهُ لَقَوْلٌ فَصْلٌ\n(Verily, this is the Word that separates.)\nIbn 'Abbas said (Fasl is), \"True.\" Qatadah also said the same. Someone else said, \"A just ruling.\"\nوَمَا هُوَ بِالْهَزْلِ\n(And it is not a thing for amusement.)\nmeaning, rather it is serious and true. Then Allah informs about the disbelievers saying that they reject Him and hinder others from His path. Allah says,\nإِنَّهُمْ يَكِيدُونَ كَيْدًا\n(Verily, they are but plotting a plot.) meaning, they plot against the people in their calling them to oppose the Qur'an. Then Allah says,\nفَمَهِّلِ الْكَافِرِينَ\n(So, give a respite to the disbelievers;) meaning, wait for them and do not be in haste concerning them.\nأَمْهِلْهُمْ رُوَيْدًا\n(deal gently with them for a while.) meaning, a little while. This means that you will see what befalls them of torment, punishment and destruction. This is as Allah says,\nنُمَتِّعُهُمْ قَلِيلًا ثُمَّ نَضْطَرُّهُمْ إِلَىٰ عَذَابٍ غَلِيظٍ\n(We let them enjoy for a little while, then in the end We shall oblige them to (enter) a great torment.)(31:24)\nThis is the end of the Tafsir Surat At-Tariq, and unto Allah is all praise and thanks.","href":"/tafsir/86?verse=11","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:87:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 87:1–13","text":"The Virtues of Surat Al-A'la\nThis Surah was revealed in Makkah before the migration to Al-Madinah. The proof of this is what Al-Bukhari recorded from Al-Bara' bin 'Azib, that he said, \"The first people to come to us (in Al-Madinah) from the Companions of the Prophet were ﷺ Mus'ab bin 'Umayr and Ibn Umm Maktum, who taught us the Qur'an; then 'Ammar, Bilal and Sa'd came. Then 'Umar bin Al-Khattab came with a group of twenty people, after which the Prophet ﷺ came. I have not seen the people of Al-Madinah happier with anything more than their happiness with his coming (to Al-Madinah). This was reached to such an extent that I saw the children and little ones saying, 'This is the Messenger of Allah who has come.' Thus, he came, but he did not come until after I had already recited (i.e., learned how to recite)\nسَبِّحِ اسْمَ رَبِّكَ الْأَعْلَى\n(Glorify the Name of your Lord, the Most High.)(87:1)\nas well as other Surahs similar to it.\"\nIt has been confirmed in the Two Sahihs that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said to Mu'adh,\nهَلَّا صَلَّيْتَ بِــ\nسَبِّحِ اسْمَ رَبِّكَ الْأَعْلَى\nوَالشَّمْسِ وَضُحَاهَا\nوَالَّيْلِ إِذَا يَغْشَىٰ\n(Why didn't you recite \"Glorify the Name of your Lord, the Most High,\"; \"By the sun and its brightness,\" and \"By the night when it envelopes.\")\nImam Ahmad recorded from An-Nu'man bin Bashir that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ recited\nسَبِّحِ اسْمَ رَبِّكَ الْأَعْلَى\nوَ\nهَلْ أَتَاكَ حَدِيثُ الْغَاشِيَةِ\nSurat Al-A'la (chapter 87) and Surat Al-Ghashiyh (chapter 88) in the two 'Id prayers. If the 'Id prayer fell on Friday, he would recite them in both prayers ('Id and Salat Al-Jumu'ah). Muslim also recorded this in his Sahih, as well as Abu Dawud, At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa'i and Ibn Majah. The wording of Muslim and the Sunan compilers says, \"He used to recite\nسَبِّحِ اسْمَ رَبِّكَ الْأَعْلَى\nوَ\nهَلْ أَتَاكَ حَدِيثُ الْغَاشِيَةِ\nSurat Al-A'la (chapter 87) and Surat Al-Ghashiyh (chapter 88) for the two 'Ids and Jumu'ah. If they occurred on the same day, he would recite them in both of them.\"\nIn his Musnad, Imam Ahmad recorded on the authority of Ubayy bin Ka'b, Abdullah bin 'Abbas, 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abza, and the Mother of the believers, 'A'ishah, that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to recite\nسَبِّحِ اسْمَ رَبِّكَ الْأَعْلَى\nوَ\nقُلْ يَا أَيُّهَا الْكَافِرُونَ\nوَ\nقُلْ هُوَ اللَّهُ أَحَدٌ\n(Glorify the Name of your Lord, the Most High.) and (Say: 'O you who disbelieve.') and (Say: 'He is Allah, the One.') 'A'ishah added in her version that he would also recite the Mu'awwidhatayn (Al-Falaq and An-Nas).\nبِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nسَبِّحِ اسْمَ رَبِّكَ الْأَعْلَى - الَّذِي خَلَقَ فَسَوَّىٰ - وَالَّذِي قَدَّرَ فَهَدَىٰ - وَالَّذِي أَخْرَجَ الْمَرْعَىٰ - فَجَعَلَهُ غُثَاءً أَحْوَىٰ - سَنُقْرِئُكَ فَلَا تَنسَىٰ - إِلَّا مَا شَاءَ اللَّهُ ۚ إِنَّهُ يَعْلَمُ الْجَهْرَ وَمَا يَخْفَىٰ - وَنُيَسِّرُكَ لِلْيُسْرَىٰ - فَذَكِّرْ إِن نَّفَعَتِ الذِّكْرَىٰ - سَيَذَّكَّرُ مَن يَخْشَىٰ - وَيَتَجَنَّبُهَا الْأَشْقَى - الَّذِي يَصْلَى النَّارَ الْكُبْرَىٰ - ثُمَّ لَا يَمُوتُ فِيهَا وَلَا يَحْيَىٰ\n(1. Glorify the Name of your Lord, the Most High.)(2. Who has created, and then proportioned it.)(3. And Who has measured; and then guided.)(4. And Who brings out the pasturage,)(5. And then makes it dark stubble.)(6. We shall make you recite, so you shall not forget,)(7. Except what Allah may will He knows what is apparent and what is hidden.)(8. And We shall make easy for you the easy.)(9. Therefore remind in case the reminder profits.)(10. The reminder will be received by him who fears,)(11. But it will be avoided by the wretched,)(12. Who will enter the great Fire.)(13. There he will neither die nor live.)\nThe Command to Pronounce Tasbih and its Response\nImam Ahmad recorded from Ibn 'Abbas that whenever the Messenger of Allah ﷺ would recite\nسَبِّحِ اسْمَ رَبِّكَ الْأَعْلَى\n(Glorify the Name of your Lord, the Most High.)\nhe would say,\nسُبْحَانَ رَبِّيَ الْأَعْلَى\n(Glory to my Lord, the Most High.)\nIbn Jarir recorded from Ibn Ishaq Al-Hamdani that whenever Ibn 'Abbas would recite\nسَبِّحِ اسْمَ رَبِّكَ الْأَعْلَى\n(Glorify the Name of your Lord, the Most High.)\nhe would say, \"Glory to my Lord, the Most High,\" and whenever he would recite\nلَا أُقْسِمُ بِيَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ\n(I swear by the Day of Resurrection.)(75:1)\nand then reach the end of it\nأَلَيْسَ ذَٰلِكَ بِقَادِرٍ عَلَىٰ أَن يُحْيِيَ الْمَوْتَىٰ\n(Is not He able to give life to the dead?)(75:40)\nhe would say, \"Glory to You, of course.\" Qatadah said,\nسَبِّحِ اسْمَ رَبِّكَ الْأَعْلَى\n(Glorify the Name of your Lord, the Most High.)\n\"It has been mentioned to us that whenever the Prophet of Allah ﷺ used to recite it he would say,\nسُبْحَانَ رَبِّيَ الْأَعْلَى\n(Glory to my Lord, the Most High.)\"\nThe Creation, the Decree, and the Bringing Forth of Vegetation\nAllah says,\nالَّذِي خَلَقَ فَسَوَّىٰ\n(Who has created, and then proportioned it.)\nmeaning, He created that which has been created, and He fashioned every creation in the best of forms. Then Allah says,\nوَالَّذِي قَدَّرَ فَهَدَىٰ\n(And Who has measured; and then guided.) Mujahid said, \"He guided man to distress and happiness, and he guided the cattle to their pastures.\" This Ayah is similar to what Allah has said about Musa's statement to Fir'awn,\nرَبُّنَا الَّذِي أَعْطَىٰ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ خَلْقَهُ ثُمَّ هَدَىٰ\n(Our Lord is He Who gave to each thing its form and nature, then guided it aright.)(20:50)\nmeaning, He decreed a set measure and guided the creation to it. This is just as is confirmed in Sahih Muslim on the authority of 'Abdullah bin 'Amr that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ اللهَ قَدَّرَ مَقَادِيرَ الْخَلَائِقِ قَبْلَ أَنْ يَخْلُقَ السَّمَواتِ وَالْأَرْضَ بِخَمْسِينَ أَلْفَ سَنَةٍ وَكَانَ عَرْشُهُ عَلَى الْمَاءِ\n(Verily, Allah ordained the measure of all creation fifty thousand years before He created the heavens and the earth, and His Throne was over the water.)\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nوَالَّذِي أَخْرَجَ الْمَرْعَىٰ\n(And Who brings out the pasturage,) meaning, all types of vegetation and crops.\nفَجَعَلَهُ غُثَاءً أَحْوَىٰ\n(And then makes it dark stubble.) Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Dried up and altered.\" It has been narrated that Mujahid, Qatadah and Ibn Zayd, all made similar statements.\nThe Prophet (ﷺ) does not Forget the Revelation\nAllah says,\nسَنُقْرِئُكَ\n(We shall make you to recite,) meaning, 'O Muhammad.'\nفَلَا تَنسَىٰ\n(so you shall not forget (it),) This is Allah informing and promising him (the Prophet ﷺ) that He will teach him a recitation that he will not forget.\nإِلَّا مَا شَاءَ اللَّهُ\n(Except what Allah may will.) Qatadah said, \"The Prophet did not forget anything except what Allah willed.\" It has been said that the meaning of Allah's statement,\nفَلَا تَنسَىٰ\n(so you shall not forget,) is, \"do not forget\" and that which would be abrogated, is merely an exception to this. Meaning, 'do not forget what We teach you to recite, except what Allah wills, which He removes and there is no sin on your leaving it off (not retaining it).' Concerning Allah's statement,\nإِنَّهُ يَعْلَمُ الْجَهْرَ وَمَا يَخْفَىٰ\n(He knows what is apparent and what is hidden.) meaning, He knows what the creatures do openly and what they hide, whether it be statements or deeds. None of that is hidden from Him.\nThen Allah says,\nوَنُيَسِّرُكَ لِلْيُسْرَىٰ\n(And We shall make easy for you the easy.) meaning, 'We will make good deeds and statements easy for you, and We will legislate such Law for you that is easy, tolerant, straight and just, with no crookedness, difficulty or hardship in it.'\nThe Command to Remind\nAllah then says,\nفَذَكِّرْ إِن نَّفَعَتِ الذِّكْرَىٰ\n(Therefore remind in case the reminder profits.) meaning, remind where reminding is beneficial.\nFrom here we get the etiquette of spreading knowledge, that it should not be wasted upon those who are not suitable or worthy of it. The Commander of the believers, 'Ali said, \"You do not tell people any statement that their intellects do not grasp except that it will be a Fitnah (trial) for some of them.\" He also said, \"Tell people that which they know. Would you like for Allah and His Messenger to be rejected?\"\nAllah said:\nسَيَذَّكَّرُ مَن يَخْشَىٰ\n(The reminder will be received by him who fears,)\nmeaning, 'he whose heart fears Allah and who knows that he is going to meet Him, will receive admonition from what you convey to him, O Muhammad.'\nوَيَتَجَنَّبُهَا الْأَشْقَى - الَّذِي يَصْلَى النَّارَ الْكُبْرَىٰ - ثُمَّ لَا يَمُوتُ فِيهَا وَلَا يَحْيَىٰ\n(But it will be avoided by the wretched, who will enter the great Fire. There he will neither die nor live.)\nmeaning, he will not die and thus be allowed to rest, nor will he live a life that is beneficial to him. Instead, his life will be harmful to him, because it will be the cause of his feeling of the pain of torment and various types of punishments what he is being punished with.\nImam Ahmad recorded from Abu Sa'id that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nأَمَّا أَهْلُ النَّارِ الَّذِينَ هُمْ أَهْلُهَا لَا يَمُوتُونَ وَلَا يَحْيَوْنَ، وَأَمَّا أُنَاسٌ يُرِيدُ اللهُ بِهِمُ الرَّحْمَةَ فَيُمِيتُهُمْ فِي النَّارِ فَيَدْخُلُ عَلَيْهِمُ الشُّفَعَاءُ فَيَأْخُذُ الرَّجُلُ الضِّبَارَةَ فَيُنْبِتُهُمْ - أو قال: يَنْبُتُونَ فِي نَهْرِ الْحَيَا، أو قال: الْحَيَاةِ، أو قال: الْحَيَوَانِ أو قال: نَهْرِ الْجَنَّةِ - فَيَنْبُتُونَ نَبَاتَ الْحِبَّةِ فِي حَمِيلِ السَّيْلِ\n(Concerning the people of the Fire who are deserving of it, they will not die nor will they live. Regarding the people that Allah wants mercy for, He will cause them to die in the Fire. Then He will allow the intercessors to come to them, and a man will take his groups of supporters and plant them (or he said (they will be planted) in the River of Al-Haya (or he said (Al-Hayah, or Al-Hayawan, or Nahr Al-Jannah). Then they will sprout up like the sprouting of the seed on the moist bank of a flowing stream.)\nThen the Prophet ﷺ said,\nأَمَا تَرَوْنَ الشَّجَرَةَ تَكُونُ خَضْرَاءَ، ثُمَّ تَكُونُ صَفْرَاءَ، ثُمَّ تَكُونُ خَضْرَاءَ؟\n(Haven't you all seen the tree that is green, then it turns yellow, then it turns green (again)?)\nAbu Sa'id then said that some of those present said, \"It is as if the Prophet ﷺ used to live in the desert wilderness (i.e., due to his parables of nature).\"\nAhmad also recorded from Abu Sa'id that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nأَمَّا أَهْلُ النَّارِ الَّذِينَ هُمْ أَهْلُهَا فَإِنَّهُمْ لَا يَمُوتُونَ فِيهَا وَلَا يَحْيَوْنَ، وَلَٰــكِنْ أُنَاسٌ - أو كما قال - تُصِيبُهُمُ النَّارُ بِذُنُوبِهِمْ - أو قال: بِخَطَايَاهُمْ - فَيُمِيتُهُمْ إِمَاتَةً حَتّٰى إِذَا صَارُوا فَحْمًا أُذِنَ فِي الشَّفَاعَةِ، فَجِيءَ بِهِمْ ضَبَائِرَ ضَبَائِرَ فَبُثُّوا عَلى أَنْهَارِ الْجَنَّةِ فَيُقَالُ: يَا أَهْلَ الْجَنَّةِ أَفِيضُوا عَلَيْهِمْ، فَيَنْبُتُونَ نَبَاتَ الْحِبَّةِ تَكُونُ فِي حَمِيلِ السَّيْلِ\n(Concerning the people of the Fire who will be dwellers of it, they will not die in it nor will they live. However, there will be a group of people - or as he said - whom the Fire will burn due to their sins - or he said - their wrongdoings. So, He will cause them to die until they become burnt coal. Then the intercession will be allowed and they will be brought group after group, and they will be scattered over the rivers of Paradise. Then it will be said: \"O people of Paradise! Pour down upon them.\" Then they will sprout like the growing of the seed that is upon the moist bank of the flowing stream.\"\nThen, a man from among the people present said, \"It is as if the Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to live in the desert wilderness.\" Muslim also recorded this Hadith.","href":"/tafsir/87?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:87:14","title":"Ibn Kathir · 87:14–19","text":"Indeed whosoever purifies himself shall achieve success (14)And remembers the Name of his Lord, and performs Salah (15)Rather you prefer the life of this world (16)Although the Hereafter is better and more lasting (17)Verily, this is in the former Scripture (18)The Scriptures of Ibrahim and Musa (19)\nA Statement Concerning the People of Success\nAllah says,\nقَدْ أَفْلَحَ مَن تَزَكَّىٰ\n(Indeed whosoever purifies himself shall achieve success.)\nmeaning, he purifies himself from despised characteristics and he follows what Allah has revealed to the Messenger ﷺ.\nوَذَكَرَ اسْمَ رَبِّهِ فَصَلَّىٰ\n(And remembers the Name of his Lord, and performs Salah.)\nmeaning, he establishes the prayer in its appointed time, seeking the pleasure of Allah, obedience to His command, and implementation of His Law. We have already reported from the Commander of the believers, 'Umar bin 'Abdul-'Aziz, that he used to command the people to give the Sadaqat Al-Fitr, and he would recite this Ayah:\nقَدْ أَفْلَحَ مَن تَزَكَّىٰ - وَذَكَرَ اسْمَ رَبِّهِ فَصَلَّىٰ\n(Indeed whosoever purifies himself shall achieve success. And remembers the Name of his Lord, and performs Salah.)\nAbu Al-Ahwas said, \"If someone comes to any of you begging, and he wants to pray, then he should give charity (Zakah) before he prays. For verily, Allah the Exalted says,\nقَدْ أَفْلَحَ مَن تَزَكَّىٰ - وَذَكَرَ اسْمَ رَبِّهِ فَصَلَّىٰ\n(Indeed whosoever purifies himself shall achieve success. And remembers the Name of his Lord, and performs Salah.)\"\nQatadah said concerning this Ayah,\nقَدْ أَفْلَحَ مَن تَزَكَّىٰ - وَذَكَرَ اسْمَ رَبِّهِ فَصَلَّىٰ\n(Indeed whosoever purifies himself shall achieve success. And remembers the Name of his Lord, and performs Salah (Fasalla).)\n\"He purifies his wealth and pleases his Creator.\"\nThis World is Worthless in Comparison to the Hereafter\nThen Allah says,\nبَلْ تُؤْثِرُونَ الْحَيَاةَ الدُّنْيَا\n(Rather you prefer the life of this world.)\nmeaning, 'you give it precedence over the matter of the Hereafter, and you prefer it because of what it contains of usefulness and benefit for you in livelihood, and your returns (i.e., income, profitable gain).'\nوَالْآخِرَةُ خَيْرٌ وَأَبْقَىٰ\n(Although the Hereafter is better and more lasting.)\nmeaning, the reward of the final abode is better than the worldly life, and it is more lasting. For indeed, this worldly life is lowly and temporal, whereas the Hereafter is noble and eternal. Thus, how can an intelligent person prefer that which is short-lived over that which is eternal. How can he give importance to that which will soon pass away from him, while ignoring the importance of the abode of eternity and infinity.\nImam Ahmad recorded from Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَنْ أَحَبَّ دُنْيَاهُ أَضَرَّ بِآخِرَتِهِ، وَمَنْ أَحَبَّ آخِرَتَهُ أَضَرَّ بِدُنْيَاهُ، فَآثِرُوا مَا يَبْقَى عَلَى مَا يَفْنَى\n(Whoever loves his worldly life, will suffer in his Hereafter, and whoever loves his worldly life, will suffer in his Hereafter, and whoever loves his Hereafter, will suffer in his worldly life. Therefore, chose that which is everlasting over that which is temporal.)\nAhmad was alone in recording this Hadith.\nThe Scriptures of Ibrahim and Musa\nAllah then says,\nإِنَّ هَٰذَا لَفِي الصُّحُفِ الْأُولَىٰ - صُحُفِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَمُوسَىٰ\n(Verily, this is in the former Scriptures – the Scriptures of Ibrahim and Musa.)\nThis Ayah is similar to Allah's statement in Surat An-Najm,\nأَمْ لَمْ يُنَبَّأْ بِمَا فِي صُحُفِ مُوسَىٰ - وَإِبْرَاهِيمَ الَّذِي وَفَّىٰ - أَلَّا تَزِرُ وَازِرَةٌ وِزْرَ أُخْرَىٰ - وَأَن لَّيْسَ لِلْإِنسَانِ إِلَّا مَا سَعَىٰ - وَأَنَّ سَعْيَهُ سَوْفَ يُرَىٰ - ثُمَّ يُجْزَاهُ الْجَزَاءَ الْأَوْفَىٰ - وَأَنَّ إِلَىٰ رَبِّكَ الْمُنتَهَىٰ\n(Or is he not informed with what is in the Scriptures of Musa. And of Ibrahim who fulfilled (or conveyed) all that (Allah ordered him to do or convey): that no burdened person (with sins) shall bear the burden (sins) of another. And that man can have nothing but what he does. And that his deeds will be seen. Then he will be recompensed with a full and the best recompense. And that to your Lord is the End (Return of everything).)(53:36-42)\nAnd so forth, until the end of these Ayat. Abu 'Aliyah said, \"The story of this Surah is in the earlier Scriptures.\" Ibn Jarir preferred the view that the meaning of Allah's statement,\nإِنَّ هَٰذَا\n(Verily, this) is referring to His previous statement,\nقَدْ أَفْلَحَ مَن تَزَكَّىٰ - وَذَكَرَ اسْمَ رَبِّهِ فَصَلَّىٰ - بَلْ تُؤْثِرُونَ الْحَيَاةَ الدُّنْيَا - وَالْآخِرَةُ خَيْرٌ وَأَبْقَىٰ\n(Indeed whosoever purifies himself shall achieve success. And remembers the Name of his Lord, and offers Salah. Rather you prefer the life of this world. Although the Hereafter is better and more lasting.)\nThen Allah says,\nإِنَّ هَٰذَا\n(Verily, this) meaning, the content of this discussion,\nلَفِي الصُّحُفِ الْأُولَىٰ - صُحُفِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَمُوسَىٰ\n(in the former Scriptures, the Scriptures of Ibrahim and Musa.)\nThis view that he (At-Tabari) has chosen is good and strong. Similar to it has been reported from Qatadah and Ibn Zayd. And Allah knows best.\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Al-A'la (Sabbih). All praise and blessings are due to Allah, and He is the Giver of success and protection from error.","href":"/tafsir/87?verse=14","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:88:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 88:1–7","text":"Reciting Surat Al-A'la and Al-Ghashiyah in the Friday Prayer\nIt has already been mentioned on the authority of An-Nu'man bin Bashir that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to recite Surat Al-A'la (87) and Al-Ghashiyah in the 'Id and Friday prayers. Imam Malik recorded that Ad-Dahhak bin Qays asked An-Nu'man bin Bashir, \"What else did the Messenger of Allah ﷺ recite on Friday along with Surat Al-Jumu'ah?\" An-Nu'man replied, \"Al-Ghashiyah (88).\" This narration has been recorded by Abu Dawud, An-Nasa'i, Muslim and Ibn Majah.\nبِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nهَلْ أَتَاكَ حَدِيثُ الْغَاشِيَةِ - وُجُوهٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ خَاشِعَةٌ - عَامِلَةٌ نَّاصِبَةٌ - تَصْلَىٰ نَارًا حَامِيَةً - تُسْقَىٰ مِنْ عَيْنٍ آنِيَةٍ - لَّيْسَ لَهُمْ طَعَامٌ إِلَّا مِن ضَرِيعٍ - لَّا يُسْمِنُ وَلَا يُغْنِي مِن جُوعٍ\n(1. Has there come to you the narration of Al-Ghashiyah (the overwhelming)?)(2. Some faces that Day will be Khashi'ah.)(3. Laboring, weary.)(4. They will enter into Fire, Hamiyah.)(5. They will be given to drink from a boiling (Aniyah) spring,)(6. No food will there be for them but from Dari',)(7. Which will neither nourish nor avail against hunger.)\nThe Day of Judgement and what will happen to the People of the Fire during it\nAl-Ghashiyah is one of the names of the Day of Judgement. This was said by Ibn 'Abbas, Qatadah and Ibn Zayd. It has been called this because it will overwhelm the people and overcome them. Allah then says,\nوُجُوهٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ خَاشِعَةٌ\n(Some faces that Day will be Khashi'ah.)\nmeaning, humiliated. This was said by Qatadah. Ibn 'Abbas said, \"They will be humble but this action will be of no benefit to them.\" Then Allah says,\nعَامِلَةٌ نَّاصِبَةٌ\n(Laboring, weary.) meaning, they did many deeds and became weary in their performance, yet they will be cast into a blazing Fire on the Day of Judgement. Al-Hafiz Abu Bakr Al-Burqani narrated from Abu 'Imran Al-Jawni that he said, \" 'Umar bin Al-Khattab passed by the monastery of a monk and he said: 'O monk!' Then the monk came out, and 'Umar looked at him and began to weep. Then it was said to him: 'O Commander of the faithful! Why are you weeping?' He replied: 'I remembered the statement of Allah, the Mighty and Majestic, in His Book,\nعَامِلَةٌ نَّاصِبَةٌ - تَصْلَىٰ نَارًا حَامِيَةً\n(Laboring, weary. They will enter into Fire, Hamiyah.)\nSo that is what has made me cry.'\" Al-Bukhari recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said,\nعَامِلَةٌ نَّاصِبَةٌ\n(Laboring, weary.) \"The Christians.\" It is narrated that 'Ikrimah and As-Suddi both said, \"Laboring in the worldly life with disobedience, and weariness in the Fire from torment and perdition.\" Ibn 'Abbas, Al-Hasan, and Qatadah all said,\nتَصْلَىٰ نَارًا حَامِيَةً\n(They will enter into Fire, Hamiyah) meaning, hot with intense heat.\nتُسْقَىٰ مِنْ عَيْنٍ آنِيَةٍ\n(They will be given to drink from a boiling (Aniyah) spring.)\nmeaning, its heat has reached its maximum limit and boiling point. This was said by Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, Al-Hasan and As-Suddi. Concerning Allah's statement,\nلَّيْسَ لَهُمْ طَعَامٌ إِلَّا مِن ضَرِيعٍ\n(No food will there be for them but from Dari',)\nAli bin Abi Talhah reported from Ibn 'Abbas that he said, \"A tree from the Hellfire.\" Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Abu Al-Jawza' and Qatadah, all said, \"It is Ash-Shibriq (a type of plant).\" Qatadah said, \"The Quraysh called it Ash-Shabraq in the spring and Ad-Dari' in the summer.\" 'Ikrimah said, \"It is a thorny tree which reaches down to the ground.\" Al-Bukhari related that Mujahid said, \"Ad-Dari' is a plant that is called Ash-Shibriq. The people of the Hijaz call it Ad-Dari' when it dries, and it is poisonous.\" Ma'mar narrated that Qatadah said,\nلَّيْسَ لَهُمْ طَعَامٌ إِلَّا مِن ضَرِيعٍ\n(No food will there be for them but from Dari',)\n\"This is Ash-Shibriq. When it dries it is called Ad-Dari'.\" Sa'id narrated from Qatadah that he said,\nلَّيْسَ لَهُمْ طَعَامٌ إِلَّا مِن ضَرِيعٍ\n(No food will there be for them but from Dari',)\n\"This is of the worst, most disgusting and loathsome of foods.\" Concerning Allah's statement,\nلَّا يُسْمِنُ وَلَا يُغْنِي مِن جُوعٍ\n(Which will neither nourish nor avail against hunger.)\nThis means that the intent in eating it will not be achieved, and nothing harmful will be repelled by it.","href":"/tafsir/88?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:88:8","title":"Ibn Kathir · 88:8–16","text":"Faces that Day will be joyful (8)Glad with their endeavor (9)In a lofty Paradise (10)Where they shall neither hear harmful speech nor falsehood (11)Therein will be a running spring (12)Therein will be thrones raised high (13)And cups set at hand (14)And Namariq, set in rows (15)And Zarabi, spread out (Mabthuthah)(16)\nThe Condition of the People of Paradise on the Day of Judgement\nAfter mentioning the situation of the wretched people, Allah changes the discussion to mention those who will be happy. He says,\nوُجُوهٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ\n(Faces that Day.) meaning, on the Day of Judgement.\nنَّاعِمَةٌ\n(will be joyful,) meaning, pleasure will be noticeable in them (those faces). This will only occur due to their striving. Sufyan said,\nلِّسَعْيِهَا رَاضِيَةٌ\n(Glad with their endeavor.) \"They will be pleased with their deeds.\" Then Allah says,\nفِي جَنَّةٍ عَالِيَةٍ\n(In a lofty Paradise.) meaning, elevated and brilliant, secure in their dwellings.\nلَّا تَسْمَعُ فِيهَا لَاغِيَةً\n(Where they shall neither hear harmful speech nor falsehood.)\nmeaning, they will not hear in the Paradise that they will be in, any foolish word. This is as Allah says,\nلَّا يَسْمَعُونَ فِيهَا لَغْوًا إِلَّا سَلَامًا\n(They shall not hear therein any Laghw, but only Salam.)(19:62)\nAllah also says,\nلَّا لَغْوٌ فِيهَا وَلَا تَأْثِيمٌ\n(Free from any Laghw, and free from sin.)(52:23)\nand He says,\nلَا يَسْمَعُونَ فِيهَا لَغْوًا وَلَا تَأْثِيمًا - إِلَّا قِيلًا سَلَامًا سَلَامًا\n(No Laghw will they hear therein, nor any sinful speech. But only the saying of: \"Salam! Salam!\" )(56:25-26)\nThen Allah continues,\nفِيهَا عَيْنٌ جَارِيَةٌ\n(Therein will be a running spring.) meaning, flowing freely. This is mentioned with the intent of emphasizing affirmation. It is not intended to mean that there is only one spring. So here it refers to springs collectively. Thus, the meaning is that in it (Paradise) are flowing springs.\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded from Abu Hurayrah that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nأَنْهَارُ الْجَنَّةِ تَفَجَّرُ مِنْ تَحْتِ تِلَالِ - أَوْ مِنْ تَحْتِ جِبَالِ - الْمِسْكِ\nThe rivers of Paradise spring forth from beneath hills – or mountains – of musk.)\nفِيهَا سُرُرٌ مَّرْفُوعَةٌ\n(Therein will be thrones raised high.) meaning, lofty, delightful, numerous couches, with elevated ceilings. Upon which will be seated wide-eyed, beautiful maidens. They have mentioned that whenever the friend of Allah wishes to sit on these lofty thrones, they (the thrones) will lower themselves for him.\nوَأَكْوَابٌ مَّوْضُوعَةٌ\n(And cups set at hand.) meaning, drinking containers that are prepared and presented for whoever among their masters (i.e., the people of Paradise) wants them.\nوَنَمَارِقُ مَصْفُوفَةٌ\n(And Namariq set in rows.) Ibn 'Abbas said, \"An-Namariq are pillows.\" This was also said by 'Ikrimah, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak, As-Suddi, Ath-Thawri and others. Concerning Allah's statement,\nوَزَرَابِيُّ مَبْثُوثَةٌ\n(And Zarabi, spread out (Mabthuthah).)\nIbn 'Abbas said, \"Az-Zarabi are carpets.\" This was also said by Ad-Dahhak and others. Here the word Mabthuthah means placed here and there for whoever would like to sit upon them.","href":"/tafsir/88?verse=8","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:88:17","title":"Ibn Kathir · 88:17–26","text":"Do they not look at the camels, how they are created (17)And at the heaven, how it is raised (18)And at the mountains, how they are rooted (19)And at the earth, how it is outspread (20)So remind them – you are only one who reminds (21)You are not a Musaytir over them (22)Save the one who turns away and disbelieves (23)Then Allah will punish him with the greatest punishment (24)Verily, to Us will be their return (25)Then verily, for Us will be their reckoning (26)\nThe Exhortation to look at the Creation of the Camel, the Heaven, the Mountains and the Earth\nAllah commands His servants to look at His creations that prove His power and greatness. He says,\nأَفَلَا يَنظُرُونَ إِلَى الْإِبِلِ كَيْفَ خُلِقَتْ\n(Do they not look at the camels, how they are created?)\nIndeed it is an amazing creation, and the way it has been fashioned is strange. For it is extremely powerful and strong, yet gentle, carrying heavy loads. It allows itself to be guided by a weak rider. It is eaten, benefit is derived from its hair, and its milk is drunk. They are reminded of this because the most common domestic animal of the Arabs was the camel. Shurayh Al-Qadi used to say, \"Come out with us so that we may look at the camels and how they were created, and at the sky and how it has been raised.\" Meaning, how Allah raised it in such magnificence above the ground. This is as Allah says,\nأَفَلَمْ يَنظُرُوا إِلَى السَّمَاءِ فَوْقَهُمْ كَيْفَ بَنَيْنَاهَا وَزَيَّنَّاهَا وَمَا لَهَا مِن فُرُوجٍ\n(Have they not looked at the heaven above them, how we have made it and adorned it and there are no rifts on it?)(50:6)\nThen Allah says,\nوَإِلَى الْجِبَالِ كَيْفَ نُصِبَتْ\n(And at the mountains, how they are rooted?)\nmeaning, how they have been erected. For indeed they are firmly affixed so that the earth does not sway with its dwellers. And He made them with the benefits and minerals they contain.\nوَإِلَى الْأَرْضِ كَيْفَ سُطِحَتْ\n(And at the earth, how it is outspread?)\nmeaning, how it has been spread out, extended and made smooth. Thus, He directs the bedouin to consider what he himself witnesses. His camel that he rides upon, the sky that is above his head, the mountain that faces him, and the earth that is under him, all of this is proof of the power of the Creator and Maker of these things. These things should lead him to see that He is the Lord, the Most Great, the Creator, the Owner, and the Controller of everything. Therefore, He is the God other than Whom none deserves to be worshipped.\nThe Story of Dimam bin Tha'labah\nThese are the things Dimam swore by after questioning the Messenger of Allah ﷺ. This can be seen in what Imam Ahmad recorded from Thabit, who reported that Anas said, \"We were prohibited from asking the Messenger of Allah ﷺ anything. Thus, it used to amaze us when an intelligent man from the people of the desert (bedouin Arabs) would come and ask him about something while we were listening. So a man from the people of the desert came and said, 'O Muhammad! Verily, your messenger has come to us and he claims that you claim that Allah sent you.' He (the Prophet) ﷺ said, 'He told the truth.' The man said, 'Who created the heaven?' He (the Prophet ﷺ) replied, 'Allah.' The man said, 'Who created the earth?' He (the Prophet ﷺ) replied, 'Allah.' The man said, 'Who erected these mountains and placed in them whatever is in them?' He (the Prophet ﷺ) replied, 'Allah.' Then the man said, 'By the One Who created the heaven, the earth, and erected these mountains, did Allah send you?' He (the Prophet ﷺ) said, 'Yes.' The man then said, 'Your messenger claims that we are obligated to pray five prayers during our day and night.' He (the Prophet ﷺ) said, 'He told the truth.' The man then said, 'By He Who has sent you, did Allah command you with this?' He (the Prophet ﷺ) replied, 'Yes.' The man then said, 'Your messenger also claims that we are obligated to give charity from our wealth.' He (the Prophet ﷺ) said, 'He told the truth.' Then the man said, 'By He Who has sent you, did Allah command you with this?' He (the Prophet ﷺ) replied, 'Yes.' The man then said, 'Your messenger claims that we are obligated to perform pilgrimage (Hajj) to the House (the Ka'bah), for whoever is able to find a way there.' He (the Prophet ﷺ) said, 'He told the truth.' Then the man turned away to leave while saying, 'By He Who has sent you with the truth, I will not add anything to these things and I will not decrease anything from them.' The Prophet ﷺ then said,\nإِنْ صَدَقَ لَيَدْخُلَنَّ الْجَنَّةَ\n'If he has spoken truthfully, he will certainly enter Paradise.'\nThis Hadith was recorded by Al-Bukhari, Muslim, Abu Dawud, At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa'i and Ibn Majah.\nThe Messenger (ﷺ) is only Charged with Delivering the Message\nAllah says,\nفَذَكِّرْ إِنَّمَا أَنتَ مُذَكِّرٌ - لَّسْتَ عَلَيْهِم بِمُصَيْطِرٍ\n(So remind them – you are only one who reminds. You are not a Musaytir over them)\nmeaning, \"O Muhammad! Remind the people with what you have been sent with to them.\"\nفَإِنَّمَا عَلَيْكَ الْبَلَاغُ وَعَلَيْنَا الْحِسَابُ\n(your duty is only to convey (the Message) and on Us is the reckoning.)(13:40)\nThen Allah says,\nلَّسْتَ عَلَيْهِم بِمُصَيْطِرٍ\n(You are not a Musaytir over them.)\nIbn 'Abbas, Mujahid and others said, \"You are not a dictator over them.\" This means that you cannot create faith in their hearts. Ibn Zayd said, \"You are not the one who can force them to have faith.\" Imam Ahmad recorded from Jabir that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nأُمِرْتُ أَنْ أُقَاتِلَ النَّاسَ حَتّٰى يَقُولُوا: لَا إِلهَ إِلَّا اللهُ، فَإِذَا قَالُوهَا عَصَمُوا مِنِّي دِمَاءَهُمْ وَأَمْوَالَهُمْ إِلَّا بِحَقِّهَا، وَحِسَابُهُمْ عَلَى اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ\n(I have been commanded to fight the people until they say La ilaha illallah (none has the right to be worshipped except Allah). So if they say that, they have safeguarded their blood and wealth from me - except for what is rightfully due from it - and their reckoning is with Allah, the Mighty and Majestic.)\"\nThen he ﷺ recited,\nفَذَكِّرْ إِنَّمَا أَنتَ مُذَكِّرٌ - لَّسْتَ عَلَيْهِم بِمُصَيْطِرٍ\n(So remind them – you are only one who reminds. You are not a Musaytir over them)\nThis is how Muslim recorded this Hadith in his Book of Faith, and At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa'i also recorded it in their Sunans in the Books of Tafsir. This Hadith can be found in both of the Sahihs.\nThe Threat for Whoever Turns Away from the Truth\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nإِلَّا مَن تَوَلَّىٰ وَكَفَرَ\n(Save the one who turns away and disbelieves.)\nmeaning, he turns away from acting upon its pillars, and he disbelieves in the truth with his heart and his tongue. This is similar to Allah's statement,\nفَلَا صَدَّقَ وَلَا صَلَّىٰ - وَلَٰكِن كَذَّبَ وَتَوَلَّىٰ\n(So he neither believed nor prayed! But on the contrary, he belied and turn away!)(75:31-32)\nThus, Allah says,\nفَيُعَذِّبُهُ اللَّهُ الْعَذَابَ الْأَكْبَرَ\n(Then Allah will punish him with the greatest punishment.)\nAllah then says,\nإِنَّ إِلَيْنَا إِيَابَهُمْ\n(Verily, to Us will be their return;) meaning, their place of return and their resort.\nثُمَّ إِنَّ عَلَيْنَا حِسَابَهُم\n(Then verily, for Us will be their reckoning.)\nmeaning, 'We will reckon their deeds for them and requite them for those deeds.' If they did good, they will receive good, and if they did evil, they will receive evil.\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Al-Ghashiyah and all praise and thanks are due to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/88?verse=17","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:89:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 89:1–14","text":"Recitation of Surat Al-Fajr in the Prayer\nAn-Nasa'i recorded a narration from Jabir that Mu'adh prayed a prayer and a man came and joined him in the prayer. Mu'adh made the prayer long, so the man went and prayed (alone) at the side of the Masjid, and then left. When Mu'adh was informed of this he said, \"(He is) a hypocrite.\" He (Mu'adh) then informed the Messenger of Allah ﷺ of what happened. The Prophet ﷺ then asked the young man (about it) and he replied, \"O Messenger of Allah! I came to pray with him, but he made the prayer too long for me. So I left him and prayed at the side of the Masjid. Then I went to feed my she-camel.\" The Messenger of Allah ﷺ then said,\nأَفَتَّانٌ يَا مُعَاذُ؟ أَيْنَ أَنْتَ مِنْ\nسَبِّحِ اسْمَ رَبِّكَ الاّعْلَى\nوَالشَّمْسِ وَضُحَاهَا\nوَالْفَجْرِ\nوَالَّيْلِ إِذَا يَغْشَىٰ\n(Are you causing trouble Mu'adh? Why don't you recite ('Glorify the Name of your Lord the Most High'), ('By the sun and its brightness'), ('By the dawn'), (and ('By the night as it envelops')?)\nبِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful\nوَالْفَجْرِ - وَلَيَالٍ عَشْرٍ - وَالشَّفْعِ وَالْوَتْرِ - وَالَّيْلِ إِذَا يَسْرِ - هَلْ فِي ذَٰلِكَ قَسَمٌ لِّذِي حِجْرٍ - أَلَمْ تَرَ كَيْفَ فَعَلَ رَبُّكَ بِعَادٍ - إِرَمَ ذَاتِ الْعِمَادِ - الَّتِي لَمْ يُخْلَقْ مِثْلُهَا فِي الْبِلَادِ - وَثَمُودَ الَّذِينَ جَابُوا الصَّخْرَ بِالْوَادِ - وَفِرْعَوْنَ ذِي الْأَوْتَادِ - الَّذِينَ طَغَوْا فِي الْبِلَادِ - فَأَكْثَرُوا فِيهَا الْفَسَادَ - فَصَبَّ عَلَيْهِمْ رَبُّكَ سَوْطَ عَذَابٍ - إِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَبِالْمِرْصَادِ\n(1. By the dawn;)(2. And by the ten nights,)(3. And by the even and the odd.)(4. And by the night when it departs.)(5. Is there (not) in them sufficient proofs for men of understanding!)(6. Saw you not how your Lord dealt with 'Ad?)(7. Iram of the pillars,)(8. The like of which were not created in the land?)(9. And Thamud, who hewed out rocks in the valley?)(10. And Fir'awn with Al-Awtad?)(11. Who did transgress beyond bounds in the lands.)(12. And made therein much mischief.)(13. So, your Lord poured on them different kinds of severe torment.)(14. Verily, your Lord is Ever Watchful.)\nThe Explanation of Al-Fajr and What Comes After it\nConcerning Al-Fajr, it is well known that it is the morning. This was said by 'Ali, Ibn 'Abbas, 'Ikrimah, Mujahid and As-Suddi.\nIt has been reported from Masruq and Muhammad bin Ka'b that Al-Fajr refers to the day of Sacrifice (An-Nahr) in particular, and it is the last of the ten nights. 'The ten nights' refers to the (first) ten days of Dhul-Hijjah. This was said by Ibn 'Abbas, Ibn Zubayr, Mujahid and others among the Salaf and the latter generations. It has been confirmed in Sahih Al-Bukhari from Ibn 'Abbas that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nمَا مِنْ أَيَّامٍ الْعَمَلُ الصَّالِحُ أَحَبُّ إِلَى اللهِ فِيهِنَّ مِنْ هٰذِهِ الْأَيَّامِ\n(There are no days in which righteous deeds are more beloved to Allah than these days.)\nmeaning the ten days of Dhul-Hijjah. They said, \"Not even fighting Jihad in the way of Allah\" He replied,\nوَلَا الْجِهَادُ فِي سَبِيلِ اللهِ، إِلَّا رَجُلًا خَرَجَ بِنَفْسِهِ وَمَالِهِ ثُمَّ لَمْ يَرْجِعْ مِنْ ذلِكَ بِشَيْءٍ\n(Not even Jihad in the way of Allah; except for a man who goes out (for Jihad) with his self and his wealth, and he does not return with any of that.)\nAllah then says,\nوَالشَّفْعِ وَالْوَتْرِ\n(And by the even and the odd.)\nIt has been mentioned in a Hadith that Al-Watr (the odd) is the day of 'Arafah because it falls on the ninth, and Ash-Shaf'i (the even) is the day of An-Nahr (sacrifice) because it falls on the tenth day. This was also said by Ibn 'Abbas, 'Ikrimah and Ad-Dahhaak. There are also other opinions about the explanation of these two words.\nExplanation of Night\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nوَالَّيْلِ إِذَا يَسْرِ\n(And by the night when it departs.) Al-'Awfi reported from Ibn 'Abbas that he said, \"When it goes away.\" 'Abdullah bin Zubayr said,\nوَالَّيْلِ إِذَا يَسْرِ\n(And by the night when it departs.) \"As some parts of it remove other parts of it.\" Mujahid, Abu Al-'Aliyah, Qatadah, and Malik who reported it from Zayd bin Aslam and Ibn Zayd, they all said;\nوَالَّيْلِ إِذَا يَسْرِ\n(And by the night when it departs.) \"When it moves along.\"\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nهَلْ فِي ذَٰلِكَ قَسَمٌ لِّذِي حِجْرٍ\n(There is indeed in them sufficient proofs for men with Hijr!)\nmeaning, for he who possesses intellect, sound reasoning, understanding and religious discernment. The intellect has only been called Hijr because it prevents the person from doing that which is not befitting of him of actions and statement. From this we see the meaning of Hijr Al-Bayt because it prevents the person performing Tawaf from clinging the wall facing Ash-Sham. Also the term Hijr Al-Yamamah (the cage of the pigeon) is derived from this meaning (i.e., prevention). It is said, \"Hajara Al-Hakim so-and-so (The judge passed a judgement preventing so-and-so),\" when his judgement prevents the person from his liberty (i.e., of freely utilizing his wealth). Allah says,\nوَيَقُولُونَ حِجْرًا مَّحْجُورًا\n(And they will say: \"Hijr Mahjur.\")(25:22)\nAll of these examples are different cases but their meanings are quite similar. The oath that is referred to here is about the times of worship and the acts of worship themselves, such as Hajj, Salah and other acts of worship that Allah's pious, obedient, servants who fear Him and are humble before Him, seeking His Noble Face, perform in order to draw nearer to Him.\nMentioning the Destruction of 'Ad\nAfter mentioning these people, and their worship and obedience, Allah says,\nأَلَمْ تَرَ كَيْفَ فَعَلَ رَبُّكَ بِعَادٍ\n(Saw you not how your Lord dealt with 'Ad?)\nThese were people who were rebellious, disobedient, arrogant, outside of His obedience, deniers of His Messengers and rejectors of His Scriptures. Thus, Allah mentions how He destroyed them, annihilated them and made them legends to be spoken of and an exemplary lesson of warning. He says,\nأَلَمْ تَرَ كَيْفَ فَعَلَ رَبُّكَ بِعَادٍ - إِرَمَ ذَاتِ الْعِمَادِ\n(Saw you not how your Lord dealt with 'Ad? Iram of the pillars,)\nThese were the first people of 'Ad. They were the descendants of 'Ad bin Iram bin 'Aws bin Sam bin Nuh. This was said by Ibn Ishaq. They are those to whom Allah sent His Messenger Hud. However, they rejected and opposed him. Therefore, Allah saved him and those who believed with him from among them, and He destroyed others with a furious, violent wind.\nسَخَّرَهَا عَلَيْهِمْ سَبْعَ لَيَالٍ وَثَمَانِيَةَ أَيَّامٍ حُسُومًا فَتَرَى الْقَوْمَ فِيهَا صَرْعَىٰ كَأَنَّهُمْ أَعْجَازُ نَخْلٍ خَاوِيَةٍ - فَهَلْ تَرَىٰ لَهُم مِّن بَاقِيَةٍ\n(Which Allah imposed on them for seven nights and eight days in succession, so that you could see men lying overthrown, as if they were hollow trunks of date palms! Do you see any remnants of them?)(69: 7-8)\nAllah mentioned their story in the Qur'an in more than one place, so that the believers may learn a lesson from their demise. Allah then says,\nإِرَمَ ذَاتِ الْعِمَادِ\n(Iram of the pillars.) This is an additional explanation that adds clarification who they actually were. Concerning His saying,\nذَاتِ الْعِمَادِ\n(of the pillars.) is because they used to live in trellised houses that were raised with firm pillars. They were the strongest people of their time in their physical stature, and they were the mightiest people in power. Thus, Hud reminded them of this blessing, and he directed them to use this power in the obedience of their Lord Who had created them. He said,\nوَاذْكُرُوا إِذْ جَعَلَكُمْ خُلَفَاءَ مِن بَعْدِ قَوْمِ نُوحٍ وَزَادَكُمْ فِي الْخَلْقِ بَسْطَةً ۖ فَاذْكُرُوا آلَاءَ اللَّهِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ\n(And remember that He made you successors after the people of Nuh and increased you amply in stature. So remember the graces from Allah so that you may be successful.)(7:69)\nAllah also said,\nفَأَمَّا عَادٌ فَاسْتَكْبَرُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ بِغَيْرِ الْحَقِّ وَقَالُوا مَنْ أَشَدُّ مِنَّا قُوَّةً ۖ أَوَلَمْ يَرَوْا أَنَّ اللَّهَ الَّذِي خَلَقَهُمْ هُوَ أَشَدُّ مِنْهُمْ قُوَّةً\n(As for 'Ad, they were arrogant in the land without right, and they said: \"Who is mightier than us in strength?\" See they not that Allah Who created them was mightier in strength than them.)(41:15)\nAnd Allah says here,\nالَّتِي لَمْ يُخْلَقْ مِثْلُهَا فِي الْبِلَادِ\n(The like of which were not created in the land?)\nmeaning, there had been none created like them in their land, due to their strength, power and their great physical stature. Mujahid said, \"Iram was an ancient nation who were the first people of 'Ad.\" Qatadah bin Di'amah and As-Suddi both said, \"Verily, Iram refers to the House of the kingdom of 'Ad.\" This latter statement is good and strong.\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nالَّتِي لَمْ يُخْلَقْ مِثْلُهَا فِي الْبِلَادِ\n(The like of which were not created in the land?)\nIbn Zayd considered the pronoun of discussion here to refer to the pillars, due to their loftiness. He said, \"They built pillars among the hills, the likes of which had not been constructed in their land before.\" However, Qatadah and Ibn Jarir considered the pronoun of discussion to refer to the tribe (of 'Ad), meaning that there was no tribe that had been created like this tribe in the land - meaning during their time. And this latter view is the correct position.\nThe saying of Ibn Zayd and those who follow his view is a weak one, because if He intended that, He would have said \"The like of which were not produced in the land.\" But He said:\nلَمْ يُخْلَقْ مِثْلُهَا فِي الْبِلَادِ\n(The like of which were not created in the land?)\nThen Allah says,\nوَثَمُودَ الَّذِينَ جَابُوا الصَّخْرَ بِالْوَادِ\n(And Thamud, who hewed (Jabu) rocks in the valley?)\nmeaning, they cut the rocks in the valley. Ibn 'Abbas said, \"They carved them and they hewed them.\" This was also said by Mujahid, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak and Ibn Zayd. From this terminology it is said (in the Arabic language), \"the hewing of leopard skin\" when it is torn, and \"The hewing of a garment\" when it is opened. The word 'Jayb' (pocket or opening in a garment) also comes from Jabu. Allah says,\nوَتَنْحِتُونَ مِنَ الْجِبَالِ بُيُوتًا فَارِهِينَ\n(And you hew in the mountains, houses with great skill.)(26:149)\nA Mention of Fir'awn\nAllah then says,\nوَفِرْعَوْنَ ذِي الْأَوْتَادِ\n(And Fir'awn with Al-Awtad)\nAl-'Awfi reported from Ibn 'Abbas that he said, \"Al-Awtad are the armies who enforced his commands for him.\" It has also been said that Fir'awn used to nail their hands and their feet into pegs (Awtad) of iron that he would hang them from. A similar statement was made by Mujahid when he said, \"He used to nail the people (up) on pegs.\" Sa'id bin Jubayr, Al-Hasan and As-Suddi all said the same thing.\nAllah said,\nالَّذِينَ طَغَوْا فِي الْبِلَادِ - فَأَكْثَرُوا فِيهَا الْفَسَادَ\n(Who did transgress beyond bounds in the lands. And made therein much mischief.)\nmeaning, they rebelled, were arrogant, and went about making corruption in the land, and harming the people.\nفَصَبَّ عَلَيْهِمْ رَبُّكَ سَوْطَ عَذَابٍ\n(So, your Lord poured on them different kinds of severe torment.)\nmeaning, He sent down a torment upon them from the sky and caused them to be overcome by a punishment that could not be repelled from the people who were criminals.\nThe Lord is Ever Watchful\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَبِالْمِرْصَادِ\n(Verily, your Lord is Ever Watchful.)\nIbn 'Abbas said, \"He hears and He sees.\" This means that He watches over His creation in that which they do, and He will reward them in this life and in the Hereafter based upon what each of them strove for. He will bring all of the creation before Him and He will judge them with justice. He will requit each of them with that which he deserves, for He is far removed from injustice and tyranny.","href":"/tafsir/89?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:89:15","title":"Ibn Kathir · 89:15–20","text":"As for man, when his Lord tries him by giving him honor and bounties, then he says: \"My Lord has honored me. (15)But when He tries him by straitening his means of life, he says: \"My Lord has humiliated me! (16)But no! But you treat not the orphans with kindness and generosity (17)And urge not one another on the feeding of the Miskin (18)And you devour the Turath – devouring with greed (19)And you love wealth with love Jamma (20)\nWealth and Poverty are both a Test and Honor or Disgrace for the Servant\nAllah refutes man in his belief that if Allah gives Him abundant provisions to test him with it, it is out of His honor for him. But this is not the case, rather it is a trial and a test, as Allah says,\nأَيَحْسَبُونَ أَنَّمَا نُمِدُّهُم بِهِ مِن مَّالٍ وَبَنِينَ - نُسَارِعُ لَهُمْ فِي الْخَيْرَاتِ ۚ بَل لَّا يَشْعُرُونَ\n(Do they think that in wealth and children with which We enlarge them. We hasten unto them with good things. Nay, but they perceive not.)(23:55-56)\nLikewise, from another angle, if Allah tests him and tries him by curtailing his sustenance, he believes that is because Allah is humiliating him. As Allah says,\nكَلَّا\n(But no!) meaning, the matter is not as he claims, neither in this nor in that. For indeed Allah gives wealth to those whom He loves as well as those whom He does not love. Likewise, He withholds sustenance from those whom He loves and those whom He does not love. The point is that Allah should be obeyed in either circumstance. If one is wealthy, he should thank Allah for that, and if he is poor, he should exercise patience.\nFrom the Evil that the Servant does regarding Wealth\nAllah said,\nبَل لَّا تُكْرِمُونَ الْيَتِيمَ\n(But you treat not the orphans with kindness and generosity!)\nThis contains the command to honor him (the orphan). Abu Dawud recorded from Sahl bin Sa'id that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nأَنَا وَكَافِلُ الْيَتِيمِ كَهَاتَيْنِ فِي الْجَنَّةِ\n(The guardian of the orphan and I will be like these two in Paradise.) And he put his two fingers together - the middle finger and the index finger.\nوَلَا تَحَاضُّونَ عَلَىٰ طَعَامِ الْمِسْكِينِ\n(And urge not one another on the feeding of the Miskin!)\nmeaning, they do not command that the poor and the needy be treated with kindness, nor do they encourage each other to do so.\nوَتَأْكُلُونَ التُّرَاثَ\n(And you devour the Turath) meaning, the inheritance.\nأَكْلًا لَّمًّا\n(devouring with greed.) meaning, however they can get it, whether lawful or forbidden.\nوَتُحِبُّونَ الْمَالَ حُبًّا جَمًّا\n(And you love wealth with love Jamma.) meaning, in abundance. This increases some of them in their wickedness.","href":"/tafsir/89?verse=15","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:89:21","title":"Ibn Kathir · 89:21–30","text":"Nay! When the earth is flatened, Dakkan Dakka (21)And your Lord comes with the angels in rows (22)And Hell will be brought near that Day. On that Day will man remember, but how will that remembrance avail him (23)He will say: \"Alas! Would that I had sent forth for my life! (24)So on that Day none will punish as He will punish (25)And none will bind as He will bind (26)\"O tranquil soul! (27)\"Come back to your Lord, – well-pleased and well-pleasing! (28)\"Enter then among My servants, (29)\"And enter My Paradise! (30)\nOn the Day of Judgement Everyone will be recompensed according to what He did of Good or Evil\nAllah informs of what will happen on the Day of Judgement of the great horrors. He says,\nكَلَّا\n(Nay!) meaning, truly.\nإِذَا دُكَّتِ الْأَرْضُ دَكًّا دَكًّا\n(When the earth is flatened, Dakkan Dakka.) meaning, the earth and the mountains will be flattened, leveled and made even, and the creatures will rise from their graves for their Lord.\nوَجَاءَ رَبُّكَ\n(And your Lord comes) meaning, for the session of Judgement between His creatures. This is after they requested the best of the Sons of Adam – Muhammad ﷺ – to intercede with Allah. This will occur only after they have requested the other great Messengers, one after another. Yet, all of them will say, \"I cannot do that for you.\" This will continue until the beseeching of the men reaches Muhammad ﷺ, and he will say, \"I will do it, I will do it.\" So he will go and seek to intercede with Allah as the session of Judgement will have come, and Allah will allow him to intercede for that (the Judgement).\nThis will be the first of the intercessions, and it is the praiseworthy station that has already been discussed in Surat Subhan (Al-Isra'). So Allah will come for the session of Judgement as He wills, and the angels will also come, lined up in rows upon rows before Him. Then Allah says,\nوَجِيءَ يَوْمَئِذٍ بِجَهَنَّمَ\n(And Hell will be brought near that Day.) In his Sahih, Imam Muslim bin Al-Hajjaj recorded that 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nيُؤْتَى بِجَهَنَّمَ يَوْمَئِذٍ لَهَا سَبْعُونَ أَلْفَ زِمَامٍ مَعَ كُلِّ زِمَام سَبْعُونَ أَلْفَ مَلَكٍ يَجُرُّونَهَا\n(Hell will be brought on near that Day and it will have seventy thousand leashes, and each leash will have seventy thousand angels pulling it.)\nAt-Tirmidhi also recorded the same narration. Allah said:\nيَوْمَئِذٍ يَتَذَكَّرُ الْإِنسَانُ\n(On that Day will man remember,) meaning, his deeds, and what he did before in his past and recent times.\nوَأَنَّىٰ لَهُ الذِّكْرَىٰ\n(but how will that remembrance avail him?) meaning, how can remembrance then benefit him\nيَقُولُ يَا لَيْتَنِي قَدَّمْتُ لِحَيَاتِي\n(He will say: \"Alas! Would that I had sent forth for my life!\")\nmeaning, if he was a disobedient person, he will be sorry for the acts of disobedience he committed. If he was an obedient person, he will wish that he performed more acts of obdedience.\nThis is similar to what Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal recorded from Muhammad bin Abi 'Amirah, who was one of the Companions of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ. He said, \"If a servant fell down on his face (in prostration) from the day that he was born until the day he died as an old man, in obedience to Allah, he would scorn this act on the Day of Judgement. He would wish to be returned to this life so that he could earn more reward and compensation.\"\nAllah then says,\nفَيَوْمَئِذٍ لَّا يُعَذِّبُ عَذَابَهُ أَحَدٌ\n(So on that Day none will punish as He will punish.) meaning, there is no one more severely punished than those whom Allah punishes for disobeying Him.\nوَلَا يُوثِقُ وَثَاقَهُ أَحَدٌ\n(And none will bind as He will bind.) meaning, there is no one who is more severely punished and bound than those the Az-Zabaniyah punish the disbelievers in their Lord. This is for the criminals and the wrongdoers among the creatures. In reference to the pure and tranquil soul – which is always at rest and abiding by the truth it will be said to it,\nيَا أَيَّتُهَا النَّفْسُ الْمُطْمَئِنَّةُ - ارْجِعِي إِلَىٰ رَبِّكِ\n(O tranquil soul! Come back to your Lord.) meaning, to His company, His reward and what He has prepared for His servants in His Paradise.\nرَاضِيَةً\n(well-pleased) meaning, within itself.\nمَّرْضِيَّةً\n(well-pleasing.) meaning, pleased with Allah, and He will be pleased with it and gratify it.\nفَادْخُلِي فِي عِبَادِي\n(Enter then among My servants,) meaning, among their ranks.\nوَادْخُلِي جَنَّتِي\n(And enter My Paradise!) This will be said to it at the time of death and on the Day of Judgement. This is like the angels giving glad tiding to the believer at his time of death and when he rises from his grave. Likewise is this statement here.\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded from Ibn 'Abbas concerning Allah's statement,\nيَا أَيَّتُهَا النَّفْسُ الْمُطْمَئِنَّةُ - ارْجِعِي إِلَىٰ رَبِّكِ رَاضِيَةً مَّرْضِيَّةً\n(O tranquil soul! Come back to your Lord, well-pleased and well-pleasing!)\nHe said, \"This Ayah was revealed while Abu Bakr was sitting (with the Prophet ﷺ). So he said, 'O Messenger of Allah! There is nothing better than this!' The Prophet ﷺ then replied,\nأَمَا إِنَّهُ سَيُقَالُ لَكَ هَذَا\n(This will indeed be said to you.)\"\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Al-Fajr, and all praise and blessings are due to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/89?verse=21","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:90:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 90:1–20","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nلَا أُقْسِمُ بِهَٰذَا الْبَلَدِ - وَأَنتَ حِلٌّ بِهَٰذَا الْبَلَدِ - وَوَالِدٍ وَمَا وَلَدَ - لَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا الْإِنسَانَ فِي كَبَدٍ - أَيَحْسَبُ أَن لَّن يَقْدِرَ عَلَيْهِ أَحَدٌ - يَقُولُ أَهْلَكْتُ مَالًا لُّبَدًا - أَيَحْسَبُ أَن لَّمْ يَرَهُ أَحَدٌ - أَلَمْ نَجْعَل لَّهُ عَيْنَيْنِ - وَلِسَانًا وَشَفَتَيْنِ - وَهَدَيْنَاهُ النَّجْدَيْنِ\n(1. Nay! I swear by this city;)(2. And you are free in this city.)(3. And by the begetter and that which he begot.)(4. Verily, We have created man in Kabad.)(5. Does he think that none can overcome him?)(6. He says: \"I have wasted wealth in abundance!\")(7. Does he think that none sees him?)(8. Have We not made for him two eyes?)(9. And a tongue and two lips?)(10. And shown him the two ways?)\nSwearing by the Sanctity of Makkah and Other Things that Man was created in Hardship\nHere Allah has sworn by Makkah, the Mother of the Towns, addressing its resident (during the non-sacred months,) free in this city in order to draw his attention to the significance of its sanctity when its people are in the state of sanctity. Khusayf reported from Mujahid;\nلَا أُقْسِمُ بِهَٰذَا الْبَلَدِ\n(Nay! I swear by this city;) \"The word \"La\" (Nay) refers to the refutation against them (Quraish). I swear by this city.\" Shabib bin Bishr narrated from 'Ikrimah, from Ibn 'Abbas that he said,\nلَا أُقْسِمُ بِهَٰذَا الْبَلَدِ\n(Nay! I swear by this city;) \"This means Makkah.\" Concerning the Ayah:\nوَأَنتَ حِلٌّ بِهَٰذَا الْبَلَدِ\n(And you are free in this city.) he (Ibn 'Abbas) said, \"O Muhammad! It is permissable for you to fight in it.\"\nSimilar was reported from Sa'id bin Jubayr, Abu Salih, 'Atiyah, Ad-Dahhak, Qatadah, As-Suddi and Ibn Zayd. Al-Hasan Al-Basri said, \"Allah made it lawful (to fight in) for him (the Prophet ﷺ) for one hour of a day.\" The meaning of what they have said was mentioned in a Hadith that is agreed-upon as being authentic. In it the Prophet ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ هَذَا الْبَلَدَ حَرَّمَهُ اللهُ يَوْمَ خَلَقَ السَّمٰوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ، فَهُوَ حَرَامٌ بِحُرْمَةِ اللهِ إِلَى يَوْم الْقِيَامَةِ لَا يُعْضَدُ شَجَرُهُ وَلَا يُخْتَلَى خَلَاهُ، وَإِنَّمَا أُحِلَّتْ لِي سَاعَةٌ مِنْ نَهَارٍ، وَقَدْ عَادَتْ حُرْمَتُهَا الْيَوْمَ كَحُرْمَتِهَا بِالْأَمْسِ، أَلَا فَلْيُبَلِّغِ الشَّاهِدُ الْغَائِبَ\n(Verily, Allah made this city sacred on the Day that He created the heavens and the earth. Therefore, it is sacred by the sanctity of Allah until the Day of Judgement. Its trees should not be uprooted, and its bushes and grasses should not be removed. And it was only made lawful for me (to fight in) for one hour of a day. Today its sanctity has been restored just as it was sacred yesterday. So, let the one who is present inform those who are absent.)\nIn another wording of this Hadith, he said,\nفَإِنْ أَحَدٌ تَرَخَّصَ بِقِتَالِ رَسُولِ اللهِ فَقُولُوا: إِنَّ اللهَ أَذِنَ لِرَسُولِهِ وَلَمْ يَأْذَنْ لَكُم\n(So, if anyone tries to use the fighting of the Messenger (to conquer Makkah) as an excuse (to fight there), then tell him that Allah permitted it for His Messenger and He has not permitted it for you.)\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nوَوَالِدٍ وَمَا وَلَدَ\n(And by the begetter and that which he begot.) Mujahid, Abu Salih, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak, Sufyan Ath-Thawri, Sa'id bin Jubayr, As-Suddi, Al-Hasan Al-Basri, Khusayf, Shurahbil bin Sa'd and others have said, \"Meaning, by the begetter, Adam, and that which he begot is his children.\" This view that Mujahid and his companions have chosen is good and strong.\nThis is supported by the fact that Allah swears by the Mother of the Towns, which are dwellings. Then after it He swears by the dwellers therein, who is Adam, the father of mankind, and his children. Abu 'Imran Al-Jawni said, \"It refers to Ibrahim and his progeny.\" Ibn Jarir recorded this statement as did Ibn Abi Hatim. Ibn Jarir preferred the view that it is general and it refers to every father and his children. This meaning is also acceptable.\nAllah then says,\nلَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا الْإِنسَانَ فِي كَبَدٍ\n(Verily, We have created man in Kabad.) Ibn Abi Najih and Jurayj reported from 'Ata, from Ibn 'Abbas concerning the phrase 'in Kabad', \"He was created while in hardship. Don't you see him?\" Then he mentioned his birth and the sprouting of his teeth. Mujahid said,\nفِي كَبَدٍ\n(in Kabad.) \"A drop of sperm, then a clot, then a lump of flesh, enduring in his creation.\" Mujahid then said, \"This is similar to Allah's statement,\nحَمَلَتْهُ أُمُّهُ كُرْهًا وَوَضَعَتْهُ كُرْهًا\n(His mother bears him with hardship. And she brings him forth with hardship.)(46:15)\nand she breast-feeds him with hardship, and his livelihood is a hardship. So he endures all of this.\" Sa'id bin Jubayr said,\nلَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا الْإِنسَانَ فِي كَبَدٍ\n(Verily, We have created man in Kabad.) \"In hardship and seeking livelihood.\" 'Ikrimah said, \"In hardship and long-suffering.\"\nQatadah said, \"In difficulty.\" It is reported from Al-Hasan that he said, \"Enduring the hardships of the world by life and the severity of the Hereafter.\"\nMan is encompassed by Allah and His Bounties\nAllah says,\nأَيَحْسَبُ أَن لَّن يَقْدِرَ عَلَيْهِ أَحَدٌ\n(Does he think that none can overcome him?)\nAl-Hasan Al-Basri said,\nأَيَحْسَبُ أَن لَّن يَقْدِرَ عَلَيْهِ أَحَدٌ\n(Does he think that none can overcome him?) \"Meaning no one is able to take his wealth.\"\nQatadah said,\nأَيَحْسَبُ أَن لَّن يَقْدِرَ عَلَيْهِ أَحَدٌ\n(Does he think that none can overcome him?) \"The Son of Adam thinks that he will not be asked about this wealth of his – how he earned and how he spent it.\" Allah said:\nيَقُولُ أَهْلَكْتُ مَالًا لُّبَدًا\n(He says: \"I have wasted wealth in abundance!\")\nThis means, the Son of Adam says, \"I spent an abundance of wealth.\" Mujahid, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, As-Suddi and others have said this.\nأَيَحْسَبُ أَن لَّمْ يَرَهُ أَحَدٌ\n(Does he think that none sees him?) Mujahid said, \"Does he think that Allah, the Mighty and Majestic, does not see him.\" Others among the Salaf have said similar to this.\nAllah said:\nأَلَمْ نَجْعَل لَّهُ عَيْنَيْنِ\n(Have We not made for him two eyes?) meaning, for him to see with them.\nوَلِسَانًا\n(And a tongue) meaning, for him to speak with, and so that he can express that which is inside of him.\nوَشَفَتَيْنِ\n(and two lips?) In order to help him with speaking, eating food, and beautifying his face and his mouth.\nThe Ability to distinguish between Good and Evil is also a Blessing\nوَهَدَيْنَاهُ النَّجْدَيْنِ\n(And shown him the two ways?) This refers to the two paths. Sufyan Ath-Thawri narrated from 'Asim, from Zirr, from 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud that he said,\nوَهَدَيْنَاهُ النَّجْدَيْنِ\n(And shown him the two ways?) \"The good and the evil.\" Similar to this has been reported from 'Ali, Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Abu Wa'il, Abu Salih, Muhammad bin Ka'b, Ad-Dahhak, and 'Ata' Al-Khurasani among others. Similar to this Ayah is Allah's statement,\nإِنَّا خَلَقْنَا الْإِنسَانَ مِن نُّطْفَةٍ أَمْشَاجٍ نَّبْتَلِيهِ فَجَعَلْنَاهُ سَمِيعًا بَصِيرًا - إِنَّا هَدَيْنَاهُ السَّبِيلَ إِمَّا شَاكِرًا وَإِمَّا كَفُورًا\n(Verily, We have created man from Nutfah Amshaj, in order to try him: so We made him hearer and seer. Verily, We showed him the way, whether he be grateful or ungrateful.)(76:2-3)\nفَلَا اقْتَحَمَ الْعَقَبَةَ - وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا الْعَقَبَةُ - فَكُّ رَقَبَةٍ - أَوْ إِطْعَامٌ فِي يَوْمٍ ذِي مَسْغَبَةٍ - يَتِيمًا ذَا مَقْرَبَةٍ - أَوْ مِسْكِينًا ذَا مَتْرَبَةٍ - ثُمَّ كَانَ مِنَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَتَوَاصَوْا بِالصَّبْرِ وَتَوَاصَوْا بِالْمَرْحَمَةِ - أُولَٰئِكَ أَصْحَابُ الْمَيْمَنَةِ - وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِآيَاتِنَا هُمْ أَصْحَابُ الْمَشْأَمَةِ - عَلَيْهِمْ نَارٌ مُّؤْصَدَةٌ\n(11. But he has not attempted to pass on the path that is steep.)(12. And what will make you know the path that is steep?)(13. Freeing a neck)(14. Or giving food in a day full of Masghabah,)(15. To an orphan near of kin.)(16. Or to a Miskin cleaving to dust.)(17. Then he became one of those who believed and recommended one another to patience, and recommended one another to compassion.)(18. They are those on the Right,)(19. But those who disbelieved in Our Ayat, they are those on the Left.)(20. Upon them Fire will Mu'sadah.)\nThe Encouragement to traverse upon the Path of Goodness\nIbn Zayd said,\nفَلَا اقْتَحَمَ الْعَقَبَةَ\n(But he has not attempted to pass on the path that is steep.)\n\"This means, will he not traverse upon the path which contains salvation and good? Then He explains this path by his saying,\nوَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا الْعَقَبَةُ - فَكُّ رَقَبَةٍ - أَوْ إِطْعَامٌ\n(And what will make you know the path that is steep? Freeing a neck, or giving food.)\" Imam Ahmad recorded from Sa'id bin Marjanah that he heard Abu Hurayrah saying that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَنْ أَعْتَقَ رَقَبَةً مُؤمِنَةً أَعْتَقَ اللهُ بِكُلِّ إِرْبٍ - أَيْ عُضْوٍ - مِنْهَا إِرْبًا مِنْهُ مِنَ النَّارِ حَتّٰى إِنَّهُ لَيُعْتِقُ بِالْيَدِ الْيَدَ، وَبِالرِّجْلِ الرِّجْلَ، وَبِالْفَرْجِ الْفَرْجَ\n(Whoever frees a believing slave, Allah will free for every limb (of the slave) one of his limbs from the Fire. This is to such an extent that He (Allah) will free a hand for a hand, a leg for a leg, and a private part for a private part.)\nAli bin Al-Husayn then said (to Sa'id), \"Did you hear this from Abu Hurayrah?\" Sa'id replied, \"Yes.\" Then 'Ali bin Al-Husayn said to a slave boy that he owned who was the swiftest of his servants, \"Call Mutarrif!\" So when the slave was brought before him he said, \"Go, for you are free for the Face of Allah.\" Al-Bukhari, Muslim, At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa'i, all recorded this Hadith from Sa'id bin Marjanah.\nImam Ahmad recorded from 'Amr bin 'Abasah that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nمَنْ بَنَى مَسْجِدًا لِيُذْكَرَ اللهُ فِيهِ بَنَى اللهُ لَهُ بَيْتًا فِي الْجَنَّةِ وَمَنْ أَعْتَقَ نَفْسًا مُسْلِمَةً كَانَتْ فِدْيَتَهُ مِنْ جَهَنَّمَ وَمَنْ شَابَ شَيْبَةً فِي الْإِسْلَامِ كَانَتْ لَهُ نُورًا يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ\n(Whoever builds a Masjid so that Allah may be remembered in it, Allah will build a house for him in Paradise; and whoever frees a Muslim person, then it will be his ransom from Hell; and whoever grows grey in Islam, then it will be a light for him on the Day of Judgement.)\nAccording to another route of transmission, Ahmad recorded from Abu Umamah, who reported from 'Amr bin 'Abasah that As-Sulami said to him, \"Narrate a Hadith to us that you heard from the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, without any deficiency or mistakes.\" He ('Amr) said, \"I heard him saying,\nمَنْ وُلِدَ لَهُ ثَلَاثَةُ أَوْلَادٍ فِي الْإِسْلَامِ فَمَاتُوا قَبْلَ أَنْ يَبْلُغُوا الْحِنْثَ أَدْخَلَهُ اللهُ الْجَنَّةَ بِفَضْلِ رَحْمَتِهِ إِيَّاهُمْ، وَمَنْ شَابَ شَيْبَةً فِي سَبِيلِ اللهِ كَانَتْ لَهُ نُورًا يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ، وَمَنْ رَمَى بِسهم فِي سَبِيلِ اللهِ بَلَغَ بِهِ الْعَدُوَّ أَصَابَ أَوْ أَخْطَأَ كَانَ لَهُ عِتْقُ رَقَبَةٍ، وَمَنْ أَعْتَقَ رَقَبَةً مُؤْمِنَـةً أَعْتَقَ اللهُ بِكُلِّ عُضْوٍ مِنْهُ عُضْوًا مِنْهُ مِنَ النَّارِ، وَمَنْ أَنْفَقَ زَوْجَيْنِ فِي سَبِيلِ اللهِ فَإِنَّ لِلْجَنَّةِ ثَمَانِيَةَ أَبْوَابٍ يُدْخِلُهُ اللهُ مِنْ أَيِّ بَابٍ شَاءَ مِنْهَا\n(Whoever has three children born to him in Islam, and they die before reaching the age of puberty, Allah will enter him into Paradise by virtue of His mercy to them. And whoever grows gray in the way of Allah (fighting Jihad), then it will be a light for him on the Day of Judgement. And whoever shoots an arrow in the way of Allah (fighting Jihad) that reaches the enemy, whether it hits or misses, he will get the reward of freeing a slave. And whoever frees a believing slave, then Allah will free each of his limbs from the Fire for every limb that the slave has. And whoever equipped two riding animals in the way of Allah (for fighting Jihad), then indeed Paradise has eight gates, and Allah will allow him to enter any of them he choses.)\"\nAhmad recorded this Hadith from different routes of transmission that are good and strong, and all praise is due to Allah.\nAllah said,\nأَوْ إِطْعَامٌ فِي يَوْمٍ ذِي مَسْغَبَةٍ\n(Or giving food in a day full of Masghabah,) Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Of hunger.\" 'Ikrimah, Mujahid, Ad-Dahhak, Qatadah and others all said the same. The word 'Saghb' means hunger. Then Allah says,\nيَتِيمًا\n(To an orphan) meaning, he gives food on a day like this to an orphan.\nذَا مَقْرَبَةٍ\n(near of kin.) meaning, who is related to him. Ibn 'Abbas, 'Ikrimah, Al-Hasan, Ad-Dahhak and As-Suddi all said this. This is similar to what was related in a Hadith that was collected by Imam Ahmad on the authority of Salman bin 'Amir who said that he heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ say,\nالصَّدَقَةُ عَلَى الْمِسْكِينِ صَدَقَةٌ وَعَلَى ذِي الرَّحِمِ اثْنَتَانِ: صَدَقَةٌ وَصِلَةٌ\n(Charity given to the poor person is counted as one charity, while if it is given to a relative it is counted as two: charity and connecting the ties (of kinship).)\nAt-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa'i both recorded this Hadith and its chain of narration is authentic. Then Allah says,\nأَوْ مِسْكِينًا ذَا مَتْرَبَةٍ\n(Or to a Miskin cleaving to dust (Dha Matrabah).)\nmeaning, poor, miserable, and clinging to the dirt. It means those who are in a state of destitution. Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Dha Matrabah is that who is dejected in the street and who has no house or anything else to protect him against the dirt.\"\nAllah said:\nثُمَّ كَانَ مِنَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا\n(Then he became one of those who believed) meaning, then, along with these beautiful and pure characteristics, he was a believer in his heart, seeking the reward of that from Allah. This is as Allah says,\nوَمَنْ أَرَادَ الْآخِرَةَ وَسَعَىٰ لَهَا سَعْيَهَا وَهُوَ مُؤْمِنٌ فَأُولَٰئِكَ كَانَ سَعْيُهُم مَّشْكُورًا\n(And whoever desires the Hereafter and strives for it, with the necessary effort due for it while he is believer, then such are the ones whose striving shall be appreciated.)(17:19)\nAllah also says,\nمَنْ عَمِلَ صَالِحًا مِّن ذَكَرٍ أَوْ أُنثَىٰ وَهُوَ مُؤْمِنٌ\n(Whoever works righteousness – whether male or female – while being a true believer...)(16:97)\nAllah says,\nوَتَوَاصَوْا بِالصَّبْرِ وَتَوَاصَوْا بِالْمَرْحَمَةِ\n(and recommended one another to patience, and recommended one another to compassion.)\nmeaning, he was from the believers who worked righteous deeds, and advised each other to be patient with the harms of the people, and to be merciful with them. This is similar to what has been related in the noble Hadith,\nالرَّاحِمُونَ يَرْحَمُهُمُ الرَّحْمَٰنُ، ارْحَمُوا مَنْ فِي الْأَرْضِ يَرْحَمْكُمْ مَنْ فِي السَّمَاءِ\n(The merciful people will be treated with mercy by the Most Merciful (Allah). Be merciful to those who are on the earth and He Who is above the heavens will be merciful to you.)\nIn another Hadith he said,\nلَا يَرْحَمُ اللهُ مَنْ لَا يَرْحَمِ النَّاسَ\n(Allah will not be merciful with whoever is not merciful with the people.)\nAbu Dawud recorded from 'Abdullah bin 'Amr that he narrated (from the Prophet ﷺ),\nمَنْ لَمْ يَرْحَمْ صَغِيرَنَا وَيَعْرِفْ حَقَّ كَبِيرِنَا فَلَيْسَ مِنَّا\n(Whoever does not show mercy to our children, nor does he recognize the right of our elders, then he is not of us.)\nThen Allah says,\nأُولَٰئِكَ أَصْحَابُ الْمَيْمَنَةِ\n(They are those on the Right,) meaning, those who have these characteristics are the companions of the Right Hand.\nThe Companions of the Left Hand and Their Recompense\nThen Allah says,\nوَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِآيَاتِنَا هُمْ أَصْحَابُ الْمَشْأَمَةِ\n(But those who disbelieved in Our Ayat, they are those on the Left.)\nmeaning, the companions of the Left Hand.\nعَلَيْهِمْ نَارٌ مُّؤْصَدَةٌ\n(Upon them Fire will Mu'sadah.)\nmeaning, it will be sealed over them and there will be no way for them to avoid it, nor will they have any way out. Abu Hurayrah, Ibn 'Abbas, 'Ikrimah, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Mujahid, Muhammad bin Ka'b Al-Qurazi, 'Atiyah Al-'Awfi, Al-Hasan, Qatadah and As-Suddi, all said,\nمُّؤْصَدَةٌ\n(Mu'sadah.) \"This means shut.\" Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Its doors will be closed.\" Ad-Dahhak said,\nمُّؤْصَدَةٌ\n(Mu'sadah.) \"It will be sealed over them and it will have no door.\" Qatadah said,\nمُّؤْصَدَةٌ\n(Mu'sadah.) \"It will be shut and there will be no light in it, no crevice (escape), and no way out of it forever.\"\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Al-Balad, and all praise and blessings are due to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/90?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:91:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 91:1–10","text":"Recitation of Surah Ash-Shams wa Duhaha in the 'Isha' Prayer\nThe Hadith of Jabir which was recorded in the Two Sahihs has already been mentioned. In it the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said to Mu'adh,\nهَلَّا صَلَّيْتَ بِــ\nسَبِّحِ اسْمَ رَبِّكَ الْأَعْلَى\nوَالشَّمْسِ وَضُحَاهَا\nوَالَّيْلِ إِذَا يَغْشَىٰ\n(Why didn't you pray with (the recitation of)(Glorify the Name of your Lord the Most High)(87), (By the sun and Duhaha)(91), and (By the night as it envelops)(92)?)\nبِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nوَالشَّمْسِ وَضُحَاهَا - وَالْقَمَرِ إِذَا تَلَاهَا - وَالنَّهَارِ إِذَا جَلَّاهَا - وَالَّيْلِ إِذَا يَغْشَاهَا - وَالسَّمَاءِ وَمَا بَنَاهَا - وَالْأَرْضِ وَمَا طَحَاهَا - وَنَفْسٍ وَمَا سَوَّاهَا - فَأَلْهَمَهَا فُجُورَهَا وَتَقْوَاهَا - قَدْ أَفْلَحَ مَن زَكَّاهَا - وَقَدْ خَابَ مَن دَسَّاهَا\n(1. By the sun and Duhaha.)(2. By the moon as it Talaha.)(3. By the day as it Jallaha.)(4. By the night as it Yaghshaha.)(5. By the heaven and Ma Banaha.)(6. By the earth and Ma Tahhaha.)(7. By Nafs, and Ma Sawwaha (Who apportioned it).)(8. Then He showed it its Fujur and its Taqwa.)(9. Indeed he succeeds who purifies it.)(10. And indeed he fails who Dassaha.)\nAllah swears by His Creation that the Person Who Purifies Himself will be Successful and the Person Who Corrupts Himself will Fail\nMujahid said,\nوَالشَّمْسِ وَضُحَاهَا\n(By the sun and Duhaha.) \"This means, by its light.\" Qatadah said,\nوَضُحَاهَا\n(wa Duhaha.) \"The whole day.\" Ibn Jarir said, \"The correct view is what has been said, 'Allah swears by the sun and its daytime, because the clear light of the sun is daytime.'\"\nوَالْقَمَرِ إِذَا تَلَاهَا\n(By the moon as it Talaha.) Mujahid said, \"It follows it (the sun).\" Al-'Awfi reported from Ibn 'Abbas that he said,\nوَالْقَمَرِ إِذَا تَلَاهَا\n(By the moon as it Talaha.) \"It follows the day.\" Qatadah said, \"as it Talaha (follows it)' is referring to the night of the Hilal (the new crescent moon). When the sun goes down, the Hilal is visible.\" Concerning Allah's statement,\nوَالنَّهَارِ إِذَا جَلَّاهَا\n(By the day as it Jallaha.) Mujahid said, \"When it illuminates.\" Thus, Mujahid said,\nوَالنَّهَارِ إِذَا جَلَّاهَا\n(By the day as it Jallaha.) \"This is similar to Allah's statement,\nوَالنَّهَارِ إِذَا تَجَلَّىٰ\n(By the day as it Tajalla.)(92:2)\" And they have said concerning Allah's statement,\nوَالَّيْلِ إِذَا يَغْشَاهَا\n(By the night as it Yaghshaha.) meaning, when it covers the sun, which takes place when sun disappears and the horizons become dark.\nConcerning Allah's statement,\nوَالسَّمَاءِ وَمَا بَنَاهَا\n(By the heaven and Ma Banaha.) The meaning here could be for descriptive purposes, meaning \"By the heaven and its construction.\" This was said by Qatadah. It could also mean \"By the heaven and its Constructor.\" This was stated by Mujahid. Both views are interrelated, and construction means raising. This is as Allah says,\nوَالسَّمَاءَ بَنَيْنَاهَا بِأَيْدٍ\n(With Hands did We construct the heaven.)(51:47) meaning, with strength.\nوَإِنَّا لَمُوسِعُونَ - وَالْأَرْضَ فَرَشْنَاهَا فَنِعْمَ الْمَاهِدُونَ\n(Verily, We are able to extend the vastness of space thereof. And We have spread out the earth: how excellent a spreader are We!)(51:47-48)\nThis is also similar to Allah's statement,\nوَالْأَرْضِ وَمَا طَحَاهَا\n(By the earth and Ma Tahaha.) Mujahid said, \"Tahaha means He spread it out.\" Al-'Awfi reported from Ibn 'Abbas that he said,\nوَمَا طَحَاهَا\n(and Ma Tahaha.) \"This means what He created in it.\" 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported from Ibn 'Abbas that he said, \"Tahaha means that He proportioned it.\" Mujahid, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak, As-Suddi, Ath-Thawri, Abu Salih and Ibn Zayd all said that\nطَحَاهَا\n(Tahaha) means, He spread it out.\nAllah then says,\nوَنَفْسٍ وَمَا سَوَّاهَا\n(By Nafs, and Ma Sawwaha (Who apportioned it).)\nmeaning, He created it sound and well-proportioned upon the correct nature (Al-Fitrah). This is as Allah says,\nفَأَقِمْ وَجْهَكَ لِلدِّينِ حَنِيفًا ۚ فِطْرَتَ اللَّهِ الَّتِي فَطَرَ النَّاسَ عَلَيْهَا ۚ لَا تَبْدِيلَ لِخَلْقِ اللَّهِ\n(So set you your face towards the religion, Hanif. Allah's Fitrah with which He has created mankind. No change let there be in the Khalqillah.)(30:30)\nThe Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nكُلُّ مَوْلُودٍ يُولَدُ عَلى الْفِطْرَةِ فَأَبَوَاهُ يُهَوِّدَانِهِ أَوْ يُنَصِّرَانِهِ أَوْ يُمَجِّسَانِهِ، كَمَا تُولَدُ الْبَهِيمَةُ بَهِيمَةً جَمْعَاءَ، هَلْ تُحِسُّونَ فِيهَا مِنْ جَدْعَاءَ؟\n(Every child that is born, is born upon the Fitrah, but his parents make him a Jew, a Christian, or a Zoroastrian. This is just as the animal is born, complete with all of its parts. Do you notice any mutilation in it?)\nBoth Al-Bukhari and Muslim recorded this Hadith from Abu Hurayrah. In Sahih Muslim, it has been narrated from 'Iyad bin Himar Al-Mujashi'i that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nيَقُولُ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ: إِنِّي خَلَقْتُ عِبَادِي حُنَفَاءَ فَجَاءَتْهُمُ الشَّيَاطِينُ فَاجْتَالَتْهُمْ عَنْ دِينِهِم\n(Allah the Mighty and Majestic says, \"Verily I created My servants Hunafa' (as monotheists), but then the devils came to them and distracted them from their religion.)\"\nThen Allah says,\nفَأَلْهَمَهَا فُجُورَهَا وَتَقْوَاهَا\n(Then He showed it its Fujur and its Taqwa.)\nmeaning, He showed him to his transgression and his Taqwa. This means that He clarified that for it and He guided it to what has been ordained for him. Ibn 'Abbas said,\nفَأَلْهَمَهَا فُجُورَهَا وَتَقْوَاهَا\n(Then He showed it its Fujur and its Taqwa.)\n\"He explained the good and the evil to it (the soul).\" Mujahid, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak and Ath-Thawri all said the same. Sa'id bin Jubayr said, \"He gave him inspiration (to see what was) good and evil.\" Ibn Zayd said, \"He made its Fujur and its Taqwa inside of it.\"\nIbn Jarir recorded from Abul-Aswad Ad-Dili that he said, \"'Imran bin Husayn said to me, 'Do you think that what the people do, and what they strive for is a thing that is pre-ordained and predestined for them, or is it a thing which is only written after the Message comes to them from the Prophet ﷺ, when there will be an evidence against them?' I said, 'Rather it is something preordained upon them.' Then he said, 'Is that an injustice?' Then I became extremely frightened of him (due to what he was saying), and I said to him, 'There is nothing except that He (Allah) created it and possesses it in His Hand. He is not asked about what He does, while they (His creation) will be asked.' He ('Imran) then said, 'May Allah guide you! I only asked you about that in order to inform you that a man from Muzaynah or Juhaynah tribe came to the Allah's Messenger ﷺ and asked him:\n\"O Messenger of Allah! Do you consider the actions of mankind and their struggles to be preordained for them and written for them from Qadr, or something written for them only after the Message came to them from their Prophet, when there will be an evidence against them?\" He (the Prophet ﷺ) replied:\nبَلْ شَيْءٌ قَدْ قُضِيَ عَلَيْهِم\n(Rather it is something preordained for them.)\nSo the man said, \"Then what is the point of our actions?\" The Prophet ﷺ replied,\nمَنْ كَانَ اللهُ خَلَقَهُ لإِحْدَى الْمَنْزِلَتَيْنِ يُهَيِّئُهُ لَهَا، وَتَصْدِيقُ ذَلِكَ فِي كِتَابِ اللهِ تَعَالَى:\nوَنَفْسٍ وَمَا سَوَّاهَا - فَأَلْهَمَهَا فُجُورَهَا وَتَقْوَاهَا\n(Whoever Allah created for one of the two positions (Paradise or Hell), He makes it easy for him (to attain). The proof of that is in the Book of Allah (By Nafs, and Ma Sawwaha (Who apportioned it). Then He showed it its Fujur and its Taqwa).)\"\nAhmad and Muslim both recorded this Hadith. Allah then says,\nقَدْ أَفْلَحَ مَن زَكَّاهَا - وَقَدْ خَابَ مَن دَسَّاهَا\n(Indeed he succeeds who purifies it. And indeed he fails who Dassaha.)\nThis could mean that whoever purifies himself by obedience to Allah, then he will be successful. This is as Qatadah said, \"He cleanses it from the lowly and despicable characteristics.\"\nSimilar to this has been reported from Mujahid, 'Ikrimah and Sa'id bin Jubayr.\nوَقَدْ خَابَ مَن دَسَّاهَا\n(And indeed he fails who Dassaha.) meaning, to conceal it. This means that he makes it dull, and he disregards it by neglecting to allow it to receive guidance. He treats it in this manner until he performs acts of disobedience and he abandons obedience of Allah.\nIt also could mean that he is indeed successful whose soul Allah purifies, and he has failed whose soul Allah corrupts. This is like what was reported by Al-'Awfi and 'Ali bin Abi Talhah from Ibn 'Abbas.\nAt-Tabarani recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to stop whenever he recited this Ayah,\nوَنَفْسٍ وَمَا سَوَّاهَا - فَأَلْهَمَهَا فُجُورَهَا وَتَقْوَاهَا\n(By Nafs, and Ma Sawwaha (Who apportioned it). Then He showed it its Fujur and its Taqwa.)\nThen he would say,\nاللّٰهُمَّ آتِ نَفْسِي تَقْوَاهَا، أَنْتَ وَلِيُّهَا وَمَوْلَاهَا، وَخَيْرُ مَنْ زَكَّاهَا\n(O Allah! Give my soul its good. You are its Guardian and Master, and the best to purify it.)\"\nAnother Hadith\nImam Ahmad recorded that Zayd bin Arqam said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nاللّٰهُمَّ إِنِّي أَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنَ الْعَجْز وَالْكَسَلِ، وَالْهَرَمِ وَالْجُبْنِ وَالْبُخْلِ وَعَذَابِ الْقَبْرِ. اللّٰهُمَّ آتِ نَفْسِي تَقْوَاهَا، وَزَكِّهَا أَنْتَ خَيْرُ مَنْ زَكَّاهَا، أَنْتَ وَلِيُّهَا وَمَوْلَاهَا. اللّٰهُمَّ إِنِّي أَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ قَلْبٍ لَا يَخْشَعُ، وَمِنْ نَفْسٍ لَا تَشْبَعُ، وَعِلْمٍ لَا يَنْفَعُ، وَدَعْوَةٍ لَا يُسْتَجَابُ لَهَا\n(O Allah! Verily, I seek refuge with You from weakness, laziness, senility (of old age), cowardliness, stinginess and the torment of the grave. O Allah! Give my soul its good and purify it, for You are the best to purify it. You are its Guardian and Master. O Allah! Verily, I seek refuge with You from a heart that is not humble, a soul that is not satisfied, knowledge that does not benefit and a supplication that is not answered.)\nZayd then said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to teach us these (words) and we now teach them to you.\" Muslim also recorded this Hadith.","href":"/tafsir/91?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:91:11","title":"Ibn Kathir · 91:11–15","text":"Thamud denied through their transgression (11)When their most wicked went forth (12)But the Messenger of Allah said to them: \"Be cautious! That is the she-camel of Allah! (Do not harm it) and (bar it not from having) its drink! (13)Then they denied him and they killed it. So their Lord destroyed them because of their sin, Fasawwaha (14)And He feared not the consequences thereof (15)\nThe Rejection of Thamud and Allah's Destruction of Them\nAllah informs that Thamud rejected their Messenger because of the injustice and transgression they practiced. This was said by Mujahid, Qatadah and others. Therefore, this resulted in a rejection in their hearts for the guidance and conviction their Messenger came to them with.\nإِذِ انبَعَثَ أَشْقَاهَا\n(When their most wicked went forth.)\nmeaning, the most wicked person of the tribe, and he was Qudar bin Salif, the one who killed the she-camel. He was leader of the tribe of Thamud, and he is the one whom Allah refers to in His saying,\nفَنَادَوْا صَاحِبَهُمْ فَتَعَاطَىٰ فَعَقَرَ\n(But they called their comrade and he took (a sword) and killed (her).)(54:29)\nThis man was mighty and respected among his people. He was of noble lineage and a leader who was obeyed. This is just as Imam Ahmad recorded from 'Abdullah bin Zam'ah. He said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ gave a sermon in which he mentioned the she-camel and he mentioned the man who killed her. Then he said,\nإِذِ انبَعَثَ أَشْقَاهَا\nانْبَعَثَ لَهَا رَجُلٌ عَارِمٌ عَزِيزٌ مَنِيعٌ فَي رَهْطِهِ مِثْلُ أَبِي زَمْعَةَ\n((When their most wicked went forth.)(A strong and mighty man who was invincible among his tribe, like Abu Zam'ah, went forth to her.)\nThis Hadith was recorded by Al-Bukhari in his Book of Tafsir, and Muslim in his Book of the Description of the Hellfire. At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa'i both recorded it in their Sunans in their Books of Tafsir.\nThe Story of Salih's She-Camel\nAllah then says,\nفَقَالَ لَهُمْ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ\n(But the Messenger of Allah said to them) referring to Salih.\nنَاقَةَ اللَّهِ\n(That is the she-camel of Allah!) meaning, 'beware of touching the she-camel of Allah with any harm.'\nوَسُقْيَاهَا\n(and its drink!) meaning, 'do not transgress against her in her drinking, for she has been allocated a day to drink and you have been allocated a day to drink, as is known to you.' Then Allah says,\nفَكَذَّبُوهُ فَعَقَرُوهَا\n(Then they denied him and they killed it.)\nwhich means they rejected what he came with. This resulted in them killing the she-camel that Allah had brought out of the rock as a sign for them and a proof against them.\nفَدَمْدَمَ عَلَيْهِمْ رَبُّهُم بِذَنبِهِمْ\n(So their Lord destroyed them because of their sin,)\nmeaning, He became angry with them and He annihilated them.\nفَسَوَّاهَا\n(Fasawwaha!) meaning, He made the punishment descend upon them all equally.\nQatadah said, \"It has reached us that the leader of tribe of Thamud did not kill the she-camel until their youth, their elderly, their males and their females all pledged allegiance to him. So when the people cooperated in killing her, Allah destroyed them all with the same punishment due to their sin.\" Allah said,\nوَلَا يَخَافُ\n(And He feared not) it has also been recited as\n(فَلَا يَخَافُ)\n(So He feared not)\nعُقْبَاهَا\n(the consequences thereof.) Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Allah does not fear any consequences from anyone else.\" Mujahid, Al-Hasan, Bakr bin 'Abdullah Al-Muzani and others all said the same.\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Ash-Shams, and all praise and thanks are due to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/91?verse=11","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:92:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 92:1–11","text":"The Recitation of Surat Al-Layl in the 'Isha' Prayer\nThe statement of the Prophet ﷺ to Mu'adh has already preceded, where he said,\nفَهَلَّا صَلَّيْتَ بِــ\nسَبِّحِ اسْمَ رَبِّكَ الْأَعْلَى\nوَالشَّمْسِ وَضُحَاهَا\nوَالَّيْلِ إِذَا يَغْشَىٰ\n(Why did you not pray with (the recitation of)(Glorify the Name of your Lord the Most High)(87), and (By the sun and Duhaha)(91), and (By the night as it envelops)(92)?)\nبِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nوَالَّيْلِ إِذَا يَغْشَىٰ - وَالنَّهَارِ إِذَا تَجَلَّىٰ - وَمَا خَلَقَ الذَّكَرَ وَالْأُنثَىٰ - إِنَّ سَعْيَكُمْ لَشَتَّىٰ - فَأَمَّا مَنْ أَعْطَىٰ وَاتَّقَىٰ - وَصَدَّقَ بِالْحُسْنَىٰ - فَسَنُيَسِّرُهُ لِلْيُسْرَىٰ - وَأَمَّا مَن بَخِلَ وَاسْتَغْنَىٰ - وَكَذَّبَ بِالْحُسْنَىٰ - فَسَنُيَسِّرُهُ لِلْعُسْرَىٰ - وَمَا يُغْنِي عَنْهُ مَالُهُ إِذَا تَرَدَّىٰ\n(1. By the night as it envelops.)(2. By the day as it appears.)(3. By Him Who created male and female.)(4. Certainly, your efforts and deeds are diverse.)(5. As for him who gives and has Taqwa,)(6. And believes in Al-Husna.)(7. We will make smooth for him the path of ease.)(8. But he who is greedy and thinks himself self-sufficient,)(9. And denies Al-Husna.)(10. We will make smooth for him the path to evil.)(11. And what will his wealth avail him when he goes down (in destruction)?)\nSwearing by the Diversity of Mankind in Their Efforts and informing of the Different Results of that\nAllah swears by saying:\nوَالَّيْلِ إِذَا يَغْشَىٰ\n(By the night as it envelops.) meaning, when it covers the creation with its darkness.\nوَالنَّهَارِ إِذَا تَجَلَّىٰ\n(By the day as it appears.) meaning, with its light and its radiance.\nوَمَا خَلَقَ الذَّكَرَ وَالْأُنثَىٰ\n(By Him Who created male and female.) This is similar to Allah's saying,\nوَخَلَقْنَاكُمْ أَزْوَاجًا\n(And We have created you in pairs.)(78:8)\nIt is also similar to saying,\nوَمِن كُلِّ شَيْءٍ خَلَقْنَا زَوْجَيْنِ\n(And of everything We have created pairs.)(51:49)\nAnd just as these things that are being sworn by are opposites, likewise that which this swearing is about are opposing things. This is why Allah says,\nإِنَّ سَعْيَكُمْ لَشَتَّىٰ\n(Certainly, your efforts and deeds are diverse.)\nmeaning, the actions of the servants that they have performed are also opposites and diverse. Therefore, there are those who do good and there are those who do evil. Allah then says,\nفَأَمَّا مَنْ أَعْطَىٰ وَاتَّقَىٰ\n(As for him who gives and has Taqwa.)\nmeaning, he gives what he has been commanded to give and he fears Allah in his affairs.\nوَصَدَّقَ بِالْحُسْنَىٰ\n(And believes in Al-Husna.) meaning, in the compensation for that. This was said by Qatadah. Khusayf said, \"In the reward.\"\nThen Allah says,\nفَسَنُيَسِّرُهُ لِلْيُسْرَىٰ\n(We will make smooth for him the path of ease.) Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Meaning for goodness.\" Thus, Allah says,\nوَأَمَّا مَن بَخِلَ\n(But he who is greedy) meaning, with that which he has.\nوَاسْتَغْنَىٰ\n(and thinks himself self-sufficient,) 'Ikrimah reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"This means he is stingy with his wealth and considers himself to be in no need of his Lord, the Mighty and Majestic.\" This was recorded by Ibn Abi Hatim.\nوَكَذَّبَ بِالْحُسْنَىٰ\n(And denies Al-Husna.) meaning, the recompense in the abode of the Hereafter.\nفَسَنُيَسِّرُهُ لِلْعُسْرَىٰ\n(We will make smooth for him the path to evil.)\nmeaning, the path of evil. This is as Allah says,\nوَنُقَلِّبُ أَفْئِدَتَهُمْ وَأَبْصَارَهُمْ كَمَا لَمْ يُؤْمِنُوا بِهِ أَوَّلَ مَرَّةٍ وَنَذَرُهُمْ فِي طُغْيَانِهِمْ يَعْمَهُونَ\n(And We shall turn their hearts and their eyes away, as they refused to believe therein for the first time, and We shall leave them in their trespass to wander blindly.)(6:110)\nAnd there are many Ayat with this meaning, proving that Allah rewards those who intend good with success, while whoever intends evil is abandoned, and all of this is in accordance with a preordained decree. There are also many Hadiths that prove this.\nThe Narration of Abu Bakr As-Siddiq\nImam Ahmad recorded from Abu Bakr that he said to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, \"O Messenger of Allah! Do we act according to what has already been decided, or is the matter just beginning (i.e., still undecided)?\" He replied,\nبَلْ عَلَى أَمْرٍ قَدْ فُرِغَ مِنْهُ\n(Indeed it is according to what has already been decided.)\nThen Abu Bakr said, \"Then what (good) are deeds, O Messenger of Allah?\" He replied,\nكُلٌّ مُيَسَّرٌ لِمَا خُلِقَ لَهُ\n(Everyone will find it easy to do such deeds that will lead him to what he was created for.)\nThe Narration of 'Ali\nAl-Bukhari recorded from 'Ali bin Abi Talib that they (the Companions) were with the Messenger of Allah ﷺ at the cemetery of Baqi' Al-Gharqad for a funeral, when the Prophet ﷺ said,\nمَا مِنْكُمْ مِنْ أَحَدٍ إِلَّا وَقَدْ كُتِبَ مَقْعَدُهُ مِنَ الْجَنَّةِ وَمَقْعَدُهُ مِنَ النَّارِ\n(There is none among you except that his place has already been written, a seat in Paradise and a seat in the Hellfire.)\nThey said, \"O Messenger of Allah! Should we depend on this?\" He replied,\nاعْمَلُوا، فَكُلٌّ مُيَسَّرٌ لِمَا خُلِقَ لَهُ\n(Perform deeds for everyone will have the deeds of what he was created for (Paradise or Hell) made easy for him.) Then he recited the Ayah\nفَأَمَّا مَنْ أَعْطَىٰ وَاتَّقَىٰ - وَصَدَّقَ بِالْحُسْنَىٰ - فَسَنُيَسِّرُهُ لِلْيُسْرَىٰ\n(As