 embraced Islam. They used to say, \"We gave our pledge of obedience to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ to hear and obey, in times when we are active and otherwise, even if we were passed on for rights, and not to dispute leadership with its rightful people.\" Allah also said,\nوَمَا لَكُمْ لَا تُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللَّهِ وَالرَّسُولُ يَدْعُوكُمْ لِتُؤْمِنُوا بِرَبِّكُمْ وَقَدْ أَخَذَ مِيثَاقَكُمْ إِن كُنتُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ\n(And what is the matter with you that you believe not in Allah! While the Messenger invites you to believe in your Lord; and He has indeed taken your covenant, if you are real believers.)[57:8]\nIt was also said that this Ayah (5:7) reminds the Jews of the pledges and promises Allah took from them to follow Muhammad ﷺ and adhere to his Law, as 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas stated. Allah then said,\nوَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ\n(And have Taqwa of Allah.) in all times and situations. Allah says that He knows the secrets and thoughts that the hearts conceal,\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلِيمٌ بِذَاتِ الصُّدُورِ\n(Verily, Allah is All-Knower of the secrets of (your) breasts.)\n\n## The Necessity of Observing Justice\n\nAllah said,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا كُونُوا قَوَّامِينَ لِلَّهِ\n(O you who believe! Stand out firmly for Allah...) meaning, in truth for the sake of Allah, not for the sake of people or for fame,\nشُهَدَاءَ بِالْقِسْطِ\n(as just witnesses) observing justice and not transgression. It is recorded in the Two Sahihs that An-Nu'man bin Bashir said, \"My father gave me a gift, but 'Amrah bint Rawahah, my mother, said that she would not agree to it unless he made Allah's Messenger ﷺ as a witness to it. So, my father went to Allah's Messenger ﷺ to ask him to be a witness to his giving me the gift. Allah's Messenger ﷺ asked,\nأكل ولدك نحلت مثله؟\n('Have you given the like of it to everyone of your offspring?') He replied in the negative. Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nاتَّقُوا اللهَ وَاعْدِلُوا فِي أَوْلَادِكُم\n(Have Taqwa of Allah and treat your children equally.) And said;\nإِنِّي لَا أَشْهَدُ عَلى جَوْرٍ\n(I shall not be witness to injustice.) My father then returned and took back his gift.\" Allah said;\nوَلَا يَجْرِمَنَّكُمْ شَنَآنُ قَوْمٍ عَلَىٰ أَلَّا تَعْدِلُوا\n(and let not the enmity and hatred of others make you avoid justice.)\nThe Ayah commands: Do not be carried away by your hatred for some people to avoid observing justice with them. Rather, be just with every one, whether a friend or an enemy. This is why Allah said,\nاعْدِلُوا هُوَ أَقْرَبُ لِلتَّقْوَىٰ\n(Be just: that is nearer to Taqwa) this is better than if you abandon justice in this case.\nAlthough Allah said that observing justice is 'nearer to Taqwa', there is not any other course of action to take, therefore 'nearer' here means 'is'. Allah said in another Ayah,\nأَصْحَابُ الْجَنَّةِ يَوْمَئِذٍ خَيْرٌ مُّسْتَقَرًّا وَأَحْسَنُ مَقِيلًا\n(The dwellers of Paradise will, on that Day, have the best abode, and have the fairer of places for repose.)\nSome of the female Companions said to 'Umar, \"You are more rough and crude than the Messenger of Allah ﷺ,\" meaning, you are rough, not that the Prophet ﷺ is rough at all. Allah said next,\nوَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ إِنَّ اللَّهَ خَبِيرٌ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ\n(and have Taqwa of Allah. Verily, Allah is Well-Acquainted with what you do.) and consequently, He will reward or punish you according to your actions, whether good or evil. Hence Allah's statement afterwards,\nوَعَدَ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ لَهُم مَّغْفِرَةٌ\n(Allah has promised those who believe and do deeds of righteousness, that for them there is forgiveness) for their sins,\nوَأَجْرٌ عَظِيمٌ\n(and a great reward.) which is Paradise, that is part of Allah's mercy for His servants. They will not earn Paradise on account of their good actions, but rather on account of His mercy and favor, even though they will qualify to earn this mercy on account of their good actions. Allah has made these actions the cause and path that lead to His mercy, favor, pardon and acceptance. Therefore, all this is from Allah Alone and all thanks are due to Him. Allah said next,\nوَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَكَذَّبُوا بِآيَاتِنَا أُولَٰئِكَ أَصْحَابُ الْجَحِيمِ\n(And they who disbelieve and deny our Ayat are those who will be the dwellers of the Hell-fire.) This only demonstrates Allah's perfect justice, wisdom and judgment, He is never wrong, for He is the Most Wise, Most Just and Most Able.\n\n## Among Allah's Favors is that He Prevented the Disbelievers from Fighting the Muslims\n\nAllah said,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اذْكُرُوا نِعْمَتَ اللَّهِ عَلَيْكُمْ إِذْ هَمَّ قَوْمٌ أَن يَبْسُطُوا إِلَيْكُمْ أَيْدِيَهُمْ فَكَفَّ أَيْدِيَهُمْ عَنكُمْ\n(O you who believe! Remember the favor of Allah unto you when some people desired (made a plan) to stretch out their hands against you, but (Allah) withheld their hands from you.)\nAbdur-Razzaq recorded that Jabir said, \"The Prophet ﷺ once stayed at an area and the people spread out seeking shade under various trees. The Prophet ﷺ hung his weapon on a tree, and a bedouin man came and took possession of the Prophet's weapon and held it aloft. He came towards the Prophet ﷺ and said, 'Who can protect you from me?' He replied, 'Allah, the Exalted, Most Honored.' The bedouin man repeated his question twice or thrice, each time the Prophet ﷺ answering him by saying, 'Allah.' The bedouin man then lowered the sword, and the Prophet ﷺ called his Companions and told them what had happened while the bedouin was sitting next to him, for the Prophet ﷺ did not punish him.' Ma'mar said that Qatadah used to mention that some Arabs wanted to have the Prophet ﷺ killed, so they sent that bedouin. Qatadah would then mention this Ayah,\nاذْكُرُوا نِعْمَتَ اللَّهِ عَلَيْكُمْ إِذْ هَمَّ قَوْمٌ أَن يَبْسُطُوا إِلَيْكُمْ أَيْدِيَهُمْ\n(Remember the favor of Allah unto you when some people desired (made a plan) to stretch out their hands against you...)\nThe story of this bedouin man, whose name is Ghawrath bin Al-Harith, is mentioned in the Sahih.\nMuhammad bin Ishaq bin Yasar, Mujahid and 'Ikrimah said that this Ayah was revealed about Bani An-Nadir, who plotted to drop a stone on the head of the Messenger ﷺ when he came to them for help to pay the blood money of two persons whom Muslims killed. The Jews left the execution of this plot to 'Amr bin Jihash bin Ka'b and ordered him to throw a stone on the Prophet ﷺ from above, when he came to them and sat under the wall. Allah told His Prophet ﷺ about their plot, and he went back to Al-Madinah and his Companions followed him later on. Allah sent down this Ayah concerning this matter. Allah's statement,\nوَعَلَى اللَّهِ فَلْيَتَوَكَّلِ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ\n(And in Allah let the believers put their trust.) and those who do so, then Allah shall suffice for them and shall protect them from the evil plots of the people. Thereafter, Allah commanded His Messenger ﷺ to expel Bani An-Nadir, and he laid siege to their area and forced them to evacuate Al-Madinah.","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=7","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:12","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:12–14","text":"Indeed, Allah took the covenant from the Children of Israel (Jews), and We appointed twelve leaders among them. And Allah said: \"I am with you if you perform the Salah and give the Zakah and believe in My Messengers; honor and assist them, and lend to Allah a good loan, verily, I will remit your sins and admit you to Gardens under which rivers flow (in Paradise). But if any of you after this, disbelieved, he has indeed gone astray from the straight way. (12)So, because of their breach of their covenant, We cursed them and made their hearts grow hard. They changed the words from their (right) places and have abandoned a good part of the Message that was sent to them. And you will not cease to discover deceit in them, except a few of them. But forgive them and overlook (their misdeeds). Verily, Allah loves the doers of good (13)And from those who call themselves Christians, We took their covenant, but they have abandoned a good part of the Message that was sent to them. So We planted amongst them enmity and hatred till the Day of Resurrection; and Allah will inform them of what they used to do (14)\n\n## Cursing the People of the Book for Breaking the Covenant\n\nAllah commanded His believing servants to fullfil the promises and pledges that He took from them and which they gave His servant and Messenger, Muhammad, peace be upon him. Allah also commanded them to stand for the truth and give correct testimony. He also reminded them of the obvious and subtle favors of the truth and guidance that He granted them. Next, Allah informed them of the pledges and promises that He took from the People of the Book, who were before them, the Jews and Christians. When they broke these promises and covenants, Allah cursed them as a consequence and expelled them from His grace and mercy. He also sealed their hearts from receiving guidance and the religion of truth, beneficial knowledge and righteous actions. Allah said,\nوَلَقَدْ أَخَذَ اللَّهُ مِيثَاقَ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ وَبَعَثْنَا مِنْهُمُ اثْنَيْ عَشَرَ نَقِيبًا\n(Indeed Allah took the covenant from the Children of Israel and We appointed twelve leaders among them.)\nThese twelve people were leaders who gave the pledge to Allah to listen and obey Allah, His Messenger and His Book on behalf of their tribes. Muhammad bin Ishaq and Ibn 'Abbas said that this occurred when Musa went to fight the mighty enemy (in Palestine), and Allah commanded him to choose a leader from every tribe.\n\n## The Leaders of Ansar on the Night of 'Aqabah\n\nLikewise, when the Messenger of Allah ﷺ took the pledge from the Ansar in the 'Aqabah area, there were twelve leaders from the Ansar. There were three men from the tribe of Aws: Usayd bin Al-Hudayr, Sa'd bin Khaythamah and Rifa'ah bin 'Abdul-Mundhir, or Abu Al-Haytham bin At-Tayhan. There were nine people from the tribe of Khazraj: Abu Umamah As'ad bin Zurarah, Sa'd bin Ar-Rabi', 'Abdullah bin Rawahah, Rafi' bin Malik bin Al-'Ajlan, Al-Bara' bin Ma'rur, 'Ubadah bin As-Samit, Sa'd bin 'Ubadah, 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Haram and Al-Mundhir bin 'Umar bin Khunays. Ka'b bin Malik mentioned these men in his poem, as recorded by Ibn Ishaq.On that night, these men were the leaders or representatives of their tribes by the command of the Prophet ﷺ. They gave the pledge and promise of allegiance and obedience to the Prophet ﷺ on behalf of their people. Allah said,\nوَقَالَ اللَّهُ إِنِّي مَعَكُمْ\n(And Allah said, \"I am with you...) with My protection, support and aid,\nلَئِنْ أَقَمْتُمُ الصَّلَاةَ وَآتَيْتُمُ الزَّكَاةَ وَآمَنتُم بِرُسُلِي\n(if you perform the Salah and give the Zakah and believe in My Messengers;) concerning what they bring you of the revelation,\nوَعَزَّرْتُمُوهُمْ\n(honor and assist them...) and support them on the truth,\nوَأَقْرَضْتُمُ اللَّهَ قَرْضًا حَسَنًا\n(and lend to Allah a good loan...) by spending in His cause, seeking to please Him.\nلَّأُكَفِّرَنَّ عَنكُمْ سَيِّئَاتِكُمْ\n(verily, I will remit your sins) and errors, I will erase them, cover them, and will not punish you for them,\nوَلَأُدْخِلَنَّكُمْ جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ\n(and admit you to Gardens under which rivers flow (in Paradise).) thus, protecting you from what you fear and granting you what you seek.\n\n## Breaking the Covenant\n\nAllah said,\nفَمَن كَفَرَ بَعْدَ ذَٰلِكَ مِنكُمْ فَقَدْ ضَلَّ سَوَاءَ السَّبِيلِ\n(But if any of you after this, disbelieved, he has indeed gone astray from the straight way.)\nTherefore, those who break this covenant, even though they pledged and vowed to keep it, yet, they broke it and denied it ever existed, they have avoided the clear path and deviated from the path of guidance to the path of misguidance. Allah then mentioned the punishment that befell those who broke His covenant and the pledge they gave Him,\nفَبِمَا نَقْضِهِم مِّيثَاقَهُمْ لَعَنَّاهُمْ\n(So because of their breach of their covenant, We cursed them...) Allah states, because of their breaking the promise that We took from them, We cursed them, deviated them away from the truth, and expelled them from guidance,\nوَجَعَلْنَا قُلُوبَهُمْ قَاسِيَةً\n(and made their hearts grow hard...) and they do not heed any word of advice that they hear, because of the hardness of their hearts.\nيُحَرِّفُونَ الْكَلِمَ عَن مَّوَاضِعِهِ\n(They change the words from their (right) places...) Since their comprehension became corrupt, they behaved treacherously with Allah's Ayat, altering His Book from its apparent meanings which He sent down, and distorting its indications. They attributed to Allah what He did not say, and we seek refuge with Allah from such behavior.\nوَنَسُوا حَظًّا مِّمَّا ذُكِّرُوا بِهِ\n(and have abandoned a good part of the Message that was sent to them.) by not implementing it and by ignoring it. Allah said next,\nوَلَا تَزَالُ تَطَّلِعُ عَلَىٰ خَائِنَةٍ مِّنْهُمْ\n(And you will not cease to discover deceit in them,) such as their plots and treachery against you, O Muhammad, and your Companions. Mujahid said that this Ayah refers to their plot to kill the Messenger of Allah ﷺ.\nفَاعْفُ عَنْهُمْ وَاصْفَحْ\n(But forgive them, and overlook (their misdeeds).) This, indeed, is the ultimate victory and triumph. Some of the Salaf said, \"You would never treat those who disobey Allah with you better than obeying Allah with them.\" This way, their hearts will gather around the truth and Allah might lead them to the right guidance. This is why Allah said,\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ يُحِبُّ الْمُحْسِنِينَ\n(Verily, Allah loves the doers of good.) Therefore, forgive those who err against you. Qatadah said that this Ayah was abrogated with Allah's statement,\nقَاتِلُوا الَّذِينَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللَّهِ وَلَا بِالْيَوْمِ الْآخِرِ\n(Fight against those who believe not in Allah, nor in the Last Day).\n\n## The Christians Also Broke their Covenant with Allah and the Repercussion of this Behavior\n\nAllah said,\nوَمِنَ الَّذِينَ قَالُوا إِنَّا نَصَارَىٰ أَخَذْنَا مِيثَاقَهُمْ\n(And from those who call themselves Christians, We took their covenant,)\nMeaning: 'From those who call themselves Christians and followers of 'Isa, son of Maryam, while in fact they are not as they claim. We took from them the covenant and pledges that they would follow the Prophet ﷺ, aid him, honor him and follow his footsteps.' And that they would believe in every Prophet whom Allah sends to the people of the earth. They imitated the Jews and broke the promises and the pledges. This is why Allah said,\nفَنَسُوا حَظًّا مِّمَّا ذُكِّرُوا بِهِ فَأَغْرَيْنَا بَيْنَهُمُ الْعَدَاوَةَ وَالْبَغْضَاءَ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ\n(but they have abandoned a good part of the Message that was sent to them. So We planted amongst them enmity and hatred till the Day of Resurrection;)\nMeaning: 'We planted enmity and hatred between them, and they will remain like this until the Day of Resurrection.' Indeed, the numerous Christian sects have always been enemies and adversaries of each other, accusing each other of heresy and cursing each other. Each sect among them excommunicates the other sects and does not allow them entrance to their places of worship. The Monarchist sect accuses the Jacobite sect of heresy, and such is the case with the Nestorians and the Arians. Each sect among them will continue to accuse the other of disbelief and heresy in this life and on the Day when the Witnesses will come forth. Allah then said,\nوَسَوْفَ يُنَبِّئُهُمُ اللَّهُ بِمَا كَانُوا يَصْنَعُونَ\n(and Allah will inform them of what they used to do.) warning and threatening the Christians because of their lies against Allah and His Messenger and their false claims about Allah, hallowed be He above what they say about Him. The Christians attribute a companion and a son to Allah, while He is the One and Only, the All-Sufficient, Who neither begets nor was He begotten, and there is none like unto Him.","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=12","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:15","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:15–16","text":"O People of the Scripture! Now has come to you Our Messenger explaining to you much of that which you used to hide from the Scripture and passing over much. Indeed, there has come to you from Allah a light and a plain Book (15)Wherewith Allah guides all those who seek His Pleasure to ways of peace, and He brings them out of darkness by His permission unto light and guides them to a straight path (16)\n\n## Explaining the Truth Through the Messenger and the Qur'an\n\nAllah states that He sent His Messenger Muhammad ﷺ with the guidance and the religion of truth to all the people of the earth, the Arabs and non-Arabs, lettered and unlettered. Allah also states that He sent Muhammad ﷺ with clear evidences and the distinction between truth and falsehood. Allah said,\nيَا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ قَدْ جَاءَكُمْ رَسُولُنَا يُبَيِّنُ لَكُمْ كَثِيرًا مِّمَّا كُنتُمْ تُخْفُونَ مِنَ الْكِتَابِ وَيَعْفُو عَن كَثِيرٍ\n(O People of the Scripture! Now has come to you Our Messenger explaining to you much of that which you used to hide from the Scripture and passing over much.)\nSo the Prophet ﷺ explained where they altered, distorted, changed and lied about Allah. He also ignored much of what they changed, since it would not bring about any benefit if it was explained. In his Mustadrak, Al-Hakim recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"He who disbelieves in stoning (the adulterer to death) will have inadvertently disbelieved in the Qur'an, for Allah said,\nيَا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ قَدْ جَاءَكُمْ رَسُولُنَا يُبَيِّنُ لَكُمْ كَثِيرًا مِّمَّا كُنتُمْ تُخْفُونَ مِنَ الْكِتَابِ\n(O People of the Scripture! Now has come to you Our Messenger explaining to you much of that which you used to hide from the Scripture) and stoning was among the things that they used to hide.\" Al-Hakim said, \"Its chain is Sahih, and they did not record it.\"\nAllah next mentions the Glorious Qur'an that He sent down to His honorable Prophet ﷺ,\nقَدْ جَاءَكُم مِّنَ اللَّهِ نُورٌ وَكِتَابٌ مُّبِينٌ - يَهْدِي بِهِ اللَّهُ مَنِ اتَّبَعَ رِضْوَانَهُ سُبُلَ السَّلَامِ\n(Indeed, there has come to you from Allah a light and a plain Book. Wherewith Allah guides all those who seek His pleasure to ways of peace.) meaning, ways of safety and righteousness,\nوَيُخْرِجُهُم مِّنَ الظُّلُمَاتِ إِلَى النُّورِ بِإِذْنِهِ وَيَهْدِيهِمْ إِلَىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُّسْتَقِيمٍ\n(and He brings them out of darkness by His permission unto light and guides them to a straight path.) He thus saves them from destruction and explains to them the best, most clear path. Therefore, He protects them from what they fear, and brings about the best of what they long for, all the while ridding them of misguidance and directing them to the best, most righteous state of being.","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=15","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:17","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:17–18","text":"Surely, in disbelief are they who say that Allah is the Messiah, son of Maryam. Say: \"Who then has the least power against Allah, if He were to destroy the Messiah, son of Maryam, his mother, and all those who are on the earth together?\" And to Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them. He creates what He wills. And Allah is able to do all things (17)And the Jews and the Christians say: \"We are the children of Allah and His loved ones.\" Say: \"Why then does He punish you for your sins?\" Nay, you are but human beings of those He has created, He forgives whom He wills and He punishes whom He wills. And to Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them; and to Him is the return (of all (18)\n\n## The Polytheism and Disbelief of the Christians\n\nAllah states that the Christians are disbelievers because of their claim that 'Isa, son of Maryam, one of Allah's servants and creatures, is Allah. Allah is holier than what they attribute to Him. Allah then reminds them of His perfect ability over everything and that everything is under His complete control and power,\nقُلْ فَمَن يَمْلِكُ مِنَ اللَّهِ شَيْئًا إِنْ أَرَادَ أَن يُهْلِكَ الْمَسِيحَ ابْنَ مَرْيَمَ وَأُمَّهُ وَمَن فِي الْأَرْضِ جَمِيعًا\n(Say: \"Who then has the least power against Allah, if He were to destroy the Messiah, son of Maryam, his mother, and all those who are on the earth together?\")\nTherefore, if Allah wills to do that, who would be able to stop Him or prevent Him from doing it? Allah then said,\nوَلِلَّهِ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا يَخْلُقُ مَا يَشَاءُ\n(And to Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them. He creates what He wills.)\nAll things in existence are Allah's property and creation and He is able to do everything. He is never asked about what He does with His power, domain, justice and greatness so this refutes the Christian creed, may Allah's continued curses be upon them until the Day of Resurrection.\n\n## Refuting the People of the Book's Claim that they are Allah's Children\n\nAllah then refutes the Christians' and Jews' false claims and lies,\nوَقَالَتِ الْيَهُودُ وَالنَّصَارَىٰ نَحْنُ أَبْنَاءُ اللَّهِ وَأَحِبَّاؤُهُ\n(And the Jews and the Christians say, \"We are the children of Allah and His loved ones.\")\nThey claim: \"We are the followers of Allah's Prophets, who are His children, whom He takes care of. He also loves us.\" The People of the Book claim in their Book that Allah said to His servant Isra'il, \"You are my firstborn.\" But they explained this statement in an improper manner and altered its meaning. Some of the People of the Book who later became Muslims refuted this false statement saying, \"This statement only indicates honor and respect, as is common in their speech at that time.\" The Christians claim that 'Isa said to them, \"I will go back to my father and your father,\" meaning, my Lord and your Lord. It is a fact that the Christians did not claim that they too are Allah's sons as they claimed about 'Isa. Rather this statement by 'Isa only meant to indicate a closeness with Allah. This is why when they said that they are Allah's children and loved ones, Allah refuted their claim,\nقُلْ فَلِمَ يُعَذِّبُكُم بِذُنُوبِكُم\n(Say, \"Why then does He punish you for your sins?\") meaning, if you were truly as you claim, Allah's children and loved ones, then why did He prepare the Fire because of your disbelief, lies and false claims?\nبَلْ أَنتُم بَشَرٌ مِّمَّنْ خَلَقَ\n(Nay, you are but human beings, of those He has created,) Allah states: you are just like the rest of the children of Adam, and Allah is the Lord of all His creation,\nيَغْفِرُ لِمَن يَشَاءُ وَيُعَذِّبُ مَن يَشَاءُ\n(He forgives whom He wills and punishes whom He wills.) Allah does what He wills, there is none who can escape His judgement, and He is swift in reckoning.\nوَلِلَّهِ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا\n(And to Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them;) Therefore, everything is Allah's property and under His power and control,\nوَإِلَيْهِ الْمَصِيرُ\n(and to Him is the return.) In the end, the return will be to Allah and He will judge between His servants as He will, and He is the Most Just Who is never wrong in His judgment.","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=17","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:19","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:19","text":"O People of the Scripture! Now has come to you Our Messenger making (things) clear unto you, after a break in (the series of) Messengers, lest you say: \"There came to us no bringer of glad tidings and no warner.\" But now has come unto you a bringer of glad tidings and a warner. And Allah is able to do all things (19)\nAllah is addressing the People of the Book – the Jews and the Christians, saying that He has sent His Messenger Muhammad ﷺ to them, the Final Prophet, after whom there will be no Prophet or Messenger. Rather, He is the Final Messenger who came after a long time passed between him and 'Isa, son of Maryam peace be upon them.\nThere is a difference of opinion about the length of time between 'Isa and Muhammad ﷺ. Abu 'Uthman An-Nahdi and Qatadah were reported to have said that this period was six hundred years. Al-Bukhari also recorded this opinion from Salman Al-Farisi. Qatadah said that this period was five hundred and sixty years, while Ma'mar said that it is five hundred and forty years. Some said that this period is six hundred and twenty years. There is no contradiction here if we consider the fact that those who said that this period was six hundred years were talking about solar years, while the second refers to lunar years, since there is a difference of about three years between every one hundred lunar and solar years. As in Allah's statement,\nوَلَبِثُوا فِي كَهْفِهِمْ ثَلَاثَ مِائَةٍ سِنِينَ وَازْدَادُوا تِسْعًا\n(And they stayed in their Cave three hundred years, adding nine.)[18:25] meaning, nine more lunar years to substitute for the difference between lunar and solar years, thus agreeing with the three hundred years that the People of the Book knew about. We should assert again that the time period we mentioned here was between 'Isa, the last Prophet to the Children of Israel, and Muhammad ﷺ, the Last Prophet and Messenger among the children of Adam. In the Sahih collected by Al-Bukhari, Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ أَوْلَى النَّاسِ بِابْنِ مَرْيَمَ لَأَنَا، لَيْسَ بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَهُ نَبِيٌّ\n(I, among all people, have the most right to the son of Maryam, for there was no Prophet between Him and I.)\nThis Hadith refutes the opinion of Al-Quda'i and others, that there was a Prophet after 'Isa called Khalid bin Sinan.\nAllah sent Muhammad ﷺ after a period of time during which there was no Prophet, clear path, or unchanged religions. Idol worshipping, fire worshipping and cross worshipping flourished during this time. Therefore, the bounty of sending Muhammad ﷺ was the perfect bounty at a time when he was needed the most. Evil had filled the earth by then, and tyranny and ignorance had touched all the servants, except a few of those who remained loyal to the true teachings of previous Prophets, such as some Jewish rabbis, Christian priests and Sabian monks.\nImam Ahmad recorded that 'Iyad bin Himar Al-Mujash'i said that the Prophet ﷺ gave a speech one day and said,\nوَإِنَّ رَبِّي أَمَرَنِي أَنْ أُعَلِّمَكُمْ مَا جَهِلْتُمْ مِمَّا عَلَّمَنِي فِي يَوْمِي هَذَا، كُلُّ مَالٍ نَحَلْتُهُ عِبَادِي حَلَالٌ، وَإِنِّي خَلَقْتُ عِبَادِي حُنَفَاءَ كُلَّهُمْ، وَإِنَّ الشَّيَاطِينَ أَتَتْهُمْ فَأَضَلَّتْهُمْ عَنْ دِينِهِمْ، وَحَرَّمَتْ عَلَيْهِمْ مَا أَحْلَلْتُ لَهُمْ، وَأَمَرَتْهُمْ أَنْ يُشْرِكُوا بِي مَا لَمْ أُنَزِّلْ بِهِ سُلْطَانًا، ثُمَّ إِنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ نَظَرَ إِلى أَهْلِ الْأَرْضِ فَمقَتَهُمْ عَرَبَهُمْ وعَجَمَهُمْ، إِلَّا بَقَايَا مِنْ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ، وقَالَ: إِنَّمَا بَعَثْتُكَ لِأَبْتَلِيَكَ وَأَبْتَلِيَ بِكَ، وَأَنْزَلْتُ عَلَيْكَ كِتَابًا لَا يَغْسِلُهُ الْمَاءُ، تَقْرَأُهُ نَائِمًا وَيَقْظَانَ، ثُمَّ إِنَّ اللهَ أَمَرَنِي أَنْ أُحَرِّقَ قُرَيْشًا فَقُلْتُ:\nيَارَبِّ إِذَنْ يَثْلَغُوا رَأْسِي، فَيَدَعُوهُ خُبْزَةً، فَقَالَ: اسْتَخْرِجْهُمْ كَمَا اسْتَخْرَجُوكَ، واغْزُهُمْ نُغْزِكَ، وَأَنْفِقْ عَلَيْهِمْ فَسَنُنْفِقَ عَلَيْكَ، وَابْعَثْ جَيْشًا نَبْعَثْ خَمْسًا أَمْثَالَهُ، وَقَاتِلْ بِمَنْ أَطَاعَكَ مَنْ عَصَاكَ، وَأَهْلُ الْجَنَّةِ ثَلَاثَةٌ: ذوُ سُلْطانٍ مُقْسِطٌ مُوَفَّقٌ مُتَصَدِّقٌ، وَرَجُلٌ رَحِيمٌ رَقِيقُ الْقَلْبِ بِكُلِّ ذِي قُرْبَى وَمُسْلِمٍ، وَرَجُلٌ عَفِيفٌ فَقِيرٌ ذُو عِيَالٍ (مُتَصَدِّقٌ). وَأَهْلُ النَّارِ خَمْسَةٌ: الضَّعِيفُ الَّذي لَا دِينَ لَهُ، وَالَّذِين هُمْ فِيكُمْ تَبَعٌ أَوْ تَبَعًا - شَكَّ يَحْيىٰ - لَا يَبْتَغُون أَهْلًا وَلَا مَالًا، وَالْخَائِنُ الَّذِي لَا يَخْفَىٰ لَهُ طَمَعٌ وَإِنْ دَقَّ إِلَّا خَانَهُ، وَرَجُلٌ لَا يُصْبِحُ وَلَا يُمْسِي إِلَّا وَهُوَ يُخَادِعُكَ عَنْ أَهْلِكَ وَمَالِكَ - وَذَكَرَ الْبَخِيلَ أَوِ الْكَذَّابَ - وَالشِّنْظِيرَ: الفَاحِشَ\n(My Lord has commanded me to teach you what you have no knowledge of and of which He taught me this day, 'All the wealth that I gave to My servants is permissible. I created all My servants Hunafa (monotheists). But, the devils came to them and deviated them from their religion, prohibited for them what I allowed and commanded them to associate others with Me [in worship], which I gave no permission for.' Then Allah looked at the people of the earth and disliked them all, the Arabs and non-Arabs among them, except a few from among the Children of Israel. Allah said (to me), 'I only sent you to test you and to test with you. I sent to you a Book that cannot be washed by water (it is eternal), and you will read it while asleep and while awake.' Allah has also Commanded me to burn (destroy) Quraysh. So I said, 'O Lord! They will smash my head and leave it like a piece of bread.' He said, 'I will drive them out as they drove you out, and when you invade them We will help you. Spend on them (your companions) and We will spend on you, send an army and We will send five armies like it (in its support). Fight with those who obey you, against those who disobey you. And the inhabitants of Paradise are three: a just, prosperous, and charitable ruler; A merciful man who has a kind heart toward every relative and every Muslim; a forgiving, poor man with dependants [who is charitable]. And the inhabitants of the Fire are five: the weak one with no religion; those who follow after you not for family reasons nor wealth; and the treacherous who does not hide his treachery, acting treacherous in even the most insignificant matters; and a person who comes every morning and every evening, is cheating your family or your wealth.') And he mentioned the stingy, or the liar, and the foulmouthed person.\"\nTherefore, the Hadith states that Allah looked at the people of the earth and disliked them all, both the Arabs and non-Arabs among them, except a few among the Children of Israel, or a few among the People of the Book as Muslim recorded. The religion was distorted and changed for the people of the earth until Allah sent Muhammad ﷺ, and Allah, thus, guided the creatures and took them away from the darkness to the light and placed them on a clear path and a glorious Law. Allah said,\nأَن تَقُولُوا مَا جَاءَنَا مِن بَشِيرٍ وَلَا نَذِيرٍ\n(lest you say, \"There came unto us no bringer of glad tidings and no warner.\") meaning, so that you, who changed the true religion, do not make it an excuse and say, \"No Messenger came to us bringing glad tidings and warning against evil.\" There has come to you a bringer of good news and a warner, Muhammad ﷺ.\nوَاللَّهُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ\n(And Allah is able to do all things.)\nIbn Jarir said this part of the Ayah means, \"I am able to punish those who disobey Me and to reward those who obey Me.\"","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=19","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:20","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:20–26","text":"And (remember) when Musa said to his people: \"O my people! Remember the favor of Allah to you: when He made Prophets among you, made you kings and gave you what He had not given to any other among the nations (Al-'Alamin). (20)\"O my people! Enter the Holy Land which Allah has assigned to you and turn not back; for then you will be returned as losers. (21)They said: \"O Musa! In it are a people of great strength, and we shall never enter it, till they leave it; when they leave, then we will enter. (22)Two men of those who feared (Allah and) on whom Allah had bestowed His grace said: \"Assault them through the gate; for when you are in, victory will be yours. And put your trust in Allah if you are believers indeed. (23)They said: \"O Musa! We shall never enter it as long as they are there. So go, you and your Lord, and fight you two, we are sitting right here. (24)He [Musa] said: \"O my Lord! I have power only over myself and my brother, so Ifruq us from the rebellious people! (25)(Allah) said: \"Therefore it is forbidden to them for forty years; in distraction they will wander through the land. So do not greive for the rebellious people. (26)\n\n## Musa Reminds His People of Allah's Favors on Them; The Jews Refuse to Enter the Holy Land\n\nAllah states that His servant, Messenger, to whom He spoke directly, Musa, the son of 'Imran, reminded his people that among the favors Allah granted them, is that He will give them all of the good of this life and the Hereafter, if they remain on the righteous and straight path. Allah said,\nوَإِذْ قَالَ مُوسَىٰ لِقَوْمِهِ يَا قَوْمِ اذْكُرُوا نِعْمَةَ اللَّهِ عَلَيْكُمْ إِذْ جَعَلَ فِيكُمْ أَنبِيَاءَ\n(And (remember) when Musa said to his people: \"O my people! Remember the favor of Allah to you, when He made Prophets among you,) for whenever a Prophet died, another rose among them, from the time of their father Ibrahim and thereafter.\nThere were many Prophets among the Children of Israel calling to Allah and warning against His torment, until 'Isa was sent as the final Prophet from the Children of Israel. Allah then sent down the revelation to the Final Prophet and Messenger, Muhammad, the son of 'Abdullah, from the offspring of Isma'il, the son of Ibrahim, peace be upon them. Muhammad ﷺ is the most honorable Prophet of all times.\nAllah said next,\nوَجَعَلَكُم مُّلُوكًا\n(made you kings) 'Abdur-Razzaq recorded that Ibn 'Abbas commented: \"Having a servant, a wife and a house.\" In his Mustadrak, Al-Hakim recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"A wife and a servant, and,\nوَآتَاكُم مَّا لَمْ يُؤْتِ أَحَدًا مِّنَ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(and gave you what He had not given to any other among the nations ('Alamin).) means, during their time.\" Al-Hakim said, \"Sahih according to the criteria of the Two Sahihs, but they did not collect it.\" Qatadah said, \"They were the first people to take servants.\" A Hadith states,\nمَنْ أَصْبَحَ مِنْكُمْ مُعَافًى فِي جَسَدِهِ، آمِنًا فِي سِرْبِهِ، عِنْدَهُ قُوتُ يَوْمِهِ، فَكَأَنَّمَا حِيزَتْ لَهُ الدُّنْيَا بِحَذَافِيرِهَا\n(He among you who wakes up while healthy in body, safe in his family and having the provision for that very day, is as if the world and all that was in it were collected for him.) Allah's statement,\nوَآتَاكُم مَّا لَمْ يُؤْتِ أَحَدًا مِّنَ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(and gave you what He had not given to any other among the nations (Al-'Alamin).) means, during your time, as we stated. The Children of Israel were the most honorable among the people of their time, compared to the Greek, Copts and the rest of mankind. Allah said in another Ayah,\nوَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَا بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ الْكِتَابَ وَالْحُكْمَ وَالنُّبُوَّةَ وَرَزَقْنَاهُم مِّنَ الطَّيِّبَاتِ وَفَضَّلْنَاهُمْ عَلَى الْعَالَمِينَ\n(And indeed We gave the Children of Israel the Scripture, and the understanding of the Scripture and its laws, and the Prophethood; and provided them with good things, and preferred them above the nations (Al-'Alamin).)[45:16] Allah said,\nقَالُوا يَا مُوسَى اجْعَل لَّنَا إِلَٰهًا كَمَا لَهُمْ آلِهَةٌ قَالَ إِنَّكُمْ قَوْمٌ تَجْهَلُونَ - إِنَّ هَٰؤُلَاءِ مُتَبَّرٌ مَّا هُمْ فِيهِ وَبَاطِلٌ مَّا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ - قَالَ أَغَيْرَ اللَّهِ أَبْغِيكُمْ إِلَٰهًا وَهُوَ فَضَّلَكُمْ عَلَى الْعَالَمِينَ\n(They said: \"O Musa! Make for us a god as they have gods.\" He said: \"Verily, you are an ignorant people.\" (Musa added:) \"Verily, these people will be destroyed for that which they are engaged in (idol worship).\" And all that they are doing is in vain. He said: \"Shall I seek for you a god other than Allah, while He has given you superiority over the nations.\")[7:138-140]\nTherefore, they were the best among the people of their time. The Muslim Ummah is more respected and honored before Allah, and has a more perfect legislative code and system of life, it has the most honorable Prophet, the larger kingdom, more provisions, wealth and children, a larger domain and more lasting glory than the Children of Israel. Allah said,\nوَكَذَٰلِكَ جَعَلْنَاكُمْ أُمَّةً وَسَطًا لِّتَكُونُوا شُهَدَاءَ عَلَى النَّاسِ\n(Thus We have made you, a just (the best) nation, that you be witnesses over mankind.)[2:143]\nWe mentioned the Mutawatir Hadiths about the honor of this Ummah and its status and honor with Allah, when we explained Allah's statement in Surah Āl-'Imrān (3),\nكُنتُمْ خَيْرَ أُمَّةٍ أُخْرِجَتْ لِلنَّاسِ\n(You are the best of peoples ever raised up for mankind...)\nAllah states next that Musa encouraged the Children of Israel to perform Jihad and enter Jerusalem, which was under their control during the time of their father Ya'qub. Ya'qub and his children later moved with his children and household to Egypt during the time of Prophet Yusuf. His offspring remained in Egypt until their exodus with Musa. They found a mighty, strong people in Jerusalem who had previously taken it over. Musa, Allah's Messenger, ordered the Children of Israel to enter Jerusalem and fight their enemy, and he promised them victory and triumph over the mighty people if they did so. They declined, rebelled and defied his order and were punished for forty years by being lost, wandering in the land uncertain of where they should go. This was their punishment for defying Allah's command.\nAllah said that Musa ordered them to enter the Holy Land,\nالَّتِي كَتَبَ اللَّهُ لَكُمْ\n(which Allah has assigned to you) meaning, which Allah has promised to you by the words of your father Isra'il, that it is the inheritance of those among you who believe.\nوَلَا تَرْتَدُّوا عَلَىٰ أَدْبَارِكُمْ\n(and turn not back) in flight from Jihad.\nفَتَنقَلِبُوا خَاسِرِينَ - قَالُوا يَا مُوسَىٰ إِنَّ فِيهَا قَوْمًا جَبَّارِينَ وَإِنَّا لَن نَّدْخُلَهَا حَتَّىٰ يَخْرُجُوا مِنْهَا فَإِن يَخْرُجُوا مِنْهَا فَإِنَّا دَاخِلُونَ\n(\"...for then you will be returned as losers.\" They said, \"O Musa! In it are a people of great strength, and we shall never enter it, till they leave it; when they leave, then we will enter.\")[5:21-22]\nTheir excuse was this, in this very town you commanded us to enter and fight its people, there is a mighty, strong, vicious people who have tremendous physique and physical ability. We are unable to stand against these people or fight them. Therefore, they said, we are incapable of entering this city as long as they are still in it, but if they leave it, we will enter it. Otherwise, we cannot stand against them.\n\n## The Speeches of Yuwsha' (Joshua) and Kalib (Caleb)\n\nAllah said,\nقَالَ رَجُلَانِ مِنَ الَّذِينَ يَخَافُونَ أَنْعَمَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِمَا\n(Two men of those who feared (Allah and) on whom Allah had bestowed His grace said...)\nWhen the Children of Israel declined to obey Allah and follow His Messenger Musa, two righteous men among them, on whom Allah had bestowed a great bounty and who were afraid of Allah and His punishment, encouraged them to go forward. It was also said that the Ayah reads in a way that means that these men were respected and honored by their people. These two men were Yuwsha', the son of Nun, and Kalib, the son of Yufna, as Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, 'Atiyyah, As-Suddi, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas and several other Salaf and latter scholars stated. These two men said to their people,\nادْخُلُوا عَلَيْهِمُ الْبَابَ فَإِذَا دَخَلْتُمُوهُ فَإِنَّكُمْ غَالِبُونَ وَعَلَى اللَّهِ فَتَوَكَّلُوا إِن كُنتُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ\n(\"Assault them through the gate, for when you are in, victory will be yours. And put your trust in Allah if you are believers indeed.\")\nTherefore, they said, if you rely on and trust in Allah, follow His command and obey His Messenger, then Allah will give you victory over your enemies and will give you triumph and dominance over them. Thus, you will conquer the city that Allah has promised you. This advice did not benefit them in the least,\nقَالُوا يَا مُوسَىٰ إِنَّا لَن نَّدْخُلَهَا أَبَدًا مَّا دَامُوا فِيهَا فَاذْهَبْ أَنتَ وَرَبُّكَ فَقَاتِلَا إِنَّا هَاهُنَا قَاعِدُونَ\n(They said, \"O Musa! We shall never enter it as long as they are there. So go, you and your Lord, and fight you two, we are sitting right here.\")\nThis is how they declined to join Jihad, defied their Messenger, and refused to fight their enemy.\n\n## The Righteous Response of the Companions During the Battle of Badr\n\nCompare this to the better response the Companions gave to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ during the battle of Badr, when he asked for their advice about fighting the Quraysh army that came to protect the caravan led by Abu Sufyan. When the Muslim army missed the caravan and the Quraysh army, between nine hundred and one thousand strong, helmeted and drawing closer, Abu Bakr stood up and said something good. Several more Muhajirin also spoke, all the while the Messenger of Allah ﷺ saying,\nأشيروا علي أيها المسلمون\n(Advise me, O Muslims!) inquiring of what the Ansar, the majority then, had to say. Sa'd bin Mu'adh said, \"It looks like you mean us, O Messenger of Allah! By He Who has sent you with the Truth! If you seek to cross this sea and went in it, we will follow you and none among us will remain behind. We would not hate for you to lead us to meet our enemy tomorrow. We are patient in war, vicious in battle. May Allah allow you to witness from our efforts what comforts your eyes. Therefore, march forward with the blessing of Allah.\" The Messenger of Allah ﷺ was pleased with the words of Sa'd and was encouraged to march on.\nAbu Bakr bin Marduwyah recorded that Anas said that when the Messenger of Allah ﷺ went to Badr, he asked the Muslims for their opinion, and 'Umar gave his. The Prophet ﷺ again asked the Muslims for their opinion and the Ansar said, \"O Ansar! It is you whom the Prophet wants to hear.\" They said, \"We will never say as the Children of Israel said to Musa,\nفَاذْهَبْ أَنتَ وَرَبُّكَ فَقَاتِلَا إِنَّا هَاهُنَا قَاعِدُونَ\n(So go, you and your Lord, and fight you two, we are sitting right here.)\nBy He Who has sent you with the Truth! If you took the camels to Bark Al-Ghimad (near Makkah) we shall follow you.\" Imam Ahmad, An-Nasa'i and Ibn Hibban also recorded this Hadith.\nIn the Book of Al-Maghazi and At-Tafsir, Al-Bukhari recorded that 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud said, \"On the day of Badr, Al-Miqdad said, 'O Messenger of Allah! We will never say to you what the Children of Israel said to Musa,\nفَاذْهَبْ أَنتَ وَرَبُّكَ فَقَاتِلَا إِنَّا هَاهُنَا قَاعِدُونَ\n(So go, you and your Lord, and fight you two, we are sitting right here.)\nRather, march on and we will be with you.' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ was satisfied after hearing this statement.\"\n\n## Musa Supplicates to Allah Against the Jews\n\nMusa said,\nقَالَ رَبِّ إِنِّي لَا أَمْلِكُ إِلَّا نَفْسِي وَأَخِي فَافْرُقْ بَيْنَنَا وَبَيْنَ الْقَوْمِ الْفَاسِقِينَ\n(\"O my Lord! I have power only over myself and my brother, so separate us from the rebellious people!\")\nWhen the Children of Israel refused to fight, Musa became very angry with them and supplicated to Allah against them,\nرَبِّ إِنِّي لَا أَمْلِكُ إِلَّا نَفْسِي وَأَخِي\n(O my Lord! I have power only over myself and my brother') meaning, only I and my brother Harun among them will obey, implement Allah's command and accept the call,\nفَافْرُقْ بَيْنَنَا وَبَيْنَ الْقَوْمِ الْفَاسِقِينَ\n(So Ifruq us from the rebellious people!) Al-'Awfi reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Meaning, judge between us and them.\" 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported similarly from him. Ad-Dahhak said that the Ayah means, \"Judge and decide between us and them.\" Other scholars said that the Ayah means, \"Separate between us and them.\"\n\n## Forbidding the Jews from Entering the Holy Land for Forty Years\n\nAllah said,\nفَإِنَّهَا مُحَرَّمَةٌ عَلَيْهِمْ ۛ أَرْبَعِينَ سَنَةً ۛ يَتِيهُونَ فِي الْأَرْضِ\n(Therefore it is forbidden to them for forty years; in distraction they will wander through the land.)\nWhen Musa supplicated against the Jews for refusing to fight in Jihad, Allah forbade them from entering the land for forty years. They wandered about lost in the land of At-Tih, unable to find their way out. During this time, tremendous miracles occurred, such as the clouds that shaded them and the manna and quails Allah sent down for them. Allah brought forth water springs from solid rock, and the other miracles that He aided Musa bin 'Imran with. During this time, the Tawrah was revealed and the Law was established for the Children of Israel and the Tabernacle of the Covenant was erected.\n\n## Conquering Jerusalem\n\nAllah's statement,\nأَرْبَعِينَ سَنَةً\n(for forty years;) defines,\nيَتِيهُونَ فِي الْأَرْضِ\n(in distraction they will wander through the land.)\nWhen these years ended, Yuwsha' bin Nun led those who remained among them and the second generation, and laid siege to Jerusalem, conquering it on a Friday afternoon. When the sun was about to set and Yuwsha' feared that the Sabbath would begin, he said (to the sun), \"You are commanded and I am commanded, as well. O Allah! Make it stop setting for me.\" Allah made the sun stop setting until Yuwsha' bin Nun conquered Jerusalem. Next, Allah commanded Yuwsha' to order the Children of Israel to enter Jerusalem from its gate while bowing and saying Hittah, meaning, 'remove our sins.' Yet, they changed what they were commanded and entered it while dragging themselves on their behinds and saying, 'Habbah (a seed) in Sha'rah (a hair).\" We mentioned all of this in the Tafsir of Surat Al-Baqarah.\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that Ibn 'Abbas commented,\nفَإِنَّهَا مُحَرَّمَةٌ عَلَيْهِمْ ۛ أَرْبَعِينَ سَنَةً ۛ يَتِيهُونَ فِي الْأَرْضِ\n(Therefore it is forbidden to them for forty years; in distraction they will wander through the land.)\n\"They wandered in the land for forty years, during which Musa and Harun died, as well as everyone above forty years of age. When the forty years ended, Yuwsha' son of Nun assumed their leadership and later conquered Jerusalem. When Yuwsha' was reminded that the day was Friday and the sun was about to set, while they were still attacking Jerusalem, he feared that the Sabbath might begin. Therefore, he said to the sun, 'I am commanded and you are commanded.' Allah made the sun stop setting and the Jews conquered Jerusalem and found wealth unseen before. They wanted to let the fire consume the booty, but the fire would not do that. Yuwsha' said, 'Some of you have committed theft from the booty.' So he summoned the twelve leaders of the twelve tribes and took the pledge from them. Then, the hand of one of them became stuck to the hand of Yuwsha' and Yuwsha' said, 'You committed the theft, so bring it forth.' So, that man brought a cow's head made of gold with two eyes made of precious stones and a set of teeth made of pearls. When Yuwsha' added it to the booty, the fire consumed it, as they were prohibited to keep the booty.\" There is evidence supporting all of this in the Sahih.\n\n## Allah Comforts Musa\n\nComforting Musa, Allah said\nفَلَا تَأْسَ عَلَى الْقَوْمِ الْفَاسِقِينَ\n(So do not greive for the rebellious people.)\nAllah said: Do not feel sorrow or sadness over My judgment against them, for they deserve such judgment.\nThis story chastises the Jews, exposes their defiance of Allah and His Messenger, and their refusal to obey the order for Jihad. They were weak and could not bear the thought of fighting their enemy, being patient, and enduring this way. This occurred although they had the Messenger of Allah and the one whom He spoke to among them, the best of Allah's creation that time. Their Prophet promised them triumph and victory against their enemies. They also witnessed the torment and punishment of drowning with which Allah punished their enemy Fir'awn and his soldiers, so that their eyes were pleased and comforted. All this did not happen too long ago, yet they refused to perform Jihad against people who had less than a tenth of the power and strength than the people of Egypt had. Therefore, the evil works of the Jews were exposed to everyone, and the exposure was such an enormous one that the night, or the tail, can never cover its tracks. They were also blinded by their ignorance and transgression. Thus, they became hated by Allah, and they became His enemies. Yet, they claim that they are Allah's children and His loved ones! May Allah curse their faces that were transformed to the shape of swine and apes, and may Allah's curse accompany them to the raging Fire. May Allah make them abide in the Fire for eternity, and He did; all thanks are due to Him.","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=20","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:27","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:27–31","text":"And recite to them the story of the two sons of Adam in truth; when each offered a sacrifice, it was accepted from the one but not from the other. The latter said to the former: \"I will surely, kill you.\" The former said: \"Verily, Allah accepts only from those who have Taqwa (27)\"If you do stretch your hand against me to kill me, I shall never stretch my hand against you to kill you, for I fear Allah; the Lord of all that exists. (28)\"Verily, I intend to let you draw my sin on yourself as well as yours, then you will be one of the dwellers of the Fire, and that is the recompense of the wrongdoers. (29)So the soul of the other encouraged him and made fair-seeming to him the murder of his brother; he murdered him and became one of the losers (30)Then Allah sent a crow who scratched the ground to show him how to hide the dead body of his brother. He said: \"Woe to me! Am I not even able to be as this crow and to hide the dead body of my brother?\" Then he became one of those who regretted (31)\n\n## The Story of Habil (Abel) and Qabil (Cain)\n\nAllah describes the evil end and consequence of transgression, envy and injustice in the story of the two sons of Adam, Habil and Qabil. One of them fought against the other and killed him out of envy and transgression, because of the bounty that Allah gave his brother and because the sacrifice that he sincerely offered to Allah was accepted. The murdered brother earned forgiveness for his sins and was admitted into Paradise, while the murderer failed and earned a losing deal in both the lives. Allah said,\nوَاتْلُ عَلَيْهِمْ نَبَأَ ابْنَيْ آدَمَ بِالْحَقِّ\n(And recite to them the story of the two sons of Adam in truth;) meaning, tell these envious, unjust people, the brothers of swine and apes from the Jews and their likes among mankind, the story of the two sons of Adam, Habil and Qabil, as many scholars among the Salaf and later generations said. Allah's statement,\nبِالْحَقِّ\n(in truth;) means, clearly and without ambiguity, alteration, confusion, change, addition or deletion. Allah said in other Ayat,\nإِنَّ هَٰذَا لَهُوَ الْقَصَصُ الْحَقُّ\n(Verily, this is the true narrative (about the story of 'Isa),)[3:62]\nنَّحْنُ نَقُصُّ عَلَيْكَ نَبَأَهُم بِالْحَقِّ\n(We narrate unto you their story with truth,)[18:13] and,\nذَٰلِكَ عِيسَى ابْنُ مَرْيَمَ قَوْلَ الْحَقِّ\n(Such is 'Isa, son of Maryam. (It is) a statement of truth.)[19:43]\nSeveral scholars among the Salaf and the later generations said that Allah allowed Adam to marry his daughters to his sons because of the necessity of such action. They also said that in every pregnancy, Adam was given a twin, a male and a female, and he used to give the female of one twin, to the male of the other twin, in marriage. Habil's sister was not beautiful while Qabil's sister was beautiful, resulting in Qabil wanting her for himself, instead of his brother. Adam refused unless they both offer a sacrifice, and he whose sacrifice was accepted, would marry Qabil's sister. Habil's sacrifice was accepted, while Qabil's sacrifice was rejected, and thus what Allah told us about them occurred.\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said – that during the time of Adam – \"The woman was not allowed in marriage for her male twin, but Adam was commanded to marry her to any of her other brothers. In each pregnancy, Adam was given a twin, a male and a female. A beautiful daughter was once born for Adam and another one that was not beautiful. So the twin brother of the ugly daughter said, 'Marry your sister to me and I will marry my sister to you.' He said, 'No, for I have more right to my sister.' So they both offered a sacrifice. The sacrifice of the one who offered the sheep was accepted while the sacrifice of the other (the twin brother of the beautiful daughter), which consisted of some produce, was not accepted. So the latter killed his brother.\" This story has a better than good chain of narration.\nThe statement,\nإِنَّمَا يَتَقَبَّلُ اللَّهُ مِنَ الْمُتَّقِينَ\n(\"Verily, Allah accepts only from those who have Taqwa.) who fear Allah in their actions. Ibn Abi Hatim recorded that Abu Ad-Darda' said, \"If I become certain that Allah has accepted even one prayer from me, it will be better for me than this life and all that in it. This is because Allah says,\nإِنَّمَا يَتَقَبَّلُ اللَّهُ مِنَ الْمُتَّقِينَ\n(Verily, Allah accepts only from the those who have Taqwa.) The statement,\nلَئِن بَسَطتَ إِلَيَّ يَدَكَ لِتَقْتُلَنِي مَا أَنَا بِبَاسِطٍ يَدِيَ إِلَيْكَ لِأَقْتُلَكَ إِنِّي أَخَافُ اللَّهَ رَبَّ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(\"If you do stretch your hand against me to kill me, I shall never stretch my hand against you to kill you, for I fear Allah; the Lord of all that exists.\")\nQabil's brother, the pious man whose sacrifice was accepted because of his piety, said to his brother, who threatened to kill him without justification,\nلَئِن بَسَطتَ إِلَيَّ يَدَكَ لِتَقْتُلَنِي مَا أَنَا بِبَاسِطٍ يَدِيَ إِلَيْكَ لِأَقْتُلَكَ\n(If you do stretch your hand against me to kill me, I shall never stretch my hand against you to kill you,)\nI will not commit the same evil act that you threaten to commit, so that I will not earn the same sin as you,\nإِنِّي أَخَافُ اللَّهَ رَبَّ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(for I fear Allah; the Lord of the all that exists.) and, as a result, I will not commit the error that you threaten to commit. Rather, I will observe patience and endurance.\nAbdullah bin 'Amr said, \"By Allah! Habil was the stronger of the two men. But, fear of Allah restricted his hand.\" The Prophet ﷺ said in a Hadith recorded in the Two Sahihs,\nإِذَا تَوَاجَهَ الْمُسْلِمَانِ بِسَيْفَيهِمَا فَالْقَاتِلُ وَالْمَقْتُولُ فِي النَّارِ\n(When two Muslims fight (meet) each other with their swords, both the murderer as well as the murdered will go to the Hellfire.)\nThey said, \"O Allah's Messenger! It is all right for the murderer, but what about the victim?\" Allah's Messenger ﷺ replied,\nإِنَّه كَانَ حَرِيصًا عَلى قَتْلِ صَاحِبِهِ\n(He surely had the intention to kill his comrade.)\nImam Ahmad recorded that, at the beginning of the calamity that 'Uthman suffered from, Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas said, \"I bear witness that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nإِنَّهَا سَتَكُونُ فِتْنَةٌ القَاعِدُ فِيهَا خَيْرٌ مِنَ الْقَائِمِ، وَالْقَائِمُ خَيْرٌ مِنَ الْمَاشِي، وَالْمَاشِي خَيْرٌ مِنَ السَّاعِي\n(There will be a Fitnah, and he who sits idle during it is better than he who stands up, and he who stands up in it is better than he who walks, and he who walks is better than he who is walking at a fast pace.)\nWhen he was asked, 'What if someone enters my home and stretched his hand to kill me?' He said,\nكُنْ كَابْنِ آدَمَ\n(Be just like (the pious) son of Adam.)\"\nAt-Tirmidhi also recorded it this way, and said, \"This Hadith is Hasan, and similar is reported on this subject from Abu Hurayrah, Khabbab bin Al-Aratt, Abu Bakr, Ibn Mas'ud, Abu Waqid and Abu Musa.\" The Qur'an continues,\nإِنِّي أُرِيدُ أَن تَبُوءَ بِإِثْمِي وَإِثْمِكَ فَتَكُونَ مِنْ أَصْحَابِ النَّارِ وَذَٰلِكَ جَزَاءُ الظَّالِمِينَ\n(\"Verily, I intend to let you draw my sin on yourself as well as yours, then you will be one of the dwellers of the Fire, and that is the recompense of the wrongdoers.\")\nIbn 'Abbas, Mujahid, Ad-Dahhak, As-Suddi and Qatadah said that,\nإِنِّي أُرِيدُ أَن تَبُوءَ بِإِثْمِي وَإِثْمِكَ\n(\"Verily, I intend to let you draw my sin on yourself as well as yours...\") means, the sin of murdering me, in addition to your previous sins. Ibn Jarir recorded this. Allah's statement,\nفَطَوَّعَتْ لَهُ نَفْسُهُ قَتْلَ أَخِيهِ فَقَتَلَهُ فَأَصْبَحَ مِنَ الْخَاسِرِينَ\n(So the soul of the other encouraged him and made fair-seeming to him the murder of his brother; he murdered him and became one of the losers.)\nmeans, his conscience encouraged him to kill his brother by making it seem like a sensible thing to do, so he killed him, even after his brother admonished him. Ibn Jarir said, \"When he wanted to kill his brother, he started to twist his neck. So Shaytan took an animal and placed its head on a rock, then he took another rock, and smashed its head with it until he killed it while the son of Adam was looking. So he did the same thing to his brother.\" Ibn Abi Hatim also recorded this. 'Abdullah bin Wahb said that 'Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam said that his father said, \"Qabil held Habil by the head to kill him, so Habil laid down for him and Qabil started twisting Habil's head, not knowing how to kill him. Shaytan came to Qabil and said, 'Do you want to kill him?' He said, 'Yes.' Shaytan said, 'Take that stone and throw it on his head.' So Qabil took the stone and threw it at his brother's head and smashed his head. Shaytan then went to Hawwa' in a hurry and said to her, 'O Hawwa'! Qabil killed Habil.' She asked him, 'Woe to you! What does 'kill' mean?' He said, 'He will no longer eat, drink or move.' She said, 'And that is death?' He said, 'Yes it is.' So she started to weep until Adam came to her while she was weeping and said, 'What is the matter with you?' She did not answer him. He asked her two more times, but she did not answer him. So he said, 'You and your daughters will inherit the practice of weeping, while I and my sons are free of it.'\" Ibn Abi Hatim recorded it.\nAllah's statement,\nفَأَصْبَحَ مِنَ الْخَاسِرِينَ\n(And became one of the losers.) in this life and the Hereafter, and which loss is worse than this? Imam Ahmad recorded that 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nلَا تُقْتَلُ نَفْسٌ ظُلْمًا إِلَّا كَانَ عَلَى ابْنِ آدَمَ الْأَوَّلِ كِفْلٌ مِنْ دَمِهَا، لِأَنَّهُ كَانَ أَوَّلَ مَنْ سَنَّ الْقَتْلَ\n(Any soul that is unjustly killed, then the first son of Adam will carry a burden of its shedding, for he was the first to practice the crime of murder.)\nThe Group, with the exception of Abu Dawud, also recorded this Hadith. Ibn Jarir recorded that 'Abdullah bin 'Amr used to say, \"The son of Adam, who killed his brother, will be the most miserable among men. There is no blood shed on earth since he killed his brother, until the Day of Resurrection, but he will carry a burden from it, for he was the first person to establish murder.\" Allah said,\nفَبَعَثَ اللَّهُ غُرَابًا يَبْحَثُ فِي الْأَرْضِ لِيُرِيَهُ كَيْفَ يُوَارِي سَوْءَةَ أَخِيهِ قَالَ يَا وَيْلَتَا أَعَجَزْتُ أَنْ أَكُونَ مِثْلَ هَٰذَا الْغُرَابِ فَأُوَارِيَ سَوْءَةَ أَخِي فَأَصْبَحَ مِنَ النَّادِمِينَ\n(Then Allah sent a crow who scratched the ground to show him how to hide the dead body of his brother. He (the murderer) said, \"Woe to me! Am I not even able to be as this crow and to hide the dead body of my brother?\" Then he became one of those who regretted.)\nAs-Suddi said that the Companions said, \"When his brother died, Qabil left him on the bare ground and did not know how to bury him. Allah sent two crows, which fought with each other until one of them killed the other. So it dug a hole and threw sand over the dead corpse (which it placed in the hole). When Qabil saw that, he said,\nيَا وَيْلَتَا أَعَجَزْتُ أَنْ أَكُونَ مِثْلَ هَٰذَا الْغُرَابِ فَأُوَارِيَ سَوْءَةَ أَخِي\n(\"Woe to me! Am I not even able to be as this crow and to hide the dead body of my brother?\")\n'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"A crow came to the dead corpse of another crow and threw sand over it, until it hid it in the ground. He who killed his brother said,\nيَا وَيْلَتَا أَعَجَزْتُ أَنْ أَكُونَ مِثْلَ هَٰذَا الْغُرَابِ فَأُوَارِيَ سَوْءَةَ أَخِي\n(Woe to me! Am I not even able to be as this crow and to hide the dead body of my brother?)\"\nAl-Hasan Al-Basri commented on the statement,\nفَأَصْبَحَ مِنَ النَّادِمِينَ\n(Then he became one of those who regretted.) \"Allah made him feel sorrow after the loss that he earned.\"\n\n## The Swift Punishment for Transgression and Cutting the Relations of the Womb\n\nA Hadith states that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nمَا مِنْ ذَنْبٍ أَجْدَرُ أَنْ يُعَجِّلَ اللهُ عُقُوبَتَهُ فِي الدُّنْيَا مَعَ مَا يَدَّخِرُ لِصَاحِبهِ فِي الْآخِرَةِ مِنَ الْبَغْيِ وَقَطِيعَةِ الرَّحِمِ\n(There is no sin that is more worthy of Allah hastening its punishment in this life, in addition to what He has in store for its offender in the Hereafter, more than transgression and cutting the relations of the womb.)\nThe act of Qabil included both of these. We are Allah's and to Him is our return.","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=27","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:32","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:32–34","text":"Because of that, We ordained for the Children of Israel that if anyone killed a person not in retaliation of murder, or (and) to spread mischief in the land - it would be as if he killed all mankind, and if anyone saved a life, it would be as if he saved the life of all mankind. And indeed, there came to them Our Messengers with Al-Bayyinat, even then after that many of them continued to exceed the limits in the land (32)The recompense of those who wage war against Allah and His Messenger and do mischief in the land is only that they shall be killed or crucified, or their hands and their feet be cut off on opposite sides, or be exiled from the land. That is their disgrace in this world, and a great torment is theirs in the Hereafter (33)Except for those who (having fled away and then) came back (as Muslims) with repentance before they fall into your power; in that case, know that Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful (34)\n\n## Human Beings Should Respect the Sanctity of Other Human Beings\n\nAllah says, because the son of Adam killed his brother in transgression and aggression,\nكَتَبْنَا عَلَىٰ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ\n(We ordained for the Children of Israel...) meaning, We legislated for them and informed them,\nأَنَّهُ مَن قَتَلَ نَفْسًا بِغَيْرِ نَفْسٍ أَوْ فَسَادٍ فِي الْأَرْضِ فَكَأَنَّمَا قَتَلَ النَّاسَ جَمِيعًا وَمَنْ أَحْيَاهَا فَكَأَنَّمَا أَحْيَا النَّاسَ جَمِيعًا\n(that if anyone killed a person not in retaliation of murder, or (and) to spread mischief in the land - it would be as if he killed all mankind, and if anyone saved a life, it would be as if he saved the life of all mankind.)\nThe Ayah states, whoever kills a soul without justification – such as in retaliation for murder or for causing mischief on earth – will be as if he has killed all mankind, because there is no difference between one life and another.\nوَمَنْ أَحْيَاهَا\n(and if anyone saved a life...) by preventing its blood from being shed and believing in its sanctity, then all people will have been saved from him, so,\nفَكَأَنَّمَا أَحْيَا النَّاسَ جَمِيعًا\n(it would be as if he saved the life of all mankind.) Al-A'mash and others said that Abu Salih said that Abu Hurayrah said, \"I entered on 'Uthman when he was under siege in his house and said, 'I came to give you my support. Now, it is good to fight (defending you) O Leader of the Faithful!' He said, 'O Abu Hurayrah! Does it please you that you kill all people, including me?' I said, 'No.' He said, 'If you kill one man, it is as if you killed all people. Therefore, go back with my permission for you to leave. May you receive your reward and be saved from burden.' So I went back and did not fight.'\" 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"It is as Allah has stated,\nمَن قَتَلَ نَفْسًا بِغَيْرِ نَفْسٍ أَوْ فَسَادٍ فِي الْأَرْضِ فَكَأَنَّمَا قَتَلَ النَّاسَ جَمِيعًا وَمَنْ أَحْيَاهَا فَكَأَنَّمَا أَحْيَا النَّاسَ جَمِيعًا\n(if anyone killed a person not in retaliation of murder, or (and) to spread mischief in the land - it would be as if he killed all mankind, and if anyone saved a life, it would be as if he saved the life of all mankind.)\nSaving life in this case occurs by not killing a soul that Allah has forbidden. So this is the meaning of saving the life of all mankind, for whoever forbids killing a soul without justification, the lives of all people will be saved from him.\" Similar was said by Mujahid;\nوَمَنْ أَحْيَاهَا\n(And if anyone saved a life...) means, he refrains from killing a soul.\nAl-'Awfi reported that Ibn 'Abbas said that Allah's statement,\nفَكَأَنَّمَا أَحْيَا النَّاسَ جَمِيعًا\n(it would be as if he killed all mankind. .) means, \"Whoever kills one soul that Allah has forbidden killing, is just like he who kills all mankind.\" Sa'id bin Jubayr said, \"He who allows himself to shed the blood of a Muslim, is like he who allows shedding the blood of all people. He who forbids shedding the blood of one Muslim, is like he who forbids shedding the blood of all people.\" In addition, Ibn Jurayj said that Al-A'raj said that Mujahid commented on the Ayah,\nفَكَأَنَّمَا أَحْيَا النَّاسَ جَمِيعًا\n(it would be as if he killed all mankind,) \"He who kills a believing soul intentionally, Allah makes the Fire of Hell his abode, He will become angry with him, and curse him, and has prepared a tremendous punishment for him, equal to if he had killed all people, his punishment will still be the same.\" Ibn Jurayj said that Mujahid said that the Ayah,\nوَمَنْ أَحْيَاهَا فَكَأَنَّمَا أَحْيَا النَّاسَ جَمِيعًا\n(and if anyone saved a life, it would be as if he saved the life of all mankind.) means, \"He who does not kill anyone, then the lives of people are safe from him.\"\n\n## Warning Those who Commit Mischief\n\nAllah said,\nوَلَقَدْ جَاءَتْهُمْ رُسُلُنَا بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ\n(And indeed, there came to them Our Messengers with Al-Bayyinat,) meaning, clear evidences, signs and proofs,\nثُمَّ إِنَّ كَثِيرًا مِّنْهُم بَعْدَ ذَٰلِكَ فِي الْأَرْضِ لَمُسْرِفُونَ\n(even then after that many of them continued to exceed the limits in the land!)\nThis Ayah chastises and criticizes those who commit the prohibitions, after knowing that they are prohibited from indulging in them. The Jews of Al-Madinah, such as Banu Qurayzah, An-Nadir and Qaynuqa', used to fight along with either Khazraj or Aws, when war would erupt between them during the time of Jahiliyyah. When these wars would end, the Jews would ransom those who were captured and pay the blood money for those who were killed. Allah criticized them for this practice in Surat Al-Baqarah,\nوَإِذْ أَخَذْنَا مِيثَاقَكُمْ لَا تَسْفِكُونَ دِمَاءَكُمْ وَلَا تُخْرِجُونَ أَنفُسَكُم مِّن دِيَارِكُمْ ثُمَّ أَقْرَرْتُمْ وَأَنتُمْ تَشْهَدُونَ - ثُمَّ أَنتُمْ هَٰؤُلَاءِ تَقْتُلُونَ أَنفُسَكُمْ وَتُخْرِجُونَ فَرِيقًا مِّنكُم مِّن دِيَارِهِمْ تَظَاهَرُونَ عَلَيْهِم بِالْإِثْمِ وَالْعُدْوَانِ وَإِن يَأْتُوكُمْ أُسَارَىٰ تُفَادُوهُمْ وَهُوَ مُحَرَّمٌ عَلَيْكُمْ إِخْرَاجُهُمْ أَفَتُؤْمِنُونَ بِبَعْضِ الْكِتَابِ وَتَكْفُرُونَ بِبَعْضٍ فَمَا جَزَاءُ مَن يَفْعَلُ ذَٰلِكَ مِنكُمْ إِلَّا خِزْيٌ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَيَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ يُرَدُّونَ إِلَىٰ أَشَدِّ الْعَذَابِ وَمَا اللَّهُ بِغَافِلٍ عَمَّا تَعْمَلُونَ\n(And (remember) when We took your covenant (saying): Shed not your (people's) blood, nor turn out your own people from their dwellings. Then, (this) you ratified and (to this) you bear witness. After this, it is you who kill one another and drive out a party of your own from their homes, assist (their enemies) against them, in sin and transgression. And if they come to you as captives, you ransom them, although their expulsion was forbidden to you. Then do you believe in a part of the Scripture and reject the rest? Then what is the recompense of those who do so among you, except disgrace in the life of this world, and on the Day of Resurrection they shall be consigned to the most grievous torment. And Allah is not unaware of what you do.)[2:84-85]\n\n## The Punishment of those Who Cause Mischief in the Land\n\nAllah said next,\nإِنَّمَا جَزَاءُ الَّذِينَ يُحَارِبُونَ اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ وَيَسْعَوْنَ فِي الْأَرْضِ فَسَادًا أَن يُقَتَّلُوا أَوْ يُصَلَّبُوا أَوْ تُقَطَّعَ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَأَرْجُلُهُم مِّنْ خِلَافٍ أَوْ يُنفَوْا مِنَ الْأَرْضِ\n(The recompense of those who wage war against Allah and His Messenger and do mischief in the land is only that they shall be killed or crucified or their hands and their feet be cut off on the opposite sides, or be exiled from the land.)\nWage war' mentioned here means, oppose and contradict, and it includes disbelief, blocking roads and spreading fear in the fairways. Mischief in the land refers to various types of evil. Ibn Jarir recorded that 'Ikrimah and Al-Hasan Al-Basri said that the Ayat,\nإِنَّمَا جَزَاءُ الَّذِينَ يُحَارِبُونَ اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ\n(The recompense of those who wage war against Allah and His Messenger) until,\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ\n(Allah is Of-Forgiving, Most Merciful,) \"Were revealed about the idolators. Therefore, the Ayah decrees that, whoever among them repents before you apprehend them, then you have no right to punish them. This Ayah does not save a Muslim from punishment if he kills, causes mischief in the land or wages war against Allah and His Messenger and then joins rank with the disbelievers, before the Muslims are able to catch him. He will still be liable for punishment for the crimes he committed.\" Abu Dawud and An-Nasa'i recorded that 'Ikrimah said that Ibn 'Abbas said that the Ayah,\nإِنَّمَا جَزَاءُ الَّذِينَ يُحَارِبُونَ اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ وَيَسْعَوْنَ فِي الْأَرْضِ فَسَادًا\n(The recompense of those who wage war against Allah and His Messenger and do mischief in the land...) \"Was revealed concerning the idolators, those among them who repent before being apprehended, they will still be liable for punishment for the crimes they committed.\"\nThe correct opinion is that this Ayah is general in meaning and includes the idolators and all others who commit the types of crimes the Ayah mentioned. Al-Bukhari and Muslim recorded that Abu Qilabah 'Abdullah bin Zayd Al-Jarmi, said that Anas bin Malik said, \"Eight people of the 'Ukl tribe came to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and gave him their pledge to follow Islam. Al-Madinah's climate did not suit them and they became sick and complained to Allah's Messenger ﷺ. So he said,\nأَلَا تَخْرُجُونَ مَعَ رَاعِينَا فِي إِبِلِهِ، فَتُصِيبُوا مِنْ أَبْوَالِهَا وَأَلْبَانِهَا\n(Go with our shephard to be treated by the milk and urine of his camels.)\nSo they went as directed, and after they drank from the camels' milk and urine, they became healthy, and they killed the shepherd and drove away all the camels. The news reached the Prophet ﷺ and he sent (men) in their pursuit and they were captured. He then ordered that their hands and feet be cut off (and it was done), and their eyes were branded with heated pieces of iron. Next, they were put in the sun until they died.\" This is the wording of Muslim. In another narration for this Hadith, it was mentioned that these people were from the tribes of 'Ukl or 'Uraynah. Another narration reported that these people were put in the Harrah area (of Al-Madinah), and when they asked for water, no water was given to them. Allah said,\nأَن يُقَتَّلُوا أَوْ يُصَلَّبُوا أَوْ تُقَطَّعَ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَأَرْجُلُهُم مِّنْ خِلَافٍ أَوْ يُنفَوْا مِنَ الْأَرْضِ\n(they shall be killed or crucified or their hands and their feet be cut off on the opposite sides, or be exiled from the land.)\n'Ali bin Abi Talhah said that Ibn 'Abbas said about this Ayah, 'He who takes up arms in Muslim land and spreads fear in the fairways and is captured, the Muslim Leader has the choice to either have him killed, crucified or cut off his hands and feet.\" Similar was said by Sa'id bin Al-Musayyib, Mujahid, 'Ata', Al-Hasan Al-Basri, Ibrahim An-Nakha'i and Ad-Dahhak, as Abu Ja'far Ibn Jarir recorded. This view is supported by the fact that the word Aw (or), indicates a choice. As Allah said,\nفَجَزَاءٌ مِّثْلُ مَا قَتَلَ مِنَ النَّعَمِ يَحْكُمُ بِهِ ذَوَا عَدْلٍ مِّنكُمْ هَدْيًا بَالِغَ الْكَعْبَةِ أَوْ كَفَّارَةٌ طَعَامُ مَسَاكِينَ أَوْ عَدْلُ ذَٰلِكَ صِيَامًا\n(The penalty is an offering, brought to the Ka'bah, of an eatable animal equivalent to the one he killed, as adjudged by two just men among you; or, for expiation, he should feed the poor, or its equivalent in fasting.)[5:95] Allah said,\nفَمَن كَانَ مِنكُم مَّرِيضًا أَوْ بِهِ أَذًى مِّن رَّأْسِهِ فَفِدْيَةٌ مِّن صِيَامٍ أَوْ صَدَقَةٍ أَوْ نُسُكٍ\n(And whosoever of you is ill or has an ailment in his scalp (necessitating shaving), he must pay a ransom of either fasting or giving charity or offering a sacrifice.) and,\nفَكَفَّارَتُهُ إِطْعَامُ عَشَرَةِ مَسَاكِينَ مِنْ أَوْسَطِ مَا تُطْعِمُونَ أَهْلِيكُمْ أَوْ كِسْوَتُهُمْ أَوْ تَحْرِيرُ رَقَبَةٍ\n(...for its expiation feed ten of the poor, on a scale of the average of that with which you feed your own families, or clothe them, or free a slave.)\nAll of these Ayat offer a choice, just as the Ayah above. As for Allah's statement,\nأَوْ يُنفَوْا مِنَ الْأَرْضِ\n(or be exiled from the land.)[5:33] some said that it means, he is actively pursued until he is captured, and thus receives his prescribed punishment, or otherwise he escapes from the land of Islam, as Ibn Jarir recorded from Ibn 'Abbas, Anas bin Malik, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Ad-Dahhak, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, Az-Zuhri, Al-Layth bin Sa'd and Malik bin Anas. Some said that the Ayah means these people are expelled to another land, or to another state by the Muslims authorities. Sa'id bin Jubayr, Abu Ash-Sha'tha', Al-Hasan, Az-Zuhri, Ad-Dahhak and Muqatil bin Hayyan said that he is expelled, but not outside of the land of Islam, while others said that he is to be imprisoned. Allah's statement,\nذَٰلِكَ لَهُمْ خِزْيٌ فِي الدُّنْيَا وَلَهُمْ فِي الْآخِرَةِ عَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ\n(That is their disgrace in this world, and a great torment is theirs in the Hereafter.)[5:33] means, the punishment We prescribed, killing these aggressors, crucifying them, cutting off their hands and feet on opposite sides, or expelling them from the land is a disgrace for them among mankind in this life, along with the tremendous torment Allah has prepared for them in the Hereafter. This view supports the opinion that these Ayat were revealed about the idolators. As for Muslims, in his Sahih, Muslim recorded that 'Ubadah bin As-Samit said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ took the same pledge from us that he also took from women: That we do not associate anything with Allah in worship, we do not steal, commit adultery, or kill our children, and that we do not spread falsehood about each other. He said that he who keeps this pledge, then his reward will be with Allah. He who falls into shortcomings and was punished, then this will be his expiation. And those whose errors were covered by Allah, then their matter is for Allah: If He wills, He will punish them and If He wills, He will pardon them.\" 'Ali narrated that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَنْ أَذْنَبَ ذَنْبًا فِي الدُّنْيَا فَعُوقِبَ بِهِ، فَاللهُ أَعْدَلُ مِنْ أَنْ يُثَنِّيَ عُقُوبَتَهُ عَلى عَبْدِهِ، وَمَنْ أَذْنَبَ ذَنْبًا فِي الدُّنْيَا فَسَتَرهُ اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَعَفَا عَنْهُ، فَاللهُ أَكْرَمُ مِنْ أَنْ يَعُودَ عَلَيْهِ فِي شَيْءٍ قَدْ عَفَا عَنْهُ\n(He who sins in this life and was punished for it, then Allah is far more just than to combine two punishments on His servant. He who commits an error in this life and Allah hides this error and pardons him, then Allah is far more generous than to punish the servant for something that He has already pardoned.)\nRecorded by Ahmad, Ibn Majah and At-Tirmidhi who said, \"Hasan Gharib.\"Al-Hafiz Ad-Daraqutni was asked about this Hadith, and he said that it was related to the Prophet ﷺ in some narrations, and it was related to the Companions in others, and that this narration from the Prophet ﷺ is Sahih. Ibn Jarir commented on Allah's statement,\nذَٰلِكَ لَهُمْ خِزْيٌ فِي الدُّنْيَا\n(That is their disgrace in this world,) \"Meaning, shame, humiliation, punishment, contempt and torment in this life, before the Hereafter,\nوَلَهُمْ فِي الْآخِرَةِ عَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ\n(and a great torment is theirs in the Hereafter.) if they do not repent from these errors until death overcomes them. In this case, they will be stricken by the punishment that We prescribed for them in this life and the torment that We prepared for them therein,\nعَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ\n(a great torment) in the Fire of Jahannam.\"\n\n## The Punishment of those who Wage War Against Allah and His Messenger is Annulled if They Repent Before their Apprehension\n\nAllah said,\nإِلَّا الَّذِينَ تَابُوا مِن قَبْلِ أَن تَقْدِرُوا عَلَيْهِمْ فَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ\n(Except for those who (having fled away and then) came back (as Muslims) with repentance before they fall into your power; in that case, know that Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.)\nThis Ayah is clear in its indication that it applies to the idolators. As for the Muslims who commit this crime and repent before they are apprehended, the punishment of killing, crucifixion and cutting the limbs will be waved. The practice of the Companions in this regard is that all of the punishments prescribed in this case will be waved, as is apparent from the wording of the Ayah. Ibn Abi Hatim recorded that Ash-Sha'bi said, \"Harithah bin Badr At-Tamimi was living in Al-Basrah, and he committed the crime of mischief in the land. So he talked to some men from Quraysh, such as Al-Hasan bin 'Ali, Ibn 'Abbas and 'Abdullah bin Ja'far, and they talked to 'Ali about him so that he would grant him safety, but 'Ali refused. So Harithah went to Sa'id bin Qays Al-Hamadani who kept him in his house and went to 'Ali, saying, 'O Leader of the Faithful! What about those who wage war against Allah and His Messenger and cause mischief in the land?' So he recited the Ayah until he reached,\nإِلَّا الَّذِينَ تَابُوا مِن قَبْلِ أَن تَقْدِرُوا عَلَيْهِمْ\n(Except for those who (having fled away and them) came back cas Muslims) with repentance before they fall into your power.)\nSo 'Ali wrote a document that granted safety, and Sa'id bin Qays said, 'This is for Harithah bin Badr.'\"\nIbn Jarir recorded this Hadith. Ibn Jarir recorded that 'Amir Ash-Sha'bi said, \"A man from Murad came to Abu Musa, while he was the governor of Al-Kufah during the reign of 'Uthman, and said to him after he offered the obligatory prayer, 'O Abu Musa! I seek your help. I am so-and-so from Murad and I waged war against Allah and His Messenger and caused mischief in the land. I repented before you had any authority over me.' Abu Musa proclaimed, 'This is so-and-so, who had waged war against Allah and His Messenger and caused mischief in the land, and he repented before we had authority over him. Therefore, anyone who meets him, should deal with him in a better way. If he is saying the truth, then this is the path of those who say the truth. If he is saying a lie, his sins will destroy him. So the man remained idle for as long as Allah willed, but he later rose against the leaders, and Allah punished him for his sins and he was killed.\" Ibn Jarir recorded that Musa bin Ishaq Al-Madani said that 'Ali Al-Asadi waged war, blocked the roads, shed blood and plundered wealth. The leaders and the people alike, sought to capture him, but they could not do that until he came after he repented, after he heard a man reciting the Ayah,\nيَا عِبَادِيَ الَّذِينَ أَسْرَفُوا عَلَىٰ أَنفُسِهِمْ لَا تَقْنَطُوا مِن رَّحْمَةِ اللَّهِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَغْفِرُ الذُّنُوبَ جَمِيعًا إِنَّهُ هُوَ الْغَفُورُ الرَّحِيمُ\n(O My servants who have transgressed against themselves! Despair not of the mercy of Allah, verily, Allah forgives all sins. Truly, He is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.)\nSo he said to that man, \"O servant of Allah! Recite it again.\" So he recited it again, and 'Ali put down his sword and went to Al-Madinah in repentance, arriving during the night. He washed up and went to the Masjid of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and prayed the dawn prayer. He sat next to Abu Hurayrah amidst his companions. In the morning, the people recognized him and went after him. He said, \"You have no way against me. I came in repentance before you had any authority over me.\" Abu Hurayrah said, \"He has said the truth,\" and he held his hand and went to Marwan bin Al-Hakam, who was the governor of Al-Madinah during the reign of Mu'awiyah. Abu Hurayrah said, \"This is 'Ali and he came in repentance and you do not have a way against him, nor can you have him killed.\" So 'Ali was absolved of punishment and remained on his repentance and went to the sea to perform Jihad in Allah's cause. The Muslims met the Romans in battle, and the Muslims brought the ship 'Ali was in to one of the Roman ships, and 'Ali crossed to that ship and the Romans escaped from him to the other side of the ship, and the ship capsized and they all drowned.\"","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=32","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:35","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:35–37","text":"O you who believe! Have Taqwa of Allah and seek the Wasilah to Him, and strive hard in His cause, so that you may be successful (35)Verily, those who disbelieve, if they had all that is in the earth, and as much again therewith to ransom themselves thereby from the torment on the Day of Resurrection, it would never be accepted of them. And theirs would be a painful torment (36)They will long to get out of the Fire, but never will they get out therefrom; and theirs will be a lasting tormen (37)\n\n## Commanding Taqwa, Wasilah, and Jihad\n\nAllah commands His faithful servants to fear Him in Taqwa, which if mentioned along with acts of obedience, it means to refrain from the prohibitions and the prohibited matters. Allah said next,\nوَابْتَغُوا إِلَيْهِ الْوَسِيلَةَ\n(seek the Wasilah to Him.) Sufyan Ath-Thawri said that Talhah said that 'Ata' said that Ibn 'Abbas said that Wasilah means 'the means of approach'. Mujahid, Abu Wa'il, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, 'Abdullah bin Kathir, As-Suddi, Ibn Zayd and others gave the same meaning for Wasilah. Qatadah said that the Ayah means, \"Seek the means of approach to Him by obeying Him and performing the acts that please Him.\"\nأُولَٰئِكَ الَّذِينَ يَدْعُونَ يَبْتَغُونَ إِلَىٰ رَبِّهِمُ الْوَسِيلَةَ\n(Those whom they call upon seek a means of access to their Lord (Allah).)[17:57]\nWasilah is a means of approach to achieve something, and it is also used to refer to the highest grade in Paradise, and it is the grade of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, his residence and the nearest grade in Paradise to Allah's Throne. Al-Bukhari recorded that Jabir bin 'Abdullah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَنْ قَالَ حِينَ يَسْمَعُ النِّدَاءَ: اللَّهُمَّ رَبَّ هذِهِ الدَّعْوَةِ التَّامَّةِ، وَالصَّلَاةِ الْقَائِمَةِ، آتِ مُحَمَّدًا الْوَسِيلَةَ وَالْفَضِيلَةَ، وَابْعَثْهُ مَقَامًا مَحْمُودًا الَّذِي وَعَدْتَهُ، إِلَّا حَلَّتْ لَهُ الشَّفَاعَةُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَة\n(Whoever, after hearing to the Adhan says, \"O Allah! Lord of this perfect call and of the regular prayer which is going to be established! Grant Muhammad the Wasilah and superiority and send him [on the Day of Judgment] to the praiseworthy station which You have promised him,\" then intercession from me will be permitted for him on the Day of Resurrection.)\nMuslim recorded that 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As said that he heard the Prophet ﷺ saying,\nإِذَا سَمِعْتُمُ الْمُؤَذِّنَ فَقُولُوا مِثْلَ مَا يَقُولُ، ثُمَّ صَلُّوا عَلَيَّ، فَإِنَّهُ مَنْ صَلَّى عَلَيَّ صَلَاةً صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ عَشْرًا، ثُمَّ سَلُوا لِيَ الْوَسِيلَةَ، فَإِنَّهَا مَنْزِلَةٌ فِي الْجَنَّةِ لَا تَنْبَغِي إِلَّا لِعَبْدٍ مِنْ عِبَادِ اللهِ، وَأَرْجُو أَنْ أَكُونَ أَنَا هُوَ، فَمَنْ سَأَلَ لِيَ الْوَسِيلَةَ حَلَّتْ عَلَيْهِ الشَّفَاعَةُ\n(When you hear the Mu'adhdhin, repeat what he says, and then ask for Salah (blessing, mercy from Allah) for me. Verily, whoever asks for Salah for me, then Allah will grant ten Salah to him. Then, ask for the Wasilah for me, for it is a grade in Paradise that only one servant of Allah deserves, and I hope that I am that servant. Verily, whoever asks (Allah) for Wasilah for me, he will earn the right of my intercession.) Allah said,\nوَجَاهِدُوا فِي سَبِيلِهِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ\n(and strive hard in His cause as much as you can. So that you may be successful.)\nAfter Allah commanded Muslims to avoid the prohibitions and to work towards obedience, He commanded them to fight against their enemies, the disbelievers and idolators who have deviated from the straight path and abandoned the correct religion. Allah encouraged the believers by reminding them of the unending success and great happiness that He prepared for them for the Day of Resurrection, which will never change or decrease for those who join Jihad in His cause. They will remain in the lofty rooms of Paradise that are safe and beautiful. Those who live in these dwellings will always be comfortable and will never be miserable, living, never dying, and their clothes will never grow thin, nor will their youth ever end.\n\n## No Amount of Ransom Shall Be Accepted from the Disbelievers on the Day of the Judgment and They Will Remain in the Fire\n\nAllah then describes the painful torment and punishment that He has prepared for His disbelieving enemies for the Day of Resurrection. Allah said,\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَوْ أَنَّ لَهُم مَّا فِي الْأَرْضِ جَمِيعًا وَمِثْلَهُ مَعَهُ لِيَفْتَدُوا بِهِ مِنْ عَذَابِ يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ مَا تُقُبِّلَ مِنْهُمْ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ\n(Verily, those who disbelieve, if they had all that is in the earth, and as much again therewith to ransom themselves thereby from the torment on the Day of Resurrection, it would never be accepted of them. And theirs would be a painful torment.)\nSo if a disbeliever brought the earth's fill of gold, and twice as much as that amount on the Day of Judgment to ransom himself from Allah's torment that has surrounded him, and he is certain that he will suffer from it, it will not be accepted of him. Rather, there is no escaping the torment, and he will not be able to evade or save himself from it. Hence Allah's statement,\nوَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ\n(And theirs would be a painful torment.) meaning, hurtful,\nيُرِيدُونَ أَن يَخْرُجُوا مِنَ النَّارِ وَمَا هُم بِخَارِجِينَ مِنْهَا وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ مُّقِيمٌ\n(They will long to get out of the Fire, but never will they get out therefrom, and theirs will be a lasting torment.) In another Ayah, Allah said,\nكُلَّمَا أَرَادُوا أَن يَخْرُجُوا مِنْهَا مِنْ غَمٍّ أُعِيدُوا فِيهَا\n(Every time they seek to get away therefrom, in anguish, they will be driven back therein.)\nTherefore, they will still long to leave the torment because of the severity and the pain it causes. They will have no way of escaping it. The more the flames lift them to the upper part of Hell, the more the angels of punishment will strike them with iron bars and they will fall down to its depths,\nوَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ مُّقِيمٌ\n(And theirs will be a lasting torment.) meaning, eternal and everlasting, and they will never be able to depart from it or avoid it. Anas bin Malik said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nيُؤْتَى بِالرَّجُلِ مِنْ أَهْلِ النَّارِ فَيُقَالُ لَهُ: يَا ابْنَ آدَمَ! كَيْفَ وَجَدْتَ مَضْجَعَكَ؟ فَيَقُولُ: شَرَّ مَضْجَعٍ، فَيُقَالُ: هَلْ تَفْتَدِي بِقُرَابِ الْأَرْضِ ذَهَبًا؟ قَالَ: فَيَقُولُ: نَعَمْ يَارَبِّ! فَيَقُولُ اللهُ: كَذَبْتَ، قَدْ سَأَلْتُكَ أَقَلَّ مِنْ ذلِكَ فَلَمْ تَفْعَلْ، فَيُؤْمَرُ بِهِ إِلَى النَّارِ\n(A man from the people of the Fire will be brought forth and will be asked, 'O son of Adam! How did you find your dwelling?' He will say, 'The worst dwelling.' He will be told, 'Would you ransom yourself with the earth's fill of gold?' He will say, 'Yes, O Lord!' Allah will say to him, 'You have lied. I asked you for what is less than that and you did not do it,' and he will be ordered to the Fire.) Muslim and An-Nasa'i recorded it.","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=35","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:38","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:38–40","text":"And (as for) the male thief and the female thief, cut off their hands as a recompense for that which both committed, a punishment by way of example from Allah. And Allah is All-Powerful, All-Wise (38)But whosoever repents after his crime and does righteous good deeds, then verily, Allah will pardon him. Verily, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful (39)Know you not that to Allah (Alone) belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth! He forgives whom He wills and He punishes whom He wills. And Allah is able to do all things (40)\n\n## The Necessity of Cutting off the Hand of the Thief\n\nAllah commands and decrees that the hand of the thief, male or female be cut off. During the time of Jahiliyyah, this was also the punishment for the thief, and Islam upheld this punishment. In Islam, there are several conditions that must be met before this punishment is carried out, as we will come to know, Allah willing. There are other rulings that Islam upheld after modifying these rulings, such as that of blood money for example.\n\n## When Does Cutting the Hand of the Thief Become Necessary?\n\nIn is recorded in the Two Sahihs that Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nلَعَنَ اللهُ السَّارِقَ يَسْرِقُ الْبَيْضَةَ فَتُقْطَعُ يَدُهُ، وَيَسْرِقُ الْحَبْلَ فَتُقْطَعُ يَدُهُ\n(May Allah curse the thief who steals an egg and as a result his hand is cut off, and who steals rope and as a result his hand is cut off.)\nAl-Bukhari and Muslim recorded that 'A'ishah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nتُقْطَعُ يَدُ السَّارِقِ فِي رُبْعِ دِينَارٍ فَصَاعِدًا\n(The hand of the thief shall be cut off if he steals a quarter of a Dinar or more.)\nMuslim recorded that 'A'ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nلَا تُقْطَعُ يَدُ السَّارقِ إِلَّا فِي رُبْعِ دِينارٍ فَصَاعِدًا\n(The hand of the thief shall only be cut off if he steals a quarter of a Dinar or more.)\nThis Hadith is the basis of the matter since it specifies (that the least amount of theft that deserves cutting the hand) is a quarter of a Dinar.\nSo this Hadith fixes the value. And saying that it is three Dirhams is not a contradiction. This is because the Dinar in question was equal to twelve Dirhams, so three Dirhams equalled a fourth of a Dinar. So in this way it is possible to harmonize these two views. This opinion was reported from 'Umar bin Al-Khattab, 'Uthman bin 'Affan, 'Ali bin Abi Talib - may Allah be pleased with them - and it is the view of 'Umar bin 'Abdul-'Aziz, Al-Layth bin Sa'd, Al-Awza'i, and Ash-Shafi'i and his companions. This is also the view of Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal and Ishaq bin Rahwayh in one of the narrations from him, as well as Abu Thawr, and Dawud bin 'Ali Az-Zahari, may Allah have mercy upon them.\nAs for Imam Abu Hanifah and his students Abu Yusuf, Muhammad and Zufar, along with Sufyan Ath-Thawri, they said that the least amount of theft that deserves cutting off the hand is ten Dirhams, whereas a Dinar was twelve Dirhams at that time. The first ruling is the correct one, that the least amount of theft is one forth of a Dinar or more. This meager amount was set as the limit for cutting the hand, so that the people would refrain from theft, and this is a wise decision to those who have sound comprehension. Hence Allah's statement,\nجَزَاءً بِمَا كَسَبَا نَكَالًا مِّنَ اللَّهِ وَاللَّهُ عَزِيزٌ حَكِيمٌ\n(as a recompense for that which both committed, a punishment by way of example from Allah. And Allah is All-Powerful, All-Wise.)\nThis is the prescribed punishment for the evil action they committed, by stealing the property of other people with their hands. Therefore, it is fitting that the tool they used to steal the people's wealth be cut off as punishment from Allah for their error.\nوَاللَّهُ عَزِيزٌ\n(And Allah is All-Powerful,) in His torment,\nحَكِيمٌ\n(All-Wise.) in His commands, what he forbids, what He legislates and what He decrees.\n\n## Repentance of the Thief is Acceptable\n\nAllah said next,\nفَمَن تَابَ مِن بَعْدِ ظُلْمِهِ وَأَصْلَحَ فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ يَتُوبُ عَلَيْهِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ\n(But whosoever repents after his crime and does righteous good deeds, then verily, Allah will pardon him. Verily, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.)\nTherefore, whoever repents and goes back to Allah after he commits theft, then Allah will forgive him.\nImam Ahmad recorded that 'Abdullah bin 'Amr said that a woman committed theft during the time of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and those from whom she stole brought her and said, \"O Allah's Messenger! This woman stole from us.\" Her people said, \"We ransom her.\" The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nاقْطَعُوا يَدَهَا\n(Cut off her hand.) They said, \"We ransom her with five hundred Dinars.\" The Prophet ﷺ said,\nاقْطَعُوا يَدَهَا\n(Cut off her hand.) Her right hand was cut off and the woman asked, \"O Messenger of Allah! Is there a chance for me to repent?\" He said,\nنَعَمْ أَنْتِ الْيَوْمَ مِنْ خَطِيئَتِكِ كَيَوْمَ وَلَدَتْكِ أُمُّكِ\n(Yes. This day, you are free from your sin just as the day your mother gave birth to you.) Allah sent down the verse in Surat Al-Ma'idah,\nفَمَن تَابَ مِن بَعْدِ ظُلْمِهِ وَأَصْلَحَ فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ يَتُوبُ عَلَيْهِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ\n(But whosoever repents after his crime and does righteous good deeds (by obeying Allah), then verily, Allah will pardon him. Verily, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.) This woman was from the tribe of Makhzum. Her story was narrated in the Two Sahihs from Az-Zuhri from 'Urwah from 'A'ishah, The incident caused concern for the Quraysh after she committed the theft during the time of the battle of the Conquest [of Makkah]. They said, \"Who can talk to Allah's Messenger ﷺ about her matter?\" They then said, \"Who dares speak to him about such matters other than Usamah bin Zayd, his loved one.\" When the woman was brought to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, Usamah bin Zayd talked to him about her and the face of the Messenger ﷺ changed color (because of anger) and he ﷺ said,\nأَتَشْفَعُ فِي حَدٍّ مِنْ حُدُودِ اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ؟\n(Do you intercede in a punishment prescribed by Allah?)\nUsamah said to him, \"Ask Allah to forgive me, O Allah's Messenger!\" During that night, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ stood up and gave a speech and praised Allah as He deserves to be praised. He then said,\nأَمَّا بَعْدُ فَإِنَّمَا أَهْلَكَ الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِكُمْ أَنَّهُمْ كَانُوا إِذَا سَرَقَ فِيهِمُ الشَّرِيفُ تَرَكُوهُ، وَإِذَا سَرَقَ فِيهِمُ الضَّعِيفُ أَقَامُوا عَلَيْهِ الْحَدَّ، وَإِنِّي وَالَّذِي نَفْسِي بِيَدِهِ لَوْ أَنَّ فَاطِمَةَ بِنْتَ مُحَمَّدٍ سَرَقَتْ لَقَطَعْتُ يَدَهَا\n(Those who were before you were destroyed because when an honorable person among them would steal, they would leave him. But, when a weak man among them stole, they implemented the prescribed punishment against him. By Him in Whose Hand is my soul! If Fatimah the daughter of Muhammad stole, I will have her hand cut off.)\nThe Prophet ﷺ commanded that the hand of the woman who stole be cut off, and it was cut off. 'A'ishah said, 'Her repentance was sincere afterwards, and she got married and she used to come to me so that I convey her needs to the Messenger of Allah.\" This is the wording that Muslim collected, and in another narration by Muslim, 'A'ishah said, \"She was a woman from Makhzum who used to borrow things and deny that she took them. So the Prophet ordered that her hand be cut off.\" Allah then said,\nأَلَمْ تَعْلَمْ أَنَّ اللَّهَ لَهُ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ\n(Know you not that to Allah (Alone) belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth!)\nHe owns everything and decides what He wills for it and no one can resist His judgment,\nفَيَغْفِرُ لِمَن يَشَاءُ وَيُعَذِّبُ مَن يَشَاءُ وَاللَّهُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ\n(He forgives whom He wills and punishes whom He wills. And Allah is able to do all things.)[2:284]","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=38","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:41","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:41–44","text":"(41. O Messenger! Let not those who hurry to fall into disbelief grieve you, of such who say, \"We believe\" with their mouths but their hearts have no faith. And of the Jews are men who listen much and eagerly to lies, listening to others who have not come to you. They change the words from their places; they say, \"If you are given this, take it, but if you are not given this, then beware!\" And whomsoever Allah wants to put in Fitnah, you can do nothing for him against Allah. Those are the ones whose hearts Allah does not want to purify; for them there is a disgrace in this world, and in the Hereafter a great torment.)(42. They (like to) listen to falsehood, to devour Suht. So if they come to you, either judge between them, or turn away from them. If you turn away from them, they cannot hurt you in the least. And if you judge, judge with justice between them. Verily, Allah loves those who act justly.)(43. But how do they come to you for a decision while they have the Tawrah, in which is the decision of Allah; yet even after that they turn away. For they are not believers.)(44. Verily, We did send down the Tawrah, therein was guidance and light, by which the Prophets who submitted themselves to Allah's will, judged for the Jews. And the 'Rabbāniyyūn' and the 'Aḥbār', for to them was entrusted the protection of Allah's Book, and they were witnesses thereto. Therefore fear not men but fear Me and sell not My verses for a miserable price. And whosoever does not judge by what Allah has revealed, such are the disbelievers.)\n\n## Do Not Feel Sad Because of the Behavior of the Jews and Hypocrites\n\nThese honorable Ayat were revealed about those who rush into disbelief, deviating from the obedience of Allah, His Messenger, prefering their opinions and lusts to what Allah has legislated,\nمِنَ الَّذِينَ قَالُوا آمَنَّا بِأَفْوَاهِهِمْ وَلَمْ تُؤْمِن قُلُوبُهُمْ\n(of such who say, \"We believe\" with their mouths but their hearts have no faith.)\nThese people pretend to be faithful with their words, but their hearts are empty from faith, and they are the hypocrites.\nمِنَ الَّذِينَ هَادُوا\n(And of the Jews...) the enemies of Islam and its people, they and the hypocrites all,\nسَمَّاعُونَ لِلْكَذِبِ\n(listen much and eagerly to lies...) and they accept and react to it positively,\nسَمَّاعُونَ لِقَوْمٍ آخَرِينَ لَمْ يَأْتُوكَ\n(listening to others who have not come to you,) meaning, they listen to some people who do not attend your meetings, O Muhammad. Or, the Ayah might mean, they listen to what you say and convey it to your enemies who do not attend your audience.\n\n## The Jews Alter and Change the Law, Such As Stoning the Adulterer\n\nيُحَرِّفُونَ الْكَلِمَ مِن بَعْدِ مَوَاضِعِهِ\n(They change the words from their places:) by altering their meanings and knowingly distorting them after they comprehended them,\nيَقُولُونَ إِنْ أُوتِيتُمْ هَٰذَا فَخُذُوهُ وَإِن لَّمْ تُؤْتَوْهُ فَاحْذَرُوا\n(they say, \"If you are given this, take it, but if you are not given this, then beware!\")\nIt was reported that this part of the Ayah was revealed about some Jews who committed murder and who said to each other, \"Let us ask Muhammad to judge between us, and if he decides that we pay the Diyah, accept his judgement. If he decides on capital punishment, do not accept his judgement.\" The correct opinion is that this Ayah was revealed about the two Jews who committed adultery. The Jews changed the law they had in their Book from Allah on the matter of punishment for adultery, from stoning to death, to a hundred flogs and making the offenders ride a donkey facing the back of the donkey. When this incident of adultery occurred after the Hijrah, they said to each other, \"Let us go to Muhammad and seek his judgement. If he gives a ruling of flogging, then implement his decision and make it a proof for you with Allah. This way, one of Allah's Prophets will have upheld this ruling amongst you. But if he decides that the punishment should be stoning to death, then do not accept his decision.\"\nThere are several Hadiths mentioning this story. Malik reported that Nafi' said that 'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, \"The Jews came to Allah's Messenger ﷺ and mentioned that a man and a woman from them committed adultery. Allah's Messenger ﷺ said to them,\nمَا تَجِدُونَ فِي التَّوْرَاةِ فِي شَأْنِ الرَّجْمِ؟\n(What do find of the ruling about stoning in the Tawrah?)\nThey said, 'We only find that they should be exposed and flogged.' 'Abdullah bin Salam said, 'You lie. The Tawrah mentions stoning, so bring the Tawrah.' They brought the Tawrah and opened it but one of them hid the verse about stoning with his hand and recited what is before and after that verse. 'Abdullah bin Salam said to him, 'Remove your hand,' and he removed it, thus uncovering the verse about stoning. So they said, He ('Abdullah bin Salam) has said the truth, O Muhammad! It is the verse about stoning.' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ decided that the adulterers be stoned to death and his command was carried out. I saw that man shading the woman from the stones with his body.\" Al-Bukhari and Muslim also collected this Hadith and this is the wording collected by Al-Bukhari. In another narration by Al-Bukhari, the Prophet ﷺ said to the Jews,\nمَا تَصْنَعُون بِهِمَا؟\n(What would you do in this case?) They said, \"We would humiliate and expose them.\" The Prophet ﷺ recited,\nفَأْتُوا بِالتَّوْرَاةِ فَاتْلُوهَا إِن كُنتُمْ صَادِقِينَ\n(Bring here the Tawrah and recite it, if you are truthful.)[3:93]\nSo they brought a man who was blind in one eye and who was respected among them and said to him, \"Read (from the Tawrah).\" So he read until he reached a certain verse and then covered it with his hand. He was told, \"Remove your hand,\" and it was the verse about stoning. So that man said, \"O Muhammad! This is the verse about stoning, and we had hid its knowledge among us.\" So the Messenger ﷺ ordered that the two adulterers be stoned, and they were stoned.\nMuslim recorded that a Jewish man and a Jewish woman were brought before Allah's Messenger ﷺ because they committed adultery. The Messenger of Allah went to the Jews and asked them,\nمَا تَجِدُونَ فِي التَّوْرَاةِ عَلى مَنْ زَنَىٰ؟\n(What is the ruling that you find in the Tawrah for adultery?)\nThey said, \"We expose them, carry them (on donkeys) backwards and parade them in public.\" The Prophet ﷺ recited;\nفَأْتُوا بِالتَّوْرَاةِ فَاتْلُوهَا إِن كُنتُمْ صَادِقِينَ\n(Bring here the Tawrah and recite it, if you are truthful.)\nSo they brought the Tawrah and read from it until the reader reached the verse about stoning. Then he placed his hand on that verse and read what was before and after it. 'Abdullah bin Salam, who was with the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, said, \"Order him to remove his hand,\" and he removed his hand and under it was the verse about stoning. So the Messenger of Allah ﷺ commanded that the adulterers be stoned, and they were stoned. 'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, \"I was among those who stoned them and I saw the man shading the woman from the stones with his body.\" Abu Dawud recorded that Ibn 'Umar said, \"Some Jews came to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and invited him to go to the Quff area. So he went to the house of Al-Midras and they said, 'O Abu Al-Qasim! A man from us committed adultery with a woman, so decide on their matter.' They arranged a pillow for the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and he sat on it and said,\nائْتُونِي بِالتَّوْرَاةِ\n(Bring the Tawrah to me.) He was brought the Tawrah and he removed the pillow from under him and placed the Tawrah on it, saying,\nآمَنْتُ بِكِ وَبِمَنْ أَنْزَلَكِ\n(I trust you and He Who revealed it to you.) He then said,\nائْتُونِي بِأَعْلَمِكُم\n(Bring me your most knowledgeable person.)\nSo he was brought a young man... \" and then he mentioned the rest of the story that Malik narrated from Nafi'.\nThese Hadiths state that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ issued a decision that conforms with the ruling in the Tawrah, not to honor the Jews in what they believe in, for the Jews were commanded to follow the Law of Muhammad ﷺ only. Rather, the Prophet did this because Allah commanded him to do so. He asked them about the ruling of stoning in the Tawrah to make them admit to what the Tawrah contains and what they collaborated to hide, deny and exclude from implementing for all that time. They had to admit to what they did, although they did it while having knowledge of the correct ruling. What made them go to the Prophet ﷺ for judgement in this matter was their lusts and desires, hoping that the Prophet ﷺ would agree with their opinion, not that they believed in the correctness of his judgment. This is why they said,\nإِنْ أُوتِيتُمْ هَٰذَا\n(If you are given this,) referring to flogging, then take it,\nوَإِن لَّمْ تُؤْتَوْهُ فَاحْذَرُوا\n(but if you are not given this, then beware!) and do not accept or implement it. Allah said next,\nوَمَن يُرِدِ اللَّهُ فِتْنَتَهُ فَلَن تَمْلِكَ لَهُ مِنَ اللَّهِ شَيْئًا أُولَٰئِكَ الَّذِينَ لَمْ يُرِدِ اللَّهُ أَن يُطَهِّرَ قُلُوبَهُمْ لَهُمْ فِي الدُّنْيَا خِزْيٌ وَلَهُمْ فِي الْآخِرَةِ عَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ - سَمَّاعُونَ لِلْكَذِبِ أَكَّالُونَ لِلسُّحْتِ\n(And whomsoever Allah wants to put in Fitnah, you can do nothing for him against Allah. Those are the ones whose hearts Allah does not want to purify; for them there is a disgrace in this world, and in the Hereafter a great torment. They (like to) listen to falsehood, to devour Suht)\nSuht' refers to bribes, as Ibn Mas'ud and others stated. The Ayah states that if one is like this, how can Allah cleanse his heart and accept his supplication? Allah said to His Prophet ﷺ,\nفَإِن جَاءُوكَ\n(So if they come to you...) so that you judge between them,\nفَاحْكُم بَيْنَهُمْ أَوْ أَعْرِضْ عَنْهُمْ وَإِن تُعْرِضْ عَنْهُمْ فَلَن يَضُرُّوكَ شَيْئًا\n(either judge between them, or turn away from them. If you turn away from them, they cannot hurt you in the least.) meaning, there is no harm if you do not judge between them. This is because when they came to you to judge between them, they did not seek to follow the truth, but only what conformed to their lusts. We should mention here that Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, As-Suddi, Zayd bin Aslam, 'Ata' Al-Khurasani, and several others said that this part of the Ayah was abrogated by Allah's statement,\nوَأَنِ احْكُم بَيْنَهُم بِمَا أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ\n(And so judge among them by what Allah has revealed.)\nوَإِنْ حَكَمْتَ فَاحْكُم بَيْنَهُم بِالْقِسْطِ\n(And if you judge, judge with justice between them.) and with fairness, even if the Jews were unjust and outcasts from the path of fairness,\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ يُحِبُّ الْمُقْسِطِينَ\n(Verily, Allah loves those who act justly.)\n\n## Chastising the Jews for Their Evil Lusts and Desires, While Praising the Tawrah\n\nAllah then chastises the Jews for their false ideas and deviant desires to abandon what they believe is true in their Book, and which they claim is their eternal Law that they are always commanded to adhere to. Yet, they do not adhere to the Tawrah, but they prefer other laws over it, although they believe that these other laws are not correct and do not apply to them. Allah said,\nوَكَيْفَ يُحَكِّمُونَكَ وَعِندَهُمُ التَّوْرَاةُ فِيهَا حُكْمُ اللَّهِ ثُمَّ يَتَوَلَّوْنَ مِن بَعْدِ ذَٰلِكَ وَمَا أُولَٰئِكَ بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ\n(But how do they come to you for decision while they have the Tawrah, in which is the decision of Allah; yet even after that they turn away. For they are not believers.)\nAllah next praises the Tawrah that He sent down to His servant and Messenger Musa, son of 'Imran,\nإِنَّا أَنزَلْنَا التَّوْرَاةَ فِيهَا هُدًى وَنُورٌ يَحْكُمُ بِهَا النَّبِيُّونَ الَّذِينَ أَسْلَمُوا لِلَّذِينَ هَادُوا\n(Verily, We did send down the Tawrah [to Musa], therein was guidance and light, by which the Prophets who submitted themselves to Allah's will, judged the Jews.) and these Prophets did not deviate from the law of the Tawrah, change or alter it,\nوَالرَّبَّانِيُّونَ وَالْأَحْبَارُ\n(And (also) the 'Rabbāniyyūn' and the 'Aḥbār'...) wherein 'Rabbāniyyūn' refers to the worshippers who are learned and religious, and 'Aḥbār' refers to the scholars,\nبِمَا اسْتُحْفِظُوا مِن كِتَابِ اللَّهِ\n(for to them was entrusted the protection of Allah's Book,) meaning, they were entrusted with the Book of Allah, and they were commanded to adhere to it and not hide any part of,\nوَكَانُوا عَلَيْهِ شُهَدَاءَ فَلَا تَخْشَوُا النَّاسَ وَاخْشَوْنِ وَلَا تَشْتَرُوا بِآيَاتِي ثَمَنًا قَلِيلًا وَمَن لَّمْ يَحْكُم بِمَا أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْكَافِرُونَ\n(and they were witnesses thereto. Therefore fear not men but fear Me and sell not My verses for a miserable price. And whosoever does not judge by what Allah has revealed, such are the disbelievers.)\nThere are two ways to explain this Ayah and we will mention the later.\n\n## Another Reason Behind Revealing these Honorable Ayat\n\nImam Ahmad recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Allah sent down the Ayat,\nوَمَن لَّمْ يَحْكُم بِمَا أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْكَافِرُونَ\n(And whosoever does not judge by what Allah has revealed, such are the disbelievers,)\nفَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الظَّالِمُونَ\n(Such are the unjust,) and,\nفَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْفَاسِقُونَ\n(Such are the rebellious.) about two groups among the Jews. During the time of Jahiliyyah, one of them had defeated the other. As a result, they made a treaty that they would pay blood money totaling fifty Wasaq [of gold](each Wasaq approx. 3 kg) for every dead person from the defeated group killed by the victors, and a hundred Wasaq for every dead person the defeated group killed from the victors. This treaty remained in effect until the Prophet ﷺ came to Al-Madinah and both of these groups became subservient under the Prophet ﷺ. Yet, when the mighty group once suffered a casualty at the hands of the weaker group, the mighty group sent a delegation demanding the hundred Wasaq. The weaker group said, 'How can two groups who have the same religion, one ancestral lineage and a common land, have a Diyah that for some of them is half of that of the others? We only agreed to this because you oppressed us and because we feared you. Now that Muhammad has come, we will not give you what you asked.' So war was almost rekindled between them, but they agreed to seek Muhammad's judgement in their dispute. The mighty group among them said [among themselves], 'By Allah! Muhammad will never give you double the Diyah that you pay to them compared to what they pay to you. They have said the truth anyway, for they only gave us this amount because we oppressed and overpowered them. Therefore, send someone to Muhammad who will sense what his judgement will be. If he agrees to give you what you demand, accept his judgment, and if he does not give you what you seek, do not refer to him for judgement.' So they sent some hypocrites to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ to try and find out the Messenger's judgement. When they came to the Messenger ﷺ, Allah informed him of their matter and of their plot. Allah sent down,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الرَّسُولُ لَا يَحْزُنكَ الَّذِينَ يُسَارِعُونَ فِي الْكُفْرِ\n(O Messenger! Let not those who hurry to fall into disbelief grieve you,)[5:41] until,\nالْفَاسِقُونَ\n(Such are the rebellious.)[5:47]\nBy Allah! It is because of their problem that Allah sent down these verses and it is they whom Allah meant.\"\nAbu Dawud collected a similar narration for this Hadith. Abu Ja'far Ibn Jarir recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said that the Ayah in Surat Al-Ma'idah,\nفَاحْكُم بَيْنَهُمْ أَوْ أَعْرِضْ عَنْهُمْ\n(either judge between them, or turn away from them...)[5:42] until,\nالْمُقْسِطِينَ\n(Those who act justly.)[5:42] was revealed concerning the problem of blood money between Bani An-Nadir and Bani Qurayzah. The dead of Bani An-Nadir were being honored more and they received the full amount of Diyah, while Qurayzah received half the Diyah for their dead. So they referred to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ for judgement and Allah sent down these verses about them. The Messenger of Allah compelled them to adhere to the true judgement in this matter and made the Diyah the same for both groups and Allah knows best about that matter.\" Ahmad, Abu Dawud and An-Nasa'i also recorded this Hadith from Abu Ishaq.\nAl-'Awfi and 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas said that these Ayat were revealed about the two Jews who committed adultery, and we mentioned the Hadiths about this story before. It appears that both of these were the reasons behind revealing these Ayat, and Allah knows best. This is why Allah said afterwards,\nوَكَتَبْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ فِيهَا أَنَّ النَّفْسَ بِالنَّفْسِ وَالْعَيْنَ بِالْعَيْنِ\n(And We ordained therein for them: Life for life, eye for eye) until the end of the Ayah, which strengthens the opinion that the story of the Diyah was behind revealing the Ayat as we explained above. Allah knows best. Allah said,\nوَمَن لَّمْ يَحْكُم بِمَا أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْكَافِرُونَ\n(And whosoever does not judge by what Allah has revealed, such are the disbelievers.)\nAl-Bara' bin 'Azib, Hudhayfah bin Al-Yaman, Ibn 'Abbas, Abu Mijlaz, Abu Raja' Al-'Utaridi, 'Ikrimah, 'Ubaydullah bin 'Abdullah, Al-Hasan Al-Basri and others said that this Ayah was revealed about the People of the Book. Al-Hasan Al-Basri added that this Ayah also applies to us. 'Abdur-Razzaq said that Ath-Thawri said that Mansur said that Ibrahim said that these Ayat, \"Were revealed about the Children of Israel, and Allah accepted them for this Ummah.\" Ibn Jarir recorded this statement.\n'Ali bin Abi Talhah also stated that Ibn 'Abbas commented on Allah's statement,\nوَمَن لَّمْ يَحْكُم بِمَا أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْكَافِرُونَ\n(And whosoever does not judge by what Allah has revealed, such are the disbelievers,)\n\"Whoever rejects what Allah has revealed, will have committed Kufr, and whoever accepts what Allah has revealed, but did not rule by it, is a Zalim (unjust) and a Fasiq (rebellious) and a sinner.\" Ibn Jarir recorded this statement.\n'Abdur-Razzaq said, \"Ma'mar narrated to us that Tawus said that Ibn 'Abbas was asked about Allah's statement,\nوَمَن لَّمْ يَحْكُم\n(And whosoever does not judge...) He said, 'It is an act of Kufr.' Ibn Tawus added, 'It is not like those who disbelieve in Allah, His angels, His Books and His Messengers.' Ath-Thawri narrated that Ibn Jurayj said that 'Ata' said, 'There is Kufr and Kufr less than Kufr, Zulm and Zulm less than Zulm, Fisq and Fisq less than Fisq.'\" Waki' said that Sa'id Al-Makki said that Tawus said that,\nوَمَن لَّمْ يَحْكُم بِمَا أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْكَافِرُونَ\n(And whosoever does not judge by what Allah has revealed, such are the disbelievers,) \"This is not the Kufr that annuls one's religion.\"","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=41","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:45","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:45","text":"And We ordained therein for them \"Life for life, eye for eye, nose for nose, ear for ear, tooth for tooth, and wounds equal for equal. \" But if anyone remits the retaliation by way of charity, it shall be for him an expiation. And whosoever does not judge by that which Allah has revealed, such are the unjust (45)\nThis Ayah also chastises and criticizes the Jews because in the Tawrah, they have the law of a life for a life. Yet, they defied this ruling by transgression and rebellion. They used to apply this ruling when a person from Bani An-Nadir was killed by a Qurayzah person, but this was not the case when the opposite occurred. Rather, they would revert to Diyah in this case. They also defied the ruling in the Tawrah to stone the adulterer and instead came up with their own form of punishment, flogging, humiliation and parading them in public. This is why Allah said in the previous Ayah,\nوَمَن لَّمْ يَحْكُم بِمَا أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْكَافِرُونَ\n(And whosoever does not judge by what Allah has revealed, such are the disbelievers.) because they rejected Allah's command with full intention and with transgression and rebellion. In this Ayah, Allah said,\nفَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الظَّالِمُونَ\n(such are the unjust.) because they did not exact the oppressed his due rights from the oppressor in a matter which Allah ordered that all be treated equally and fairly. Instead, they defied that command, committed injustice and transgressed against each other.\n\n## A Man is Killed for a Woman Whom He Kills\n\nImam Abu Nasr bin As-Sabbagh stated in his book, Ash-Shamil, that the scholars agree that this Ayah [5:45] should be implemented, and the Imams agree that the man is killed for a woman whom he kills, according to the general indications of this Ayah. A Hadith that An-Nasa'i recorded states that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ had this statement written in the book that he gave 'Amr bin Hazm,\nأَنَّ الرَّجُلَ يُقْتَلُ بِالْمَرْأَةِ\n(The man is killed for the woman (whom he kills).) In another Hadith, the Messenger ﷺ said,\nالْمُسْلِمُونَ تَتَكَافَأُ دِمَاؤُهُم\n(Muslims are equal regarding the sanctity of their blood.) This is also the opinion of the majority of the scholars. What further supports what Ibn As-Sabbagh said is the Hadith that Imam Ahmad recorded that Anas bin Malik said, \"Ar-Rabi' (his aunt) broke the tooth of a girl, and the relatives of Ar-Rabi' requested the girl's relatives to forgive (the offender), but they refused. So, they went to the Prophet ﷺ who ordered them to bring about retaliation. Anas bin An-Nadr, her brother, asked, 'O Allah's Messenger! Will the tooth of Ar-Rabi' be broken?' The Messenger of Allah said, 'O Anas! The Book of Allah prescribes retaliation.' Anas said, 'No, by Him Who has sent you with the Truth, her tooth will not be broken. ' Later the relatives of the girl agreed to forgive Ar-Rabi' and forfeit their right to retaliation. The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nإن من عباد الله من لو أقسم على الله لأبره\n(There are some of Allah's servants who, if they take an oath by Allah, Allah fullfils them.)\" It was recorded in the Two Sahihs.\n\n## Retaliation for Wounds\n\nAllah said,\nوَالْجُرُوحَ قِصَاصٌ\n(and wounds equal for equal.) 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Life for life, an eye for an eye, a nose, if cut off, for a nose, a tooth broken for a tooth and wounds equal for wound.\" The free Muslims, men and women, are equal in this matter. And their slaves, male and female, are equal in this matter. And this ruling is the same regarding intentional murder and lesser offenses, as Ibn Jarir and Ibn Abi Hatim recorded.\n\n## An Important Ruling\n\nThe retaliation for wounds should not be implemented until the wounds of the victim heal. If retaliation occurs before the wound heals, and then the wound becomes aggravated, the victim will have no additional rights in this case. The proof for this ruling is what Imam Ahmad narrated from 'Amr bin Shu'ayb, from his father, from his grandfather that a man once stabbed another man in his leg using a horn. The victim came to the Prophet ﷺ asking for retaliation, and the Prophet ﷺ said,\nحَتَّى تَبْرَأَ\n(Not until you heal.) The man again came to the Prophet ﷺ and asked for equality in retaliation and the Prophet ﷺ allowed him that. Later on, that man said, \"O Messenger of Allah! I limp now.\" The Messenger ﷺ said,\nقَدْ نَهَيْتُكَ فَعَصَيْتَنِي، فَأَبْعَدكَ اللهُ وَبَطَلَ عَرَجُكَ\n(I had asked you to wait, but you disobeyed me. Therefore, Allah cast you away and your limp has no compensation.)\nAfterwards, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ forbade that the wound be retaliated for until the wound of the victim heals.\nIf the victim is allowed to retaliate for his wound caused by the aggressor and the aggressor dies as a result, there is no compensation in this case, according to the majority of the Companions and their followers.\n\n## The Pardon is Expiation for Such Offenses\n\nAllah said,\nفَمَن تَصَدَّقَ بِهِ فَهُوَ كَفَّارَةٌ لَّهُ\n(But if anyone remits the retaliation by way of charity, it shall be for him an expiation.) 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas commented that\nفَمَن تَصَدَّقَ بِهِ\n(But if anyone remits the retaliation by way of charity) means; \"If one pardons by way of charity, it will result in expiation for the aggressor and reward for the victim.\" Sufyan Ath-Thawri said that 'Ata' bin As-Sa'ib said that Sa'id bin Jubayr said that Ibn 'Abbas said, 'He who pardons the retaliation by way of charity, it will be an expiation for the aggressor and a reward for the victim with Allah.\" Ibn Abi Hatim recorded this statement. Jabir bin 'Abdullah said that Allah's statement,\nفَمَن تَصَدَّقَ بِهِ فَهُوَ كَفَّارَةٌ لَّهُ\n(But if anyone remits the retaliation by way of charity, it shall be for him an expiation,)\n\"For the victim.\" This is also the opinion of Al-Hasan Al-Basri, Ibrahim An-Nakha'i and Abu Ishaq Al-Hamdani.\nImam Ahmad recorded that 'Ubadah bin As-Samit said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ saying,\nمَا مِنْ رَجُلٍ يُجْرَحُ مِنْ جَسَدِهِ جَرَاحَةً فَيَتَصَدَّقُ بِهَا، إِلَّا كَفَّرَ اللهُ عَنْهُ مِثْلَ مَا تَصَدَّقَ بِهِ\n(Any man who suffers a wound on his body and forfeits his right of retaliation as way of charity, then Allah will pardon him that which is similar to what he forfeited.) An-Nasa'i and Ibn Jarir recorded this Hadith.\nAllah's statement,\nوَمَن لَّمْ يَحْكُم بِمَا أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الظَّالِمُونَ\n(And whosoever does not judge by that which Allah has revealed, such are the unjust.)\nEarlier we mentioned the statements of 'Ata' and Tawus that there is Kufr and lesser Kufr, injustice and lesser injustice and Fisq and lesser Fisq.","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=45","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:46","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:46–47","text":"And in their footsteps, We sent 'Isa, son of Maryam, confirming the Tawrah that had come before him, and We gave him the Injil, in which was guidance and light and confirmation of the Tawrah that had come before it, a guidance and an admonition for those who have Taqwa (46)Let the people of the Injil judge by what Allah has revealed therein. And whosoever does not judge by what Allah has revealed, such are the rebellious (47)\n\n## Allah Mentions 'Isa and Praises the Injil\n\nAllah said,\nوَقَفَّيْنَا\n(and We sent...) meaning, We sent\nعَلَىٰ آثَارِهِم\n(in their footsteps) meaning the Prophets of the Children of Israel,\nبِعِيسَى ابْنِ مَرْيَمَ مُصَدِّقًا لِّمَا بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ مِنَ التَّوْرَاةِ\n('Isa, son of Maryam, confirming the Tawrah that had come before him,) meaning, he believed in it and ruled by it.\nوَآتَيْنَاهُ الْإِنجِيلَ فِيهِ هُدًى وَنُورٌ\n(and We gave him the Injil, in which was guidance and light) a guidance that directs to the truth and a light that removes the doubts and solves disputes,\nوَمُصَدِّقًا لِّمَا بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ مِنَ التَّوْرَاةِ\n(and confirmation of the Tawrah that had come before it,) meaning, he adhered to the Tawrah, except for the few instances that clarified the truth where the Children of Israel differed. Allah states in another Ayah that 'Isa said to the Children of Israel,\nوَلِأُحِلَّ لَكُم بَعْضَ الَّذِي حُرِّمَ عَلَيْكُمْ\n(...and to make lawful to you part of what was forbidden to you.)[3:50] So the scholars say that the Injil abrogated some of the rulings of the Tawrah. Allah's statement,\nوَهُدًى وَمَوْعِظَةً لِّلْمُتَّقِينَ\n(a guidance and an admonition for those who have Taqwa.) means, We made the Injil guidance and an admonition that prohibits committing sins and errors, for those who have Taqwa of Allah and fear His warning and torment. Allah said next,\nوَلْيَحْكُمْ أَهْلُ الْإِنجِيلِ بِمَا أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ فِيهِ\n(Let the people of the Injil judge by what Allah has revealed therein.) meaning, so that He judges the people of the Injil by it in their time. Or, the Ayah means, so that they believe in all that is in it and adhere to all its commands, including the good news about the coming of Muhammad ﷺ and the command to believe in and follow him when he is sent. Allah said in other Ayat,\nقُلْ يَا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ لَسْتُمْ عَلَىٰ شَيْءٍ حَتَّىٰ تُقِيمُوا التَّوْرَاةَ وَالْإِنجِيلَ وَمَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْكُم مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ\n(Say \"O People of the Scripture! You have nothing (guidance) until you act according to the Tawrah, the Injil, and what has been sent down to you from your Lord.\") and,\nالَّذِينَ يَتَّبِعُونَ الرَّسُولَ النَّبِيَّ الْأُمِّيَّ الَّذِي يَجِدُونَهُ مَكْتُوبًا عِندَهُمْ فِي التَّوْرَاةِ\n(Those who follow the Messenger, the Prophet who can neither read nor write whom they find written with them in the Tawrah...)[7:157] until,\nالْمُفْلِحُونَ\n(...successful.)[7:157] Here, Allah said,\nوَمَن لَّمْ يَحْكُم بِمَا أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْفَاسِقُونَ\n(And whosoever does not judge by what Allah has revealed, such are the rebellious.) meaning, the rebellious and disobedient of Allah who prefer falsehood and abandon truth. We mentioned before that this Ayah was revealed about the Christians, and this is evident from the context of the Ayah.","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=46","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:48","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:48–50","text":"And We have sent down to you the Book (this Qur'an) in truth, confirming the Scripture that came before it and Muhayminan over it (old Scriptures). So judge between them by what Allah has revealed, and follow not their vain desires, diverging away from the truth that has come to you. To each among you, We have prescribed a law and a clear way. If Allah willed, He would have made you one nation, but that (He) may test you in what He has given you; so compete in good deeds. The return of you (all) is to Allah; then He will inform you about that in which you used to differ (48)And so judge between them by what Allah has revealed and follow not their vain desires, but beware of them lest they turn you far away from some of that which Allah has sent down to you. And if they turn away, then know that Allah's will is to punish them for some sins of theirs. And truly, most men are rebelliou (49)Do they then seek the judgement of (the days of) ignorance And who is better in judgement than Allah for a people who have firm faith (50)\n\n## Praising the Qur'an; the Command to Refer to the Qur'an for Judgment\n\nAllah mentioned the Tawrah that He sent down to His Prophet Musa, the one whom He spoke directly to, praising it, commanding that it should be implemented, before it was abrogated. Allah then mentioned the Injil, praised it and commanded its people to adhere to it and follow it, as we stated. He next mentioned the Glorious Qur'an that He sent down to His honorable servant and Messenger. Allah said,\nوَأَنزَلْنَا إِلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ بِالْحَقِّ\n(And We have sent down to you the Book in truth...) meaning, with the truth that, no doubt, is coming from Allah,\nمُصَدِّقًا لِّمَا بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ مِنَ الْكِتَابِ\n(confirming the Scripture that came before it) meaning, the Divinely Revealed Books that praised the Qur'an and mentioned that it would be sent down from Allah to His servant and Messenger Muhammad ﷺ. The Qur'an was revealed as was foretold in the previous Scriptures. This fact increased faith in the previous Scriptures for the sincere who have knowledge of these Scriptures, those who adhered to Allah's commands and Laws and believed in His Messengers. Allah said,\nقُلْ آمِنُوا بِهِ أَوْ لَا تُؤْمِنُوا إِنَّ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْعِلْمَ مِن قَبْلِهِ إِذَا يُتْلَىٰ عَلَيْهِمْ يَخِرُّونَ لِلْأَذْقَانِ سُجَّدًا - وَيَقُولُونَ سُبْحَانَ رَبِّنَا إِن كَانَ وَعْدُ رَبِّنَا لَمَفْعُولًا\n(Say: \"Believe in it or do not believe (in it). Verily, those who were given knowledge before it, when it is recited to them, fall down on their faces in humble prostration.\" And they say: \"Glory be to our Lord! Truly, the promise of our Lord must be fulfilled.\") meaning that they say, the promise of our Lord, concerning the coming of Muhammad ﷺ by the words of His previous Messengers, will certainly be fulfilled. Allah's statement,\nوَمُهَيْمِنًا عَلَيْهِ\n(and Muhayminan over it) means entrusted over it, according to Sufyan Ath-Thawri who narrated it from Abu Ishaq from At-Tamimi from Ibn 'Abbas. 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Muhaymin is, 'the Trustworthy'. Allah says that the Qur'an is trustworthy over every Divine Book that preceded it.\" This was reported from 'Ikrimah, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Mujahid, Muhammad bin Ka'b, 'Atiyyah, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, 'Ata' Al-Khurasani, As-Suddi and Ibn Zayd. Ibn Jarir said, \"The Qur'an is trustworthy over the Books that preceded it. Therefore, whatever in these previous Books conforms to the Qur'an is true, and whatever disagrees with the Qur'an is false.\" Al-Walibi said that Ibn 'Abbas said that Muhayminan means, 'Witness'. Mujahid, Qatadah and As-Suddi said the same. Al-'Awfi said that Ibn 'Abbas said that Muhayminan means, 'dominant over the previous Scriptures'. These meanings are similar, as the word Muhaymin includes them all. Consequently, the Qur'an is trustworthy, a witness, and dominant over every Scripture that preceded it. This Glorious Book, which Allah revealed as the Last and Final Book, is the most encompassing, glorious and perfect Book of all times. The Qur'an includes all the good aspects of previous Scriptures and even more, which no previous Scripture ever contained. This is why Allah made it trustworthy, a witness and dominant over all Scriptures. Allah promised that He will protect the Qur'an and swore by His Most Honorable Self,\nإِنَّا نَحْنُ نَزَّلْنَا الذِّكْرَ وَإِنَّا لَهُ لَحَافِظُونَ\n(Verily, We, it is We Who have sent down the Dhikr and surely, We will guard it (from corruption).)[15:9] Allah said,\nفَاحْكُم بَيْنَهُم بِمَا أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ\n(So judge between them by what Allah has revealed.) The Ayah commands: O Muhammad! Rule between the people, Arabs and non-Arabs, lettered and unlettered, by what Allah has revealed to you in this Glorious Book and what it approves of for you from the Law of the previous Prophets, as Ibn Jarir said. Ibn Abi Hatim reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"The Prophet had the choice to judge between them or to turn away from them and refer them to their own Law. Then this Ayah was revealed,\nوَأَنِ احْكُم بَيْنَهُم بِمَا أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ وَلَا تَتَّبِعْ أَهْوَاءَهُمْ\n(So judge between them by what Allah has revealed, and follow not their vain desires...) and he was commanded to judge between them by our Book.\". Allah's statement\nوَلَا تَتَّبِعْ أَهْوَاءَهُمْ\n(and follow not their vain desires...) This means the ideas they promote, because of which they turned away from what Allah revealed to His Messengers. This is why Allah said,\nوَلَا تَتَّبِعْ أَهْوَاءَهُمْ عَمَّا جَاءَكَ مِنَ الْحَقِّ\n(And follow not their vain desires, diverging away from the truth that has come to you.)\nThe Ayah commands: Do not diverge from the truth that Allah has ordained for you, to the vain desires of these miserable, ignorant people. Allah's statement,\nلِكُلٍّ جَعَلْنَا مِنكُمْ شِرْعَةً وَمِنْهَاجًا\n(To each among you, We have prescribed a law and a clear way.)\nلِكُلٍّ جَعَلْنَا مِنكُمْ شِرْعَةً\n(To each among you, We have prescribed a law) Shir'at meaning, a clear path, as Ibn Abi Hatim recorded from Ibn 'Abbas.\nوَلَوْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ لَجَعَلَكُمْ أُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً\n(If Allah willed, He would have made you one nation.) This is a general proclamation to all nations informing them of Allah's mighty ability. If Allah wills, He would make all mankind follow one religion and one Law, that would never be abrogated. Allah decided that every Prophet would have his own distinct law that is later abrogated partially or totally with the law of a latter Prophet. Later on, all previous laws were abrogated by the Law that Allah sent with Muhammad ﷺ, His servant and Messenger, whom Allah sent to the people of earth as the Final Prophet. Allah said,\nوَلَوْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ لَجَعَلَكُمْ أُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً وَلَٰكِن لِّيَبْلُوَكُمْ فِي مَا آتَاكُمْ\n(If Allah willed, He would have made you one nation, but that (He) may test you in what He has given you.)\nThis Ayah means, Allah has instituted different laws to test His servants' obedience to what He legislates for them, thus, He rewards or punishes them according to their actions and what they intend. 'Abdullah bin Kathir said that the Ayah,\nفِي مَا آتَاكُمْ\n(In what He has given you.) means, of the Book. Next, Allah encouraged rushing to perform good deeds,\nفَاسْتَبِقُوا الْخَيْرَاتِ\n(so strive as in a race in good deeds.) which are obedience to Allah, following His Law that abrogated the laws that came before it, and believing in His Book, the Qur'an, which is the Final Book that He revealed. Allah said next,\nإِلَى اللَّهِ مَرْجِعُكُمْ\n(The return of you (all) is to Allah;) Therefore, O people, your return and final destination is to Allah on the Day of Resurrection,\nفَيُنَبِّئُكُم بِمَا كُنتُمْ فِيهِ تَخْتَلِفُونَ\n(then He will inform you about that in which you used to differ.)\nAllah will inform you about the truth in which you used to differ and will reward the sincere, as compensation for their sincerity, and will punish the disbelieving, rebellious people who rejected the truth and deviated from it to other paths, without proof or evidence to justify their actions. Rather, they have rejected the clear evidences, unequivocal proofs and established signs. Ad-Dahhak said that,\nفَاسْتَبِقُوا الْخَيْرَاتِ\n(So strive as in a race in good deeds.)is directed at the Ummah of Muhammad ﷺ, but the first view is more apparent. Allah's statement,\nوَأَنِ احْكُم بَيْنَهُم بِمَا أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ وَلَا تَتَّبِعْ أَهْوَاءَهُمْ\n(And so judge between them by what Allah has revealed and follow not their vain desires,) emphasizes this command and forbids ignoring it. Allah said next,\nوَاحْذَرْهُمْ أَن يَفْتِنُوكَ عَن بَعْضِ مَا أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ إِلَيْكَ\n(but beware of them lest they turn you far away from some of that which Allah has sent down to you.) meaning; beware of the Jews, your enemies, lest they distort the truth for you in what they convey to you. Therefore, do not be deceived by them, for they are liars, treacherous and disbelievers.\nفَإِن تَوَلَّوْا\n(And if they turn away,) from the judgement that you pass in their disputes, and they defy Allah's Law,\nفَاعْلَمْ أَنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ أَن يُصِيبَهُم بِبَعْضِ ذُنُوبِهِمْ\n(then know that Allah's will is to punish them for some sins of theirs.) meaning, know that this will occur according to the decree of Allah, and because out of His wisdom they have deviated from the truth, and because of their previous sins.\nوَإِنَّ كَثِيرًا مِّنَ النَّاسِ لَفَاسِقُونَ\n(And truly, most men are rebellious.)\nTherefore, the majority of humans are disobedient to their Lord, defiant of the truth and deviate away from it. Allah said in other Ayat,\nوَمَا أَكْثَرُ النَّاسِ وَلَوْ حَرَصْتَ بِمُؤْمِنِينَ\n(And most people will not believe even if you desire it eagerly,)[12:103] and,\nوَإِن تُطِعْ أَكْثَرَ مَن فِي الْأَرْضِ يُضِلُّوكَ عَن سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ\n(And if you obey most of those on the earth they will mislead you far away from Allah's path.)[6:116]\nMuhammad bin Ishaq reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Ka'b bin Asad, Ibn Saluba, 'Abdullah bin Surya and Shas bin Qays said to each other, 'Let us go to Muhammad to try and misguide him from his religion.' So they went to the Prophet ﷺ and said, 'O Muhammad! You know that we are the scholars, noblemen and chiefs of the Jews. If we follow you, the Jews will follow suit and will not contradict us. But, there is enmity between us and some of our people, so we will refer to you for judgement in this matter, and you should rule in our favor against them and we will believe in you.' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ refused the offer and Allah sent down these Ayat about them,\nوَأَنِ احْكُم بَيْنَهُمْ بِمَآ أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ وَلاَ تَتَّبِعْ أَهْوَآءَهُمْ وَاحْذَرْهُمْ أَن يَفْتِنُوكَ عَن بَعْضِ مَآ أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ إِلَيْكَ\n(And so judge between them by what Allah has revealed and follow not their vain desires, but beware of them lest they turn you far away from some of that which Allah has sent down to you.) until,\nلِّقَوْمٍ يُوقِنُونَ\n(for a people who have firm faith.)\" Ibn Jarir and Ibn Abi Hatim recorded this Hadith. Allah continues,\nأَفَحُكْمَ الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ يَبْغُونَ وَمَنْ أَحْسَنُ مِنَ اللَّهِ حُكْمًا لِّقَوْمٍ يُوقِنُونَ\n(Do they then seek the judgement of (the days of) ignorance? And who is better in judgement than Allah for a people who have firm faith?)\nAllah criticizes those who ignore Allah's commandments, which include every type of righteous good thing and prohibit every type of evil, but they refer instead to opinions, desires and customs that people themselves invented, all of which have no basis in Allah's religion. During the time of Jahiliyyah, the people used to abide by the misguidance and ignorance that they invented by sheer opinion and lusts. The Tatar (Mongols) abided by the law that they inherited from their king Genghis Khan who wrote Al-Yasiq, for them. This book contains some rulings that were derived from various religions, such as Judaism, Christianity and Islam. Many of these rulings were derived from his own opinion and desires. Later on, these rulings became the followed law among his children, preferring them to the Law of the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His Messenger ﷺ. Therefore, whoever does this, he is a disbeliever who deserves to be fought against, until he reverts to Allah's and His Messenger's decisions, so that no law, minor or major, is referred to except by His Law. Allah said,\nأَفَحُكْمَ الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ يَبْغُونَ\n(Do they then seek the judgement of (the days of) ignorance?) meaning, they desire and want this and ignore Allah's judgement,\nوَمَنْ أَحْسَنُ مِنَ اللَّهِ حُكْمًا لِّقَوْمٍ يُوقِنُونَ\n(And who is better in judgement than Allah for a people who have firm faith?)\nWho is more just in decision than Allah for those who comprehend Allah's Law, believe in Him, who are certain that Allah is the best among those who give decisions and that He is more merciful with His creation than the mother with her own child? Allah has perfect knowledge of everything, is able to do all things, and He is just in all matters.\nAl-Hafiz Abu Al-Qasim At-Tabarani recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nأَبْغَضُ النَّاسِ إِلَى اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ، مَنْ يَبْتَغِي فِي الْإِسْلَامِ سُنَّةَ الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ، وَطَالِبُ دَمِ امْرِىءٍ بِغَيْرِ حَقٍّ لِيُرِيقَ دَمَهُ\n(The most hated person to Allah is the Muslim who seeks the ways of the days of ignorance and he who seeks to shed the blood of a person without justification.) Al-Bukhari recorded Abu Al-Yaman narrating a similar Hadith, with some addition.","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=48","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:51","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:51–53","text":"O you who believe! Do not take friends from the Jews and the Christians, as they are but friends of each other. And if any among you befriends them, then surely, he is one of them. Verily, Allah guides not those people who are the wrongdoers (51)And you see those in whose hearts there is a disease, they hurry to their friendship, saying: \"We fear lest some misfortune of a disaster may befall us. \" Perhaps Allah may bring a victory or a decision according to His will. Then they will become regretful for what they have been keeping as a secret in themselves (52)And those who believe will say: \"Are these the men who swore their strongest oaths by Allah that they were with you?\" All that they did has been in vain, and they have become the losers (53)\n\n## The Prohibition of Taking the Jews, Christians and Enemies of Islam as Friends\n\nAllah forbids His believing servants from having Jews and Christians as friends, because they are the enemies of Islam and its people, may Allah curse them. Allah then states that they are friends of each other and He gives a warning threat to those who do this,\nوَمَن يَتَوَلَّهُم مِّنكُمْ فَإِنَّهُ مِنْهُمْ\n(And if any among you befriends them, then surely he is one of them.)\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that 'Umar ordered Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari to send him on one sheet of balance the count of what he took in and what he spent. Abu Musa then had a Christian scribe, and he was able to comply with 'Umar's demand. 'Umar liked what he saw and exclaimed, \"This scribe is proficient. Would you read in the Masjid a letter that came to us from Ash-Sham?\" Abu Musa said, 'He cannot.\" 'Umar said, \"Is he not pure?\" Abu Musa said, \"No, but he is Christian.\" Abu Musa said, \"So 'Umar admonished me and poked my thigh (with his finger), saying, 'Drive him out (from Al-Madinah).' He then recited,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَتَّخِذُوا الْيَهُودَ وَالنَّصَارَىٰ أَوْلِيَاءَ\n(O you who believe! Take not the Jews and the Christians as friends...)\"\nThen he reported that 'Abdullah bin 'Utbah said, \"Let one of you beware that he might be a Jew or a Christian, while unaware.\" The narrator of this statement said, \"We thought that he was referring to the Ayah,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَتَّخِذُوا الْيَهُودَ وَالنَّصَارَىٰ أَوْلِيَاءَ\n(O you who believe! Take not the Jews and the Christians as friends,)\" Allah said,\nفَتَرَى الَّذِينَ فِي قُلُوبِهِم مَّرَضٌ\n(And you see those in whose hearts there is a disease...) A disease of doubt, hesitation and hypocrisy.\nيُسَارِعُونَ فِيهِمْ\n(they hurry to their friendship,) meaning, they rush to offer them their friendship and allegiances in secret and in public,\nيَقُولُونَ نَخْشَىٰ أَن تُصِيبَنَا دَائِرَةٌ\n(saying: \"We fear lest some misfortune of a disaster may befall us.\")\nThey thus offer this excuse for their friendship and allegiances to the disbelievers, saying that they fear that the disbelievers might defeat the Muslims, so they want to be in favor with the Jews and Christians, to use this favor for their benefit in that eventuality! Allah replied,\nفَعَسَى اللَّهُ أَن يَأْتِيَ بِالْفَتْحِ\n(Perhaps Allah may bring a victory...) referring to the conquering of Makkah, according to As-Suddi.\nأَوْ أَمْرٍ مِّنْ عِندِهِ\n(or a decision according to His will) requiring the Jews and Christians to pay the Jizyah, as As-Suddi stated,\nفَيُصْبِحُوا\n(Then they will become) meaning, the hypocrites who gave their friendship to the Jews and Christians, will become,\nعَلَىٰ مَا أَسَرُّوا فِي أَنفُسِهِمْ\n(for what they have been keeping as a secret in themselves) of allegiances,\nنَادِمِينَ\n(regretful,) for their friendship with the Jews and Christians which did not benefit them or protect them from any harm. Rather, it was nothing but harm, as Allah exposed their true reality to His faithful servants in this life, although they tried to conceal it. When the signs that exposed their hypocrisy were compiled against them, their matter became clear to Allah's faithful servants. So the believers were amazed at these hypocrites who pretended to be believers, swearing to their faithfulness, yet their claims were all lies and deceit. This is why Allah said,\nوَيَقُولُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَهَٰؤُلَاءِ الَّذِينَ أَقْسَمُوا بِاللَّهِ جَهْدَ أَيْمَانِهِمْ إِنَّهُمْ لَمَعَكُمْ حَبِطَتْ أَعْمَالُهُمْ فَأَصْبَحُوا خَاسِرِينَ\n(And those who believe will say, \"Are these the men who swore their strongest oaths by Allah that they were with you?\" All that they did has been in vain, and they have become the losers.)","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=51","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:54","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:54–56","text":"O you who believe! Whoever from among you turns back from his religion (Islam), Allah will bring a people whom He will love and they will love Him; humble towards the believers, stern towards the disbelievers, fighting in the way of Allah, and never fearing the blame of the blamers. That is the grace of Allah which He bestows on whom He wills. And Allah is All-Sufficient for His creatures' needs, All-Knower (54)Verily, your Protector is Allah, His Messenger, and the believers, those who perform the Salah, and give Zakah, and they bow down (55)And whosoever takes Allah, His Messenger, and those who have believed, as protectors, then the party of Allah will be the victorious (56)\n\n## Threatening to Replace the Believers With Another People if They Revert from Islam\n\nAllah emphasizes His mighty ability and states that whoever reverts from supporting His religion and establishing His Law, then Allah will replace them with whomever is better, mightier and more righteous in Allah's religion and Law. Allah said in other Ayat,\nوَإِن تَتَوَلَّوْا يَسْتَبْدِلْ قَوْمًا غَيْرَكُمْ ثُمَّ لَا يَكُونُوا أَمْثَالَكُم\n(And if you turn away, He will exchange you for some other people and they will not be your likes.) and,\nأَلَمْ تَرَ أَنَّ اللَّهَ خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ بِالْحَقِّ ۚ إِن يَشَأْ يُذْهِبْكُمْ وَيَأْتِ بِخَلْقٍ جَدِيدٍ - وَمَا ذَٰلِكَ عَلَى اللَّهِ بِعَزِيزٍ\n(Do you not see that Allah has created the heavens and the earth with truth? If He will, He can remove you and bring (in your place) a new creation! And for Allah that is not hard or difficult.)[14:19-20]. Verily this is not difficult or hard on Allah. Allah said here,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مَن يَرْتَدَّ مِنكُمْ عَن دِينِهِ\n(O you who believe! Whoever from among you turns back from his religion...) and turns back from the truth to falsehood, from now until the commencement of the Last Hour. Allah said next,\nأَذِلَّةٍ عَلَى الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَعِزَّةٍ عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ\n(humble towards the believers, stern towards the disbelievers.)\nThese are the qualities of perfect believers, as they are humble with their believing brothers and allies, stern with their enemies and adversaries. In another Ayah, Allah said,\nمُّحَمَّدٌ رَّسُولُ اللَّهِ وَالَّذِينَ مَعَهُ أَشِدَّاءُ عَلَى الْكُفَّارِ رُحَمَاءُ بَيْنَهُمْ\n(Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah. And those who are with him are severe against disbelievers, and merciful among themselves.)[48:29]\nThe Prophet ﷺ is described as the smiling fighter, smiling to his allies and fighting his enemies. Allah's statement,\nيُجَاهِدُونَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ وَلَا يَخَافُونَ لَوْمَةَ لَائِمٍ\n(Fighting in the way of Allah, and never fearing the blame of the blamers.)\nNothing prevents them from obeying Allah, establishing His Law, fighting His enemies, enjoining righteousness and forbidding evil. Certainly, nothing prevents them from taking this path, neither someone who seeks to hinder them, nor one who blames or chastises them.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Abu Dharr said, \"My Khalil (intimate friend, the Messenger) has commanded me to do seven deeds. He commanded me to love the poor and to be close to them. He commanded me to look at those who are less than me and not those who are above me. He commanded me to keep the relations of the womb, even if they cut it. He commanded me not to ask anyone for anything, to say the truth even if it was bitter, and to not fear the blame of anyone for the sake of Allah. He commanded me to often repeat, 'La hawla wa la quwwata illa billah (There is no strength or power except from Allah)', for these words are from a treasure under the Throne (of Allah).\" It is confirmed in the Sahih;\nمَا يَنْبَغِي لِلْمُؤْمِنِ أَنْ يُذِلَّ نَفْسَهُ\n(The believer is not required to humiliate himself.) He ﷺ was asked; \"How does one humiliate himself, O Messenger of Allah?\" So he ﷺ replied;\nيَتَحَمَّلُ مِنَ الْبَلَاءِ مَا لَا يُطِيقُ\n(He takes on tests that he cannot bear.)\nذَٰلِكَ فَضْلُ اللَّهِ يُؤْتِيهِ مَن يَشَاءُ\n(That is the grace of Allah which He bestows on whom He wills.) meaning, those who have these qualities, acquired it by Allah's bounty and favor and because He granted them these qualities.\nوَاللَّهُ وَاسِعٌ عَلِيمٌ\n(And Allah is All-Sufficient for His creatures' needs, All-Knower,) His favor is ever extending, and He has perfect knowledge of those who deserve or do not deserve His favor and bounty. Allah's statement,\nإِنَّمَا وَلِيُّكُمُ اللَّهُ وَرَسُولُهُ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا\n(Verily, your Protector is Allah, His Messenger, and the believers...) means, the Jews are not your friends. Rather, your allegiance is to Allah, His Messenger and the faithful believers.\nالَّذِينَ يُقِيمُونَ الصَّلَاةَ وَيُؤْتُونَ الزَّكَاةَ\n(those who perform the Salah, and give the Zakah...) referring to the believers who have these qualities and establish the prayer, which is one of the most important pillars of Islam, for it includes worshipping Allah alone without partners. They pay Zakah, which is the right of the creation and a type of help extended to the needy and the poor. As for Allah's statement,\nوَهُمْ رَاكِعُونَ\n(and they bow down,) some people thought that they give the Zakah while bowing down. If this were the case, then paying the Zakah while bowing would be the best form of giving Zakah. No scholar from whom religious rulings are taken says this, as much as we know. Therefore,\nوَهُمْ رَاكِعُونَ\n(and they bow down,) means, they attend the prayer in congregation in Allah's Masjids and spend by way of charity on the various needs of Muslims. Allah said;\nوَمَن يَتَوَلَّ اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا فَإِنَّ حِزْبَ اللَّهِ هُمُ الْغَالِبُونَ\n(And whosoever takes Allah, His Messenger, and those who have believed, as protectors, then the party of Allah will be the victorious.) similarly Allah said;\nكَتَبَ اللَّهُ لَأَغْلِبَنَّ أَنَا وَرُسُلِي إِنَّ اللَّهَ قَوِيٌّ عَزِيزٌ - لَّا تَجِدُ قَوْمًا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الْآخِرِ يُوَادُّونَ مَنْ حَادَّ اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ وَلَوْ كَانُوا آبَاءَهُمْ أَوْ أَبْنَاءَهُمْ أَوْ إِخْوَانَهُمْ أَوْ عَشِيرَتَهُمْ أُولَٰئِكَ كَتَبَ فِي قُلُوبِهِمُ الْإِيمَانَ وَأَيَّدَهُم بِرُوحٍ مِّنْهُ وَيُدْخِلُهُمْ جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا رَضِيَ اللَّهُ عَنْهُمْ وَرَضُوا عَنْهُ أُولَٰئِكَ حِزْبُ اللَّهِ أَلَا إِنَّ حِزْبَ اللَّهِ هُمُ الْمُفْلِحُونَ\n(Allah has decreed: \"Verily, it is I and My Messengers who shall be the victorious.\" Verily, Allah is All-Powerful, Almighty. You will not find any people who believe in Allah and the Last Day, making friendship with those who oppose Allah and His Messenger, even though they were their fathers or their sons or their brothers or their kindred (people). For such He has written faith in their hearts, and strengthened them with a Ruh (proof) from Himself. And He will admit them to Gardens (Paradise) under which rivers flow to dwell therein (forever). Allah is pleased with them, and they with Him. They are the party of Allah. Verily, it is the party of Allah that will be the successful.)\nTherefore, those who accept the allegiance of Allah - His Messenger and the faithful believers - will gain success in this life and the Hereafter. Hence Allah's statement here,\nوَمَن يَتَوَلَّ اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا فَإِنَّ حِزْبَ اللَّهِ هُمُ الْغَالِبُونَ\n(And whosoever takes Allah, His Messenger, and those who have believed, as protectors, then the party of Allah will be the victorious.)","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=54","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:57","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:57–58","text":"O you who believe! Do not take as friends those who take your religion for a mockery and fun from those who received the Scriptures before you, and (nor) the disbelievers; and have Taqwa of Allah if you indeed are true believers (57)And when you proclaim the call for the Salah, they take it (but) as a mockery and fun; that is because they are a people who understand not (58)\n\n## The Prohibition of Being Loyal Friends with Disbelievers\n\nThis Ayah discourages and forbids taking the enemies of Islam and its people, such as the People of the Book and the polytheists, as friends. These disbelievers mock the most important acts that any person could ever perform, the honorable, pure acts of Islam which include all types of good for this life and the Hereafter. They mock such acts and make them the subject of jest and play, because this is what these acts represent in their misguided minds and cold hearts. Allah said;\nمِّنَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ مِن قَبْلِكُمْ وَالْكُفَّارَ\n(from those who received the Scriptures before you and (nor) the disbelievers...) This is to clarify the particular category (of disbelievers). As Allah said,\nفَاجْتَنِبُوا الرِّجْسَ مِنَ الْأَوْثَانِ\n(So shun the evil of the idols...)[22:30] So some recited it \"Kuffari\", making it an object of the preposition, and others recited it \"Kuffara\", making it a predicate noun;\nلَا تَتَّخِذُوا الَّذِينَ اتَّخَذُوا دِينَكُمْ هُزُوًا وَلَعِبًا مِّنَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ مِن قَبْلِكُمْ\n(Take not as friends those who take your religion for a mockery and fun from those who received the Scriptures before you...) with the meaning of \"nor\",\nوَالْكُفَّارَ أَوْلِيَاءَ\n(nor the disbelievers as friends)\nThat is, do not take these people nor those people as friends. The meaning here of \"Kuffar\" [disbelievers] is idolators.\nSimilarly, Ibn Jarir recorded that in the recitation of Ibn Mas'ud [in place of \"Kuffar\" he recited it: \"and those who commit Shirk. Allah's statement,\nوَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ إِن كُنتُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ\n(And have Taqwa of Allah if you indeed are true believers.) means, fear Allah and do not take the enemies of you and your religion as friends, if you believe in Allah's Law and religion that these people mocked and jested about. Allah said in another Ayah,\nلَّا يَتَّخِذِ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ الْكَافِرِينَ أَوْلِيَاءَ مِن دُونِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَمَن يَفْعَلْ ذَٰلِكَ فَلَيْسَ مِنَ اللَّهِ فِي شَيْءٍ إِلَّا أَن تَتَّقُوا مِنْهُمْ تُقَاةً وَيُحَذِّرُكُمُ اللَّهُ نَفْسَهُ وَإِلَى اللَّهِ الْمَصِيرُ\n(Let not the believers take the disbelievers as friends instead of the believers, and whoever does that, will never be helped by Allah in any way, except if you indeed fear a danger from them. And Allah warns you against Himself, and to Allah is the final return.)\n\n## The Disbelievers Mock the Prayer and the Adhan\n\nAllah said,\nوَإِذَا نَادَيْتُمْ إِلَى الصَّلَاةِ اتَّخَذُوهَا هُزُوًا وَلَعِبًا\n(And when you proclaim the call for the Salah, they take it (but) as a mockery and fun;)\nWhen you proclaim the Adhan for the prayer, which is the best action there is, for those who have sound minds and good comprehension,\nاتَّخَذُوهَا\n(they take it...) also,\nهُزُوًا وَلَعِبًا ذَٰلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ قَوْمٌ لَّا يَعْقِلُونَ\n(as a mockery and fun; that is because they are a people who understand not.) the acts of worship and Allah's Law. These are the characteristics of the followers of Shaytan who,\nإِذَا سَمِعَ الْأَذَانَ أَدْبَرَ وَلَهُ حُصَاصٌ، أَيْ ضُرَاطٌ، حَتَّى لَا يَسْمَعَ التَّأْذِينَ فَإِذَا قُضِيَ التَّأْذِينُ، أَقْبَلَ فَإِذَا ثُوِّبَ لِلصَّلَاةِ أَدْبَرَ، فَإِذَا قُضِيَ التَّثْوِيبُ أَقْبَلَ حَتَّى يَخْطُرَ بَيْنَ الْمَرْءِ وَقَلْبِهِ، فَيَقُولُ: اذْكُرْ كَذَا اذْكُرْ كَذَا، لِمَا لَمْ يَكُنْ يَذْكُرُ حَتَّى يَظَلَّ الرَّجُلُ لَا يَدْرِي كَمْ صَلَّى، فَإِذَا وَجَدَ أَحَدُكُمْ ذلِكَ، فَلْيَسْجُدْ سَجْدَتَيْنِ قَبْلَ السَّلَامِ\n(When the call for prayer is made, Shaytan takes to his heels passing wind so that he may not hear the Adhan. When the call is finished he comes back, and when the Iqamah is pronounced, Shaytan again takes to his heels. When the Iqamah is finished he comes back again and tries to interfere with the person and his thoughts and to say, 'Remember this and that,' which he has not thought of before the prayer, until the praying person forgets how much he has prayed. If anyone of you does not remember, then he should perform two prostrations before pronouncing the Salam.) This Hadith is agreed upon. Az-Zuhri said, \"Allah mentioned the Adhan in His Book,\nوَإِذَا نَادَيْتُمْ إِلَى الصَّلَاةِ اتَّخَذُوهَا هُزُوًا وَلَعِبًا ذَٰلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ قَوْمٌ لَّا يَعْقِلُونَ\n(And when you proclaim the call for the Salah, they take it (but) as a mockery and fun; that is because they are a people who understand not.)\" Ibn Abi Hatim recorded this statement.","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=57","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:59","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:59–63","text":"Say: \"O People of the Scripture! Do you criticize us for no other reason than that we believe in Allah, and in what has been sent down to us and in that which has been sent down before (us), and that most of you are rebellious? (59)Say: \"Shall I inform you of something worse than that, regarding the recompense from Allah: those who incurred the curse of Allah and His wrath, and those of whom He transformed into monkeys and swine, and those who worshipped Taghut; such are worse in rank, and far more astray from the straight path. (60)When they come to you, they say: \"We believe.\" But in fact they enter with disbelief and they go out with the same. And Allah knows all that they were hiding (61)And you see many of them hurrying for sin and transgression, and eating illegal things. Evil indeed is that which they have been doing (62)Why do not the 'Rabbāniyyūn' and the 'Aḥbār' forbid them from uttering sinful words and from eating illegal things. Evil indeed is that which they have been performing (63)\n\n## The People of the Book are Enraged at the Believers Because of their Faith in Allah\n\nAllah commands: Say, O Muhammad, to those who mock and jest about your religion from among the People of the Scriptures,\nهَلْ تَنقِمُونَ مِنَّا إِلَّا أَنْ آمَنَّا بِاللَّهِ وَمَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْنَا وَمَا أُنزِلَ مِن قَبْلُ\n(Do you criticize us for no other reason than that we believe in Allah, and in what has been sent down to us and in that which has been sent down before (us))\nDo you have any criticism or cause of blame for us, other than this? This, by no means, is cause of blame or criticism. Allah said in other Ayat,\nوَمَا نَقَمُوا مِنْهُمْ إِلَّا أَن يُؤْمِنُوا بِاللَّهِ الْعَزِيزِ الْحَمِيدِ\n(And they had no fault except that they believed in Allah, the Almighty, Worthy of all praise!)[85:8] and,\nوَمَا نَقَمُوا إِلَّا أَنْ أَغْنَاهُمُ اللَّهُ وَرَسُولُهُ مِن فَضْلِهِ\n(and they could not find any cause to do so except that Allah and His Messenger had enriched them of His bounty.)[9:74] In an agreed upon Hadith, the Prophet ﷺ said,\nمَا يَنْقِمُ ابْنُ جَمِيلٍ إِلَّا أَنْ كَانَ فَقِيرًا فَأَغْنَاهُ اللهُ\n(What caused Ibn Jamil to Yanqim (refuse to give Zakah), although he was poor and Allah made him rich?) Allah's statement,\nوَأَنَّ أَكْثَرَكُمْ فَاسِقُونَ\n(and that most of you are rebellious...) is connected to\nأَنْ آمَنَّا بِاللَّهِ وَمَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْنَا وَمَا أُنزِلَ مِن قَبْلُ\n(that we believe in Allah, and in that which has been sent down to us and in that which has been sent down before (us).)\nTherefore, the meaning of this part of the Ayah is: we also believe that most of you are rebellious and deviated from the straight path.\n\n## The People of the Scriptures Deserve the Worst Torment on the Day of Resurrection\n\nAllah said next,\nقُلْ هَلْ أُنَبِّئُكُم بِشَرٍّ مِّن ذَٰلِكَ مَثُوبَةً عِندَ اللَّهِ\n(Say: \"Shall I inform you of something worse than that, regarding the recompense from Allah\") The Ayah commands the Prophet ﷺ to say: Shall I inform you about a worse people with Allah on the Day of Resurrection than what you think of us? They are you, with these characteristics,\nمَن لَّعَنَهُ اللَّهُ\n(those who incurred the curse of Allah) were expelled from His mercy,\nوَغَضِبَ عَلَيْهِ\n(and who incurred His wrath) and anger, after which He will never be pleased with them,\nوَجَعَلَ مِنْهُمُ الْقِرَدَةَ وَالْخَنَازِيرَ\n(those of whom He transformed into monkeys and swine,) as we mentioned in Surat Al-Baqarah (2) and as we will mention in Surat Al-A'raf (7). Sufyan Ath-Thawri narrated that Ibn Mas'ud said, \"Allah's Messenger ﷺ was asked if the current monkeys and swine were those whom Allah transformed. He said,\nإنَّ اللهَ لَمْ يُهْلِكْ قَوْمًا، أَوْ لَمْ يَمْسَخْ قَوْمًا فَيَجْعَلَ لَهُمْ نَسْلًا وَلَا عَقِبًا، وَإِنَّ الْقِرَدَةَ وَالْخَنَازِيرَ كَانَتْ قَبْلَ ذلِكَ\n(Allah never destroyed a people by transforming them and making offspring or descendants for them. The monkeys and swine existed before that.)\" This was also recorded by Muslim. Allah said,\nوَعَبَدَ الطَّاغُوتَ\n(Those who worshipped Taghut...) and served them, becoming their servants. The meaning of this Ayah is: you, O People of the Scriptures, who mock our religion, which consists of Allah's Tawhid, and singling Him out in worship without others, how can you mock us while these are your characteristics? This is why Allah said,\nأُولَٰئِكَ شَرٌّ مَّكَانًا\n(such are worse in rank...) than what you – People of the Scriptures – think of us Muslims,\nوَأَضَلُّ عَن سَوَاءِ السَّبِيلِ\n(and far more astray from the straight path.) 'More' in the Ayah does not mean that the other party is 'less' astray, but it means that the People of the Scriptures are far astray. In another Ayah, Allah said,\nأَصْحَابُ الْجَنَّةِ يَوْمَئِذٍ خَيْرٌ مُّسْتَقَرًّا وَأَحْسَنُ مَقِيلًا\n(The dwellers of Paradise will, on that Day, have the best abode, and have the fairest of places for repose.)\n\n## The Hypocrites Pretend to be Believers but Hide their Kufr\n\nAllah said,\nوَإِذَا جَاءُوكُمْ قَالُوا آمَنَّا وَقَد دَّخَلُوا بِالْكُفْرِ وَهُمْ قَدْ خَرَجُوا بِهِ\n(When they come to you, they say, \"We believe.\" But in fact they enter with (an intention of) disbelief and they go out with the same.)\nThis is the description of the hypocrites, for they pretend to be believers while their hearts hide Kufr. So Allah said;\nوَقَد دَّخَلُوا\n(But in fact they enter) on you, O Muhammad,\nبِالْكُفْرِ\n(with disbelief) in their hearts and they depart with Kufr, and this is why they do not benefit from the knowledge they hear from you, nor does the advice and reminder move them. So,\nوَهُمْ قَدْ خَرَجُوا بِهِ\n(and they go out with the same) meaning, they alone,\nوَاللَّهُ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا كَانُوا يَكْتُمُونَ\n(and Allah knows all that they were hiding.) Allah knows their secrets and what their hearts conceal, even if they pretend otherwise with His creatures, thus pretending to be what they are not. Allah, Who has perfect knowledge of the seen and unseen, has more knowledge about the hypocrites than any of His creatures do and He will recompense them accordingly. Allah's statement,\nوَتَرَىٰ كَثِيرًا مِّنْهُمْ يُسَارِعُونَ فِي الْإِثْمِ وَالْعُدْوَانِ وَأَكْلِهِمُ السُّحْتَ\n(And you see many of them (Jews) hurrying for sin and transgression, and eating illegal things.)\nThey hurry to devour prohibited and illegal things, all the while transgressing against people, unjustly consuming their property through bribes and Riba,\nلَبِئْسَ مَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ\n(Evil indeed is that which they have been doing.) Indeed, horrible is that which they used to do and the transgression that they committed.\n\n## Criticizing Rabbis and Learned Religious Men for Giving up on Forbidding Evil\n\nAllah said,\nلَوْلَا يَنْهَاهُمُ الرَّبَّانِيُّونَ وَالْأَحْبَارُ عَن قَوْلِهِمُ الْإِثْمَ وَأَكْلِهِمُ السُّحْتَ لَبِئْسَ مَا كَانُوا يَصْنَعُونَ\n(Why do not the 'Rabbāniyyūn' and the 'Aḥbār' forbid them from uttering sinful words and from eating illegal things. Evil indeed is that which they have been performing.) meaning why don't the 'Rabbāniyyūn' and the 'Aḥbār' forbid them from this evil? The 'Rabbāniyyūn' are the scholars who are in positions of authority, while the 'Aḥbār' are the regular scholars.\nلَبِئْسَ مَا كَانُوا يَصْنَعُونَ\n(Evil indeed is that which they have been performing.) referring to the 'Rabbāniyyūn', as 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported from Ibn 'Abbas, because they abandoned forbidding evil. Ibn Jarir recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"There is no Ayah in the Qur'an that has more severe admonition than this Ayah,\nلَوْلَا يَنْهَاهُمُ الرَّبَّانِيُّونَ وَالْأَحْبَارُ عَن قَوْلِهِمُ الْإِثْمَ وَأَكْلِهِمُ السُّحْتَ لَبِئْسَ مَا كَانُوا يَصْنَعُونَ\n(Why do not the 'Rabbāniyyūn' and the 'Aḥbār' forbid them from uttering sinful words and from eating illegal things. Evil indeed is that which they have been performing.)\"\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that Yahya bin Ya'mar said, \" 'Ali bin Abi Talib once gave a speech, which he started by praising Allah and thanking Him. He then said, 'O people! Those who were before you were destroyed because they committed sins and the 'Rabbāniyyūn' and 'Aḥbār' did not forbid them from evil. When they persisted in sin, they were overcome by punishment. Therefore, enjoin righteousness and forbid evil before what they suffered also strikes you. Know that enjoining righteousness and forbidding evil does not reduce the provision or shorten the term of life.\" Imam Ahmad recorded that Jarir said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَا مِنْ قَوْمٍ يَكُونُ بَيْنَ أَظْهُرِهِمْ مَنْ يَعْمَلُ بِالْمَعَاصِي هُمْ أَعَزُّ مِنْهُ وَأَمْنَعُ، وَلَمْ يُغَيِّرُوا إِلَّا أَصَابَهُمُ اللهُ مِنْهُ بِعَذَابٍ\n(There is no people among whom there are those who commit sins, while the rest are more powerful and mightier than the sinners, yet they do not stop them, but Allah will send a punishment upon them.) Ahmad was alone with this wording. Abu Dawud recorded it, but in his narration Jarir said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ saying,\nمَا مِنْ رَجُلٍ يَكُونُ فِي قَوْمٍ يُعْمَلُ فِيهِمْ بِالْمَعَاصِي، يَقْدِرُونَ أَنْ يُغَيِّرُوا عَلَيْهِ، فَلَا يُغَيِّرُوا إِلَّا أَصَابَهُمُ اللهُ بِعِقَابٍ قَبْلَ أَنْ يَمُوتُوا\n(There is no one who resides among people commiting evil among them, and they do not stop him though they are able to do so, but Allah will punish them [all] before they die.)\" Ibn Majah also recorded this Hadith.","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=59","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:64","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:64–66","text":"The Jews say: \"Allah's Hand is tied up.\" Be their hands tied up and be they accursed for what they uttered. Nay, both His Hands are widely outstretched. He spends as He wills. Verily, the revelation that has come to you from your Lord makes many of them increase in rebellion and disbelief. We have put enmity and hatred among them till the Day of Resurrection. Every time they kindled the fire of war, Allah extinguished it; and they (ever) strive to make mischief on the earth. And Allah does not like the mischief-makers (64)And if only the People of the Scripture had believed and had Taqwa, We would indeed have expiated for them their sins and admitted them to Gardens of pleasure (in Paradise)(65)And if only they had acted according to the Tawrah, the Injil, and what has (now) been sent down to them from their Lord (the Qur'an), they would surely have gotten provision from above them and from underneath their feet. And among them is a Muqtasid Ummah, but for most of them; evil is their work (66)\n\n## The Jews Say That Allah's Hand is Tied up!\n\nAllah states that the Jews, may Allah's continuous curses descend on them until the Day of Resurrection, describe Him as a miser. Allah is far holier than what they attribute to Him. The Jews also claim that Allah is poor, while they are rich. 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas commented on Allah's statement,\nوَقَالَتِ الْيَهُودُ يَدُ اللَّهِ مَغْلُولَةٌ\n(The Jews say, \"Allah's Hand is tied up.\") \"They do not mean that Allah's Hand is literally tied up. Rather, they mean that He is a miser and does not spend from what He has. Allah is far holier than what they attribute to Him.\" Similar was reported from Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Qatadah, As-Suddi and Ad-Dahhak. Allah said in another Ayah,\nوَلَا تَجْعَلْ يَدَكَ مَغْلُولَةً إِلَىٰ عُنُقِكَ وَلَا تَبْسُطْهَا كُلَّ الْبَسْطِ فَتَقْعُدَ مَلُومًا مَّحْسُورًا\n(And let not your hand be tied (like a miser) to your neck, nor stretch it forth to its utmost reach (like a spendthrift), so that you become blameworthy and in severe poverty.)[17:29]\nIn this Ayah, Allah prohibits stinginess and extravagance, which includes unnecessary and improper expenditures. Allah describes stinginess by saying,\nوَلَا تَجْعَلْ يَدَكَ مَغْلُولَةً إِلَىٰ عُنُقِكَ\n(And let not your hand be tied (like a miser) to your neck.) Therefore, this is the meaning that the Jews meant, may Allah's curses be on them. 'Ikrimah said that this Ayah was revealed about Finhas, one of the Jews, may Allah curse him. We mentioned before that Finhas said,\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ فَقِيرٌ وَنَحْنُ أَغْنِيَاءُ\n(\"Truly, Allah is poor and we are rich!\") and that Abu Bakr smacked him. Allah has refuted what the Jews attribute to Him and cursed them in retaliation for their lies and fabrications about Him. Allah said,\nغُلَّتْ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَلُعِنُوا بِمَا قَالُوا\n(Be their hands tied up and be they accursed for what they uttered.) What Allah said occurred, for the Jews are indeed miserly, envious, cowards and tremendously humiliated. Allah said in other Ayat,\nأَمْ لَهُمْ نَصِيبٌ مِّنَ الْمُلْكِ فَإِذًا لَّا يُؤْتُونَ النَّاسَ نَقِيرًا - أَمْ يَحْسُدُونَ النَّاسَ عَلَىٰ مَا آتَاهُمُ اللَّهُ مِن فَضْلِهِ فَقَدْ آتَيْنَا آلَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ الْكِتَابَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ وَآتَيْنَاهُم مُّلْكًا عَظِيمًا\n(Or have they a share in the dominion? Then in that case they would not give mankind even a Naqir. Or do they envy men for what Allah has given them of His bounty? Then, We had already given the family of Ibrahim the Book and the Hikmah, and conferred upon them a great kingdom.) and,\nضُرِبَتْ عَلَيْهِمُ الذِّلَّةُ\n(Indignity is put over them.)[3:112]\n\n## Allah's Hands are Widely Outstretched\n\nAllah said next,\nبَلْ يَدَاهُ مَبْسُوطَتَانِ يُنفِقُ كَيْفَ يَشَاءُ\n(Nay, both His Hands are widely outstretched. He spends (of His bounty) as He wills.)\nAllah's favors are ample, His bounty unlimited, as He owns the treasures of everything. Any good that reaches His servants is from Him alone, without partners. He has created everything that we need by night or by day, while traveling or at home and in all situations and conditions. Allah said,\nوَآتَاكُم مِّن كُلِّ مَا سَأَلْتُمُوهُ وَإِن تَعُدُّوا نِعْمَتَ اللَّهِ لَا تُحْصُوهَا إِنَّ الْإِنسَانَ لَظَلُومٌ كَفَّارٌ\n(And He gave you of all that you asked for, and if you count the blessings of Allah, never will you be able to count them. Verily, man is indeed an extreme wrongdoer, an extreme ingrate.)\nThere are many other Ayat on this subject. Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal said that 'Abdur-Razzaq narrated to him that Ma'mar said that Hammam bin Munabbih said, \"This is what Abu Hurayrah narrated to us that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ يَمِينَ اللهِ مَلْأَى، لَا يَغِيضُهَا نَفَقَةٌ، سَحَّاءُ اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ، أَرَأَيْتُمْ مَا أَنْفَقَ مُنْذُ خَلَقَ السَّمٰوَات وَالْأَرْضَ، فَإِنَّهُ لَمْ يَغِضْ مَا فِي يَمِينِهِ - قال - : وَعَرْشُهُ عَلَى الْمَاءِ، وَفِي يَدِهِ الْأَخُرى الْقَبْضُ يَرْفَعُ وَيَخْفِضُ\n(Allah's Right Hand is perfectly full, and no amount of spending can decrease what He has, even though He spends by night and by day. Do you see how much Allah has spent since He created the heavens and earth? Yet surely it has not decreased what He has in His Right Hand. His Throne is over the water and in His Other Hand is the hold by which He raises and lowers.) He also said,\nقُولُ اللهُ تَعَالىٰ: أَنْفِقْ، أُنْفِقْ عَلَيْكَ\n(Allah said, 'Spend and I will spend on you.')\"\nThis Hadith was recorded in the Two Sahihs.\n\n## The Revelation to the Muslims only Adds to the Transgression and Disbelief of the Jews\n\nAllah said,\nوَلَيَزِيدَنَّ كَثِيرًا مِّنْهُم مَّا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْكَ مِن رَّبِّكَ طُغْيَانًا وَكُفْرًا\n(Verily, the revelation that has come to you from your Lord makes many of them increase in rebellion and disbelief.) meaning, the bounty that comes to you, O Muhammad, is a calamity for your enemies, the Jews and their kind. The more the revelation increases the believers in faith, good works, and beneficial knowledge, the more the disbelievers increase in envy for you and your Ummah, the more they increase in Tughyan – which is to exceed the ordained limits for things – and in disbelief – meaning denial of you. Allah said in other Ayat,\nقُلْ هُوَ لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا هُدًى وَشِفَاءٌ وَالَّذِينَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ فِي آذَانِهِمْ وَقْرٌ وَهُوَ عَلَيْهِمْ عَمًى أُولَٰئِكَ يُنَادَوْنَ مِن مَّكَانٍ بَعِيدٍ\n(Say: \"It is for those who believe, a guide and a healing. And as for those who disbelieve, there is heaviness (deafness) in their ears, and it is blindness for them. They are those who are called from a place far away.\")[41:44] and,\nوَنُنَزِّلُ مِنَ الْقُرْآنِ مَا هُوَ شِفَاءٌ وَرَحْمَةٌ لِّلْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَلَا يَزِيدُ الظَّالِمِينَ إِلَّا خَسَارًا\n(And We send down of the Qur'an that which is a healing and a mercy to those who believe, and it increases wrongdoers in nothing but loss.)[17:82] Allah said next,\nوَأَلْقَيْنَا بَيْنَهُمُ الْعَدَاوَةَ وَالْبَغْضَاءَ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ\n(We have put enmity and hatred among them till the Day of Resurrection.)\nTherefore, their hearts are never united. Rather, their various groups and sects will always have enmity and hatred for each other, because they do not agree on the truth, and because they opposed you and denied you. Allah's statement,\nكُلَّمَا أَوْقَدُوا نَارًا لِّلْحَرْبِ أَطْفَأَهَا اللَّهُ\n(Every time they kindled the fire of war, Allah extinguished it;) means, every time they try to plot against you and kindled the fire of war, Allah extinguishes it and makes their plots turn against them. Therefore, their evil plots will return to harm them.\nوَيَسْعَوْنَ فِي الْأَرْضِ فَسَادًا وَاللَّهُ لَا يُحِبُّ الْمُفْسِدِينَ\n(and they (ever) strive to make mischief on earth. And Allah does not like the mischief-makers.)\nIt is their habit to always strive to cause mischief on the earth, and Allah does not like those with such behavior.\n\n## Had the People of the Book Adhered to their Book, they Would Have Acquired the Good of this Life and the Hereafter\n\nAllah said next,\nوَلَوْ أَنَّ أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ آمَنُوا وَاتَّقَوْا\n(And if only the People of the Scripture had believed and had Taqwa...)\nConsequently, had the People of the Book believed in Allah and His Messenger ﷺ and avoided the sins and prohibitions that they committed;\nلَكَفَّرْنَا عَنْهُمْ سَيِّئَاتِهِمْ وَلَأَدْخَلْنَاهُمْ جَنَّاتِ النَّعِيمِ\n(We would indeed have expiated for them their sins and admitted them to Gardens of pleasure (in Paradise).) meaning We would have removed the dangers from them and granted them their objectives.\nوَلَوْ أَنَّهُمْ أَقَامُوا التَّوْرَاةَ وَالْإِنجِيلَ وَمَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْهِم مِّن رَّبِّهِمْ\n(And if only they had acted according to the Tawrah, the Injil, and what has (now) been sent down to them from their Lord,) meaning, the Qur'an, as Ibn 'Abbas and others said.\nلَأَكَلُوا مِن فَوْقِهِمْ وَمِن تَحْتِ أَرْجُلِهِم\n(they would surely have gotten provision from above them and from underneath their feet.)\nHad they adhered to the Books that they have with them which they inherited from the Prophets, without altering or changing these Books, these would have directed them to follow the truth and implement the revelation that Allah sent Muhammad ﷺ with. These Books testify to the Prophet's truth and command that he must be followed. Allah's statement,\nلَأَكَلُوا مِن فَوْقِهِمْ وَمِن تَحْتِ أَرْجُلِهِم\n(they would surely have gotten provision from above them and from underneath their feet.) refers to the tremendous provision that would have descended to them from the sky and grown for them on the earth. Allah said in another Ayah,\nوَلَوْ أَنَّ أَهْلَ الْقُرَىٰ آمَنُوا وَاتَّقَوْا لَفَتَحْنَا عَلَيْهِم بَرَكَاتٍ مِّنَ السَّمَاءِ وَالْأَرْضِ\n(And if the people of the towns had believed and had Taqwa, certainly, We should have opened for them blessings from the heaven and the earth.)[7:96] Allah's statement,\nمِّنْهُمْ أُمَّةٌ مُّقْتَصِدَةٌ وَكَثِيرٌ مِّنْهُمْ سَاءَ مَا يَعْمَلُونَ\n(And among them is a Muqtasid Ummah, but for most of them; evil is their work.) is similar to Allah's statement,\nوَمِن قَوْمِ مُوسَىٰ أُمَّةٌ يَهْدُونَ بِالْحَقِّ وَبِهِ يَعْدِلُونَ\n(And of the people of Musa there is a community who lead (the men) with truth and establish justice therewith.)[7:159] and His statement about the followers of 'Isa, peace be upon him,\nفَآتَيْنَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مِنْهُمْ أَجْرَهُمْ\n(So We gave those among them who believed, their (due) reward.)[57:27]\nTherefore, Allah gave them the highest grade of Iqtisad, which is the middle course, given to this Ummah. Above them there is the grade of Sabiqun, as Allah described in His statement;\nثُمَّ أَوْرَثْنَا الْكِتَابَ الَّذِينَ اصْطَفَيْنَا مِنْ عِبَادِنَا فَمِنْهُمْ ظَالِمٌ لِّنَفْسِهِ وَمِنْهُم مُّقْتَصِدٌ وَمِنْهُمْ سَابِقٌ بِالْخَيْرَاتِ بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ ذَٰلِكَ هُوَ الْفَضْلُ الْكَبِيرُ - جَنَّاتُ عَدْنٍ يَدْخُلُونَهَا يُحَلَّوْنَ فِيهَا مِنْ أَسَاوِرَ مِن ذَهَبٍ وَلُؤْلُؤًا وَلِبَاسُهُمْ فِيهَا حَرِيرٌ\n(Then We gave the Book as inheritance to such of Our servants whom We chose. Then of them are some who wrong themselves, and of them are some who follow a middle course, and of them are some who, by Allah's permission, are Sabiq (foremost) in good deeds. That itself is indeed a great grace. 'Adn (Eden) Paradise (everlasting Gardens) will they enter, therein will they be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls, and their garments there will be of silk.)[35:32-33]","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=64","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:67","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:67","text":"O Messenger! Convey what has been sent down to you from your Lord. And if you do not, then you have not conveyed His Message. Allah will protect you from mankind. Verily, Allah guides not the people who disbelieve (67)\n\n## Commanding the Prophet (ﷺ) to Convey the Message; Promising Him Immunity and Protection\n\nAllah addresses His servant and Messenger Muhammad by the title 'Messenger' and commands him to convey all that He has sent him, a command that the Prophet ﷺ has fulfilled in the best manner.\nAl-Bukhari recorded that 'A'ishah said, \"Whoever says to you that Muhammad hid any part of what Allah revealed to him, then he is uttering a lie. Allah said,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الرَّسُولُ بَلِّغْ مَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْكَ مِن رَّبِّكَ\n(O Messenger! Convey what has been sent down to you from your Lord.)\"\nAl-Bukhari collected the short form of this story here, but mentioned the full narration in another part of his book. Muslim in the Book of Iman, At-Tirmidhi, and An-Nasa'i in the Book of Tafsir of their Sunans also collected this Hadith. In is recorded in the Two Sahihs that 'A'ishah said, \"If Muhammad hid anything from the Qur'an, he would have hidden this Ayah,\nوَتُخْفِي فِي نَفْسِكَ مَا اللَّهُ مُبْدِيهِ وَتَخْشَى النَّاسَ وَاللَّهُ أَحَقُّ أَن تَخْشَاهُ\n(But you did hide in yourself that which Allah will make manifest, you did fear the people while Allah had a better right that you should fear Him.)\"\nAl-Bukhari recorded that Az-Zuhri said, \"From Allah comes the Message, for the Messenger is its deliverance and for us is submission to it.\" The Ummah of Muhammad ﷺ has testified that he has delivered the Message and fulfilled the trust, when he asked them during the biggest gathering in his speech during the Farewell Hajj. At that time, there were over forty thousand of his Companions. Muslim recorded that Jabir bin 'Abdullah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said in his speech on that day,\nأَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّكُمْ مَسْؤُولُونَ عَنِّي، فَمَا أَنْتُمْ قَائِلُونَ؟\n(O people! You shall be asked about me, so what are you going to reply?) They said, \"We bear witness that you have conveyed (the Message), fulfilled (the trust) and offered sincere advice.\" The Prophet ﷺ kept raising his finger towards the sky and then pointing at them, saying,\nاللَّهُمَّ هَلْ بَلَّغْتُ؟ اللَّهُمَّ هَلْ بَلَّغْتُ؟\n(O Allah! Did I convey? O Allah! Did I convey?) Allah's statement,\nوَإِن لَّمْ تَفْعَلْ فَمَا بَلَّغْتَ رِسَالَتَهُ\n(And if you do not, then you have not conveyed His Message.) meaning: If you do not convey to the people what I sent to you, then you have not conveyed My Message. Meaning, the Prophet ﷺ knows the consequences of this failure. 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas commented on the Ayah,\nوَإِن لَّمْ تَفْعَلْ فَمَا بَلَّغْتَ رِسَالَتَهُ\n(And if you do not, then you have not conveyed His Message.) \"It means, if you hide only one Ayah that was revealed to you from your Lord, then you have not conveyed His Message.\" Allah's statement,\nوَاللَّهُ يَعْصِمُكَ مِنَ النَّاسِ\n(Allah will protect you from mankind.) means, you convey My Message and I will protect, aid and support you over your enemies and will grant you victory over them. Therefore, do not have any fear or sadness, for none of them will be able to touch you with harm. Before this Ayah was revealed, the Prophet ﷺ was being guarded, as Imam Ahmad recorded that 'A'ishah said that the Prophet ﷺ was vigilant one night when she was next to him; she asked him, \"What is the matter, O Allah's Messenger?\" He said,\nلَيْتَ رَجُلًا صَالِحًا مِنْ أَصْحَابِي يَحْرُسُنِي اللَّيْلَةَ\n(Would that a pious man from my companions guard me tonight!) She said, \"Suddenly we heard the clatter of arms. The Prophet ﷺ said,\nمَنْ هَذَا؟\n(Who is that?\") He (the new comer) replied, \"I am Sa'd bin Malik (Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas).\" The Prophet ﷺ asked,\nمَا جَاءَ بِكَ؟\n(What brought you here?) He said, \"I have come to guard you, Allah's O Messenger.\" 'A'ishah said, \"So, the Prophet slept (that night) and I heard the noise of sleep coming from him.)\" This Hadith is recorded in Two Sahihs.\nAnother narration for this Hadith reads, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ was vigilant one night, after he came to Al-Madinah...\", meaning, after the Hijrah and after the Prophet consummated his marriage to 'A'ishah in the second year of Hijrah.\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that 'A'ishah said, \"The Prophet ﷺ was being guarded until this Ayah,\nوَاللَّهُ يَعْصِمُكَ مِنَ النَّاسِ\n(Allah will protect you from mankind) was revealed.\" She added; \"The Prophet ﷺ raised his head from the room and said;\nيَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ! انْصَرِفُوا فَقَدْ عَصَمَنِي اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ\n(O people! Go away, for Allah will protect me.)\" At-Tirmidhi recorded it and said,\"This Hadith is Gharib.\" It was also recorded by Ibn Jarir, and Al-Hakim in his Mustadrak, where he said, \"Its chain is Sahih, but they did not record it.\" Allah's statement,\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ الْكَافِرِينَ\n(Verily, Allah guides not those who disbelieve.) means, O Muhammad, you convey, and Allah guides whom He wills, and misguides whom He wills. In other Ayat, Allah said,\nلَّيْسَ عَلَيْكَ هُدَاهُمْ وَلَٰكِنَّ اللَّهَ يَهْدِي مَن يَشَاءُ\n(Not upon you is their guidance, but Allah guides whom He wills,)[2:272] and,\nفَإِنَّمَا عَلَيْكَ الْبَلَاغُ وَعَلَيْنَا الْحِسَابُ\n(Your duty is only to convey and on Us is the reckoning.)[13:40]","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=67","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:68","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:68–69","text":"Say: \"O People of the Scripture! You have nothing till you act according to the Tawrah, the Injil, and what has (now) been sent down to you from your Lord (the Qur'an).\" Verily, the revelation that has come to you from your Lord makes many of them increase in rebellion and disbelief. So do not grieve for the people who disbelieve (68)Surely, those who believe, and those who are the Jews and the Sabians and the Christians, whosoever believed in Allah and the Last Day, and worked righteousness, on them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve (69)\n\n## There is no Salvation Except through Faith in the Qur'an\n\nAllah says: O Muhammad, say,\nيَا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ لَسْتُمْ عَلَىٰ شَيْءٍ\n(O People of the Scripture! You have nothing...) meaning no real religion until you adhere to and implement the Tawrah and the Injil. That is, until you believe in all the Books that you have that Allah revealed to the Prophets. These Books command following Muhammad ﷺ and believing in his prophecy, all the while adhering to his Law. Before, we explained Allah's statement,\nوَلَيَزِيدَنَّ كَثِيرًا مِّنْهُم مَّا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْكَ مِن رَّبِّكَ طُغْيَانًا وَكُفْرًا\n(Verily, the revelation that has come to you from your Lord makes many of them increase in rebellion and disbelief.)\nفَلَا تَأْسَ عَلَى الْقَوْمِ الْكَافِرِينَ\n(So do not grieve for the people who disbelieve), Do not be sad or taken aback by their disbelief. Allah said next,\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا\n(Surely, those who believe) referring to Muslims,\nوَالَّذِينَ هَادُوا\n(those who are the Jews) who were entrusted with the Tawrah,\nوَالصَّابِئُونَ\n(and the Sabians...) a sect from the Christians and Magians who did not follow any particular religion, as Mujahid stated. As for the Christians, they are known and were entrusted with the Injil. The meaning here is that if each of these groups believed in Allah and the Hereafter, which is the Day of Judgement and Reckoning, and performed good actions, which to be so, must conform to Muhammad's Law, after Muhammad ﷺ was sent to all mankind and the Jinns. If any of these groups held these beliefs, then they shall have no fear of what will come or sadness regarding what they lost, nor will grief ever affect them. We discussed a similar Ayah before in Surat Al-Baqarah [2:62].","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=68","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:70","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:70–71","text":"Verily, We took the covenant of the Children of Israel and sent Messengers to them. Whenever there came to them a Messenger with what they themselves desired not, a group of them they called liars, and others among them they killed (70)They thought there will be no Fitnah (trial or punishment), so they became blind and deaf; after that Allah turned to them (with forgiveness); yet again many of them became blind and deaf. And Allah is the All-Seer of what they do (71)\nAllah reminds that He took the covenant and pledges from the Children of Israel to hear and obey Him and His Messenger. They broke these pledges and covenants and followed their lusts and desires instead of the law, and whichever part of the law they agreed with, they took it. Otherwise, they abandoned it, if it did not conform to their desires. This is why Allah said,\nكُلَّمَا جَاءَهُمْ رَسُولٌ بِمَا لَا تَهْوَىٰ أَنفُسُهُمْ فَرِيقًا كَذَّبُوا وَفَرِيقًا يَقْتُلُونَ - وَحَسِبُوا أَلَّا تَكُونَ فِتْنَةٌ فَعَمُوا وَصَمُّوا\n(Whenever there came to them a Messenger with what they themselves desired not - a group of them they called liars, and others among them they killed. They thought there will be no Fitnah (trial or punishment) so they became blind and deaf.)\nthinking that they would suffer no repercussions for of the evil that they committed. Consequently, they were blinded from the truth and became deaf, incapable of hearing the truth. For these reasons they were unable to be guided by it. Allah forgave that, then,\nعَمُوا وَصَمُّوا\n(yet they became blind and deaf) again,\nكَثِيرٌ مِّنْهُمْ وَاللَّهُ بَصِيرٌ بِمَا يَعْمَلُونَ\n(many of them, and Allah is the All-Seer of what they do.) He has perfect knowledge of what they do and whomever among them deserves the guidance and whomever deserves misguidance.","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=70","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:72","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:72–75","text":"Surely, they have disbelieved who say: \"Allah is the Messiah ['Isa], son of Maryam.\" But the Messiah said: \"O Children of Israel! worship Allah, my Lord and your Lord.\" Verily, whosoever sets up partners (in worship) with Allah, then Allah has forbidden Paradise for him, and the Fire will be his abode. And for the wrongdoers there are no helpers (72)Surely, they have disbelieved who say: \"Allah is the third of three.\" And there is no god but One God (Allah). And if they cease not from what they say, verily, a painful torment will befall on the disbelievers among them (73)Will they not repent to Allah and ask His forgiveness For Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful (74)The Messiah ['Isa], son of Maryam, was no more than a Messenger; many were the Messengers that passed away before him. His mother [Maryam] was a Siddiqah. They both used to eat food. Look how We make the Ayat clear to them; yet look how they are deluded away (from the truth)(75)\n\n## The Disbelief of the Christians; 'Isa Only called to Tawhid\n\nAllah states that the Christians such sects as Monarchite, Jacobite and Nestorite are disbelievers, those among them who say that 'Isa is Allah. Allah is far holier than what they attribute to Him. They made this claim in spite of the fact that 'Isa made it known that he was the servant of Allah and His Messenger. The first words that 'Isa uttered when he was still a baby in the cradle were, \"I am 'Abdullah (the servant of Allah).\" He did not say, \"I am Allah,\" or, \"I am the son of Allah.\" Rather, he said,\nإِنِّي عَبْدُ اللَّهِ آتَانِيَ الْكِتَابَ وَجَعَلَنِي نَبِيًّا\n(Verily, I am a servant of Allah, He has given me the Scripture and made me a Prophet.)[19:30] until he said,\nوَإِنَّ اللَّهَ رَبِّي وَرَبُّكُمْ فَاعْبُدُوهُ هَٰذَا صِرَاطٌ مُّسْتَقِيمٌ\n(\"And verily Allah is my Lord and your Lord. So worship Him (Alone). That is the straight path.\")[19:36]\nHe also proclaimed to them when he was a man, after he was sent as a Prophet, commanding them to worship his Lord and their Lord, alone without partners,\nوَقَالَ الْمَسِيحُ يَا بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ رَبِّي وَرَبَّكُمْ إِنَّهُ مَن يُشْرِكْ بِاللَّهِ\n(But the Messiah said, \"O Children of Israel! worship Allah, my Lord and your Lord.\" Verily, whosoever sets up partners with Allah...) in worship;\nفَقَدْ حَرَّمَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِ الْجَنَّةَ وَمَأْوَاهُ النَّارُ\n(...then Allah has forbidden Paradise for him, and the Fire will be his abode.) as He will send him to the Fire and forbid Paradise for him. Allah also said;\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَغْفِرُ أَن يُشْرَكَ بِهِ وَيَغْفِرُ مَا دُونَ ذَٰلِكَ لِمَن يَشَاءُ\n(Verily, Allah forgives not that partners should be set up with Him (in worship), but He forgives except that (anything else) to whom He wills.)[4:48] and,\nوَنَادَىٰ أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ أَصْحَابَ الْجَنَّةِ أَنْ أَفِيضُوا عَلَيْنَا مِنَ الْمَاءِ أَوْ مِمَّا رَزَقَكُمُ اللَّهُ قَالُوا إِنَّ اللَّهَ حَرَّمَهُمَا عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ\n(And the dwellers of the Fire will call to the dwellers of Paradise; \"Pour on us some water or anything that Allah has provide you with.\" They will say: \"Allah has forbidden both to the disbelievers.\")\nIt is recorded in the Sahih that the Prophet ﷺ had someone proclaim to the people,\nإِنَّ الْجَنَّةَ لَا يَدْخُلُهَا إِلَّا نَفْسٌ مُسْلِمَةٌ\n(Only a Muslim soul shall enter Paradise.) In another narration,\nمُؤْمِنَةٌ\n(Only a believing soul...) This is why Allah said that 'Isa said to the Children of Israel,\nإِنَّهُ مَن يُشْرِكْ بِاللَّهِ فَقَدْ حَرَّمَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِ الْجَنَّةَ وَمَأْوَاهُ النَّارُ وَمَا لِلظَّالِمِينَ مِنْ أَنصَارٍ\n(Verily, whosoever sets up partners with Allah, then Allah has forbidden Paradise for him, and the Fire will be his abode. And there are no helpers for the wrongdoers.)\nThere is no help from Allah, nor anyone who will support or protect them from the state they will be in. Allah's statement,\nلَّقَدْ كَفَرَ الَّذِينَ قَالُوا إِنَّ اللَّهَ ثَالِثُ ثَلَاثَةٍ\n(Surely, they have disbelieved who say: \"Allah is the third of three.\")\nMujahid and several others said that this Ayah was revealed about the Christians in particular. As-Suddi and others said that this Ayah was revealed about taking 'Isa and his mother as gods besides Allah, thus making Allah the third in a trinity. As-Suddi said, \"This is similar to Allah's statement towards the end of the Surah,\nوَإِذْ قَالَ اللَّهُ يَا عِيسَى ابْنَ مَرْيَمَ أَأَنتَ قُلْتَ لِلنَّاسِ اتَّخِذُونِي وَأُمِّيَ إِلَٰهَيْنِ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ قَالَ سُبْحَانَكَ\n(And (remember) when Allah will say: \"O 'Isa, son of Maryam! Did you say unto men: 'Worship me and my mother as two gods besides Allah?' He will say, \"Glory be to You!\")[5:116]. Allah replied,\nوَمَا مِنْ إِلَٰهٍ إِلَّا إِلَٰهٌ وَاحِدٌ\n(But there is no god but One God.) meaning there are not many worthy of worship but there is only One God without partners, and He is the Lord of all creation and all that exists. Allah said next, while threatening and admonishing them,\nوَإِن لَّمْ يَنتَهُوا عَمَّا يَقُولُونَ\n(And if they cease not from what they say,) their lies and false claims,\nلَيَمَسَّنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنْهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ\n(verily, a painful torment will befall the disbelievers among them.) in the Hereafter, shackled and tormented. Allah said next,\nأَفَلَا يَتُوبُونَ إِلَى اللَّهِ وَيَسْتَغْفِرُونَهُ وَاللَّهُ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ\n(Will they not repent to Allah and ask His Forgiveness For Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.)\nThis demonstrates Allah's generosity, kindness and mercy for His creatures, even though they committed this grave sin and invented such a lie and false allegation. Despite all of this, Allah calls them to repent so that He will forgive them, for Allah forgives those who sincerely repent to Him.\n\n## Isa is Allah's Servant and His Mother is a Truthful Believer\n\nAllah said,\nمَّا الْمَسِيحُ ابْنُ مَرْيَمَ إِلَّا رَسُولٌ قَدْ خَلَتْ مِن قَبْلِهِ الرُّسُلُ\n(The Messiah, son of Maryam, was no more than a Messenger; many were the Messengers that passed away before him.)\n'Isa is just like the previous Prophets, and he is one of the servants of Allah and one of His honorable Messengers. Allah said in another Ayah,\nإِنْ هُوَ إِلَّا عَبْدٌ أَنْعَمْنَا عَلَيْهِ وَجَعَلْنَاهُ مَثَلًا لِّبَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ\n(He ['Isa] was not more than a servant. We granted Our favor to him, and We made him an example for the Children of Israel.)[43:59] Allah said next,\nوَأُمُّهُ صِدِّيقَةٌ\n(His mother was a Siddiqah) for she believed in Allah with complete trust in Him. This is the highest rank she was given, which proves that she was not a Prophet. Allah said next,\nكَانَا يَأْكُلَانِ الطَّعَامَ\n(They both used to eat food) needing nourishment and to relieve the call of nature. Therefore, they are just servants like other servants, not gods as ignorant Christian sects claim, may Allah's continued curses cover them until the Day of Resurrection. Allah said next,\nانظُرْ كَيْفَ نُبَيِّنُ لَهُمُ الْآيَاتِ\n(Look how We make the Ayat clear to them.) making them unequivocal and plain,\nثُمَّ انظُرْ أَنَّىٰ يُؤْفَكُونَ\n(yet look how they are deluded away (from the truth).) look at the opinions, misguided ideas, and claims they cling to, even after Our clarification and plain, unequivocal explanation.","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=72","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:76","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:76–77","text":"Say: \"How do you worship besides Allah something which has no power either to harm or to benefit you? But it is Allah Who is the All-Hearer, All-Knower. (76)Say: \"O People of the Scripture! Exceed not the limits in your religion beyond the truth, and do not follow the vain desires of people who went astray before and who misled many, and strayed (themselves) from the right path. (77)\n\n## The Prohibition of Shirk (Polytheism) and Exaggeration in the Religion\n\nAllah admonishes those who take up rivals with Him and worship the idols, monuments and false deities. Allah states that such false deities do not deserve any degree of Divinity. Allah said,\nقُلْ\n(Say) O Muhammad, to those from among the Children of Adam, such as the Christians, who worship other than Allah,\nأَتَعْبُدُونَ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ مَا لَا يَمْلِكُ لَكُمْ ضَرًّا وَلَا نَفْعًا\n(How do you worship besides Allah something which has no power either to harm or to benefit you?) meaning, which cannot prevent harm for you nor bring about your benefit,\nوَاللَّهُ هُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ\n(But it is Allah Who is the All-Hearer, All-Knower.) He hears what His servants say and has knowledge of all things. Therefore, how did you worship inanimate objects that do not hear, see or know anything - having no power to bring harm or benefit to themselves let alone others - instead of worshipping Allah? Allah then said,\nقُلْ يَا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ لَا تَغْلُوا فِي دِينِكُمْ غَيْرَ الْحَقِّ\n(Say: \"O People of the Scipture! Exceed not the limits in your religion beyond the truth,)\nMeaning: Do not exceed the limits concerning the truth and exaggeration in praising whom you were commanded to honor. You exaggerated in his case and elevated him from the rank of Prophet to the rank of a god. You did this with 'Isa, who was a Prophet, yet you claimed that he is god besides Allah. This error occurred because you followed your teachers, the advocates of misguidance who came before your time and who,\nوَأَضَلُّوا كَثِيرًا وَضَلُّوا عَن سَوَاءِ السَّبِيلِ\n(...and who misled many, and strayed (themselves) from the right path,) deviated from the straight path, to the path of misguidance and deviation.","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=76","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:78","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:78–81","text":"Those among the Children of Israel who disbelieved were cursed by the tongue of Dawud and 'Isa, son of Maryam. That was because they disobeyed (Allah and the Messengers) and were ever transgressing (beyond the bounds)(78)They used not to forbid one another from the evil they committed. Vile indeed was what they used to do (79)You see many of them taking the disbelievers as their friends. Evil indeed is that which they have sent forward before themselves; for that (reason) Allah is wrath with them, and in torment they will abide (80)And had they believed in Allah, and in the Prophet and in what has been revealed to him, never would they have taken them as friends; but many of them are rebellious (81)\n\n## Allah Cursed the Disbelievers Among the Children of Israel\n\nAllah states that He has cursed the disbelievers among the Children of Israel long ago, and revealed this fact to His Prophets Dawud and 'Isa, son of Maryam. He cursed them because they disobeyed Allah and transgressed against His creatures. Al-'Awfi reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"They were cursed in the Tawrah, the Injil, the Zabur (Psalms) and the Furqan (Qur'an).\" Allah then states that during their time, their habit was that,\nكَانُوا لَا يَتَنَاهَوْنَ عَن مُّنكَرٍ فَعَلُوهُ\n(They used not to forbid one another from the evil they committed.)\nThey did not forbid each other from committing sins and the prohibitions. Allah chastised them for this behavior, so that their behavior would not be imitated. Allah said,\nلَبِئْسَ مَا كَانُوا يَفْعَلُونَ\n(Vile indeed was what they used to do.)\n\n## Hadiths that Order Enjoining Righteousness and Forbidding Evil\n\nThere are many Hadiths that order enjoining righteousness and forbidding evil. Imam Ahmad recorded that Hudhayfah bin Al-Yaman said that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nوَالَّذِي نَفْسِي بِيَدِهِ، لَتَأْمُرُنَّ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ، وَلَتَنْهَوُنَّ عَنِ الْمُنْكَرِ، أَوْ لَيُوشِكَنَّ اللهُ أَنْ يَبْعَثَ عَلَيْكُمْ عِقَابًا مِنْ عِنْدِهِ، ثُمَّ لَتَدْعُنَّهُ فَلَا يَسْتَجِيبَ لَكُم\n(By He in Whose Hand is my soul! You will enjoin righteousness and forbid evil, or Allah will send a punishment on you from Him. Then, you will supplicate to Him, but He will not accept your supplication.) At-Tirmidhi also recorded it and said, \"This Hadith is Hasan.\"\nMuslim recorded that Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَنْ رَأَى مِنْكُمْ مُنْكَرًا فَلْيُغَيِّرْهُ بِيَدِهِ، فَإِنْ لَمْ يَسْتَطِعْ فَبِلِسَانِهِ، فَإِنْ لَمْ يَسْتَطِعْ فَبِقَلْبِهِ، وَذلِكَ أَضْعَفُ الْإِيمَانِ\n(He among you who witnesses an evil, let him change it with his hand, if he cannot do that, then by his tongue, if he cannot do even that, then with his heart, and this is the weakest faith.)\nAbu Dawud said that Al-'Urs, meaning Ibn 'Amirah, said that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nإِذَا عُمِلَتِ الْخَطِيئَةُ فِي الْأَرْضِ كَانَ مَنْ شَهِدَهَا فَكَرِهَهَا، - وَقَالَ مَرَّةً فَأَنْكَرَهَا - كَانَ كَمَنْ غَابَ عَنْهَا، وَمَنْ غَابَ عَنْهَا فَرَضِيَهَا كَانَ كَمَنْ شَهِدَهَا\n(When sin is committed on the earth, then whoever witnesses it and hates - (once he said): forbids it, will be like those who did not witness it. Whoever was absent from it, but agreed with it, will be like those who witness it.)\nOnly Abu Dawud recorded this Hadith. Abu Dawud recorded that one of the Companions said that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nلَنْ يَهْلِكَ النَّاسُ حَتَّى يَعْذِرُوا أَوْ يُعْذِرُوا مِنْ أَنْفُسِهِم\n(The people will not perish until they do not leave - or - have any excuse for themselves.) Ibn Majah recorded that Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ gave a speech once and said,\nأَلَا لَا يَمْنَعَنَّ رَجُلًا هَيْبَةُ النَّاسِ أَنْ يَقُولَ الْحَقَّ إِذَا عَلِمَهُ\n(Behold! Fear from people should not prevent one from saying the truth if he knows it.) Abu Sa'id then cried and said, \"By Allah! We have seen some errors, but we feared (the people).\"\nAnother Hadith that Abu Sa'id narrated states that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nأَفْضَلُ الْجِهَادِ كَلِمَةُ حَقٍّ عِنْدَ سُلْطَانٍ جَائِرٍ\n(The best Jihad is a word of truth proclaimed before an unjust ruler.) Recorded by Abu Dawud, At-Tirmidhi, and Ibn Majah. At-Tirmidhi said, \"Hasan Gharib from this route of narration.\"\nImam Ahmad recorded that Hudhayfah said that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nلَا يَنْبَغِي لِمُسْلِمٍ أَنْ يُذِلَّ نَفْسَهُ\n(It is not required of the Muslim that he humiliate himself.) They said, 'How does one humiliate himself?\" he said;\nيَتَعَرَّضُ مِنَ الْبَلَاءِ لِمَا لَا يُطِيقُ\n(He takes on trials that he is not capable of enduring.) This was recorded by At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah, and At-Tirmidhi said, \"This Hadith is Hasan Sahih Gharib.\"\n\n## Censuring the Hypocrites\n\nAllah said,\nتَرَىٰ كَثِيرًا مِّنْهُمْ يَتَوَلَّوْنَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا\n(You see many of them taking the disbelievers as their friends.) Mujahid said that this Ayah refers to the hypocrites. Allah's statement,\nلَبِئْسَ مَا قَدَّمَتْ لَهُمْ أَنفُسُهُمْ\n(Evil indeed is that which they have sent forward before themselves;) by giving their loyalty and support to the disbelievers, instead of the believers. This evil act caused them to have hypocrisy in their hearts and brought them the anger of Allah, that will remain with them until the Day of Return. Allah said;\nأَن سَخِطَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِمْ\n(for that (reason) Allah is wrath with them) because of what they did. Allah next said that,\nوَفِي الْعَذَابِ هُمْ خَالِدُونَ\n(in torment they will abide) on the Day of Resurrection. Allah's statement,\nوَلَوْ كَانُوا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللَّهِ وَالنَّبِيِّ وَمَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْهِ مَا اتَّخَذُوهُمْ أَوْلِيَاءَ\n(And had they believed in Allah, and in the Prophet and in what has been revealed to him, never would they have taken them as friends.) meaning, had they sincerely believed in Allah, His Messenger and the Qur'an, they would not have committed the evil act of supporting the disbelievers in secret and being enemies with those who believe in Allah, the Prophet ﷺ and what was revealed to him,\nوَلَٰكِنَّ كَثِيرًا مِّنْهُمْ فَاسِقُونَ\n(but many of them are rebellious). disobedient to Allah and His Messenger and defiant of the Ayat of His revelation that He sent down.","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=78","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:82","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:82–86","text":"Verily, you will find the strongest among men in enmity to the believers the Jews and those who commit Shirk, and you will find the nearest in love to the believers those who say: \"We are Christians.\" That is because among them are priests and monks, and they are not proud (82)And when they listen to what has been sent down to the Messenger, you see their eyes overflowing with tears because of the truth they have recognized. They say: \"Our Lord! We believe; so write us down among the witnesses. (83)\"And why should we not believe in Allah and in that which has come to us of the truth? And we wish that our Lord will admit us along with the righteous people. (84)So because of what they said, Allah awarded them with Gardens under which rivers flow, they will abide therein forever. Such is the reward of good-doers (85)But those who disbelieved and belied Our Ayat, they shall be the dwellers of Hell (86)\n\n## The Reason Behind Revealing these Ayat\n\nSa'id bin Jubayr, As-Suddi and others said that these Ayat were revealed concerning a delegation that An-Najashi (King of Ethiopia) sent to the Prophet ﷺ in order to hear his words and observe his qualities. When the delegation met with the Prophet ﷺ and he recited the Qur'an to them, they embraced Islam, cried and were humbled. Then they returned to An-Najashi and told him what happened. 'Ata' bin Abi Rabah commented, \"They were Ethiopians who embraced Islam when the Muslims who migrated to Ethiopia resided among them.\" Qatadah said, \"They were some followers of the religion of 'Isa, son of Maryam, who when they saw Muslims and heard the Qur'an, they became Muslims without hesitation.\" Ibn Jarir said that these Ayat were revealed concerning some people who fit this description, whether they were from Ethiopia or otherwise. Allah said,\nلَتَجِدَنَّ أَشَدَّ النَّاسِ عَدَاوَةً لِّلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا الْيَهُودَ وَالَّذِينَ أَشْرَكُوا\n(Verily, you will find the strongest among men in enmity to the believers the Jews and those who commit Shirk,)\nThis describes the Jews, since their disbelief is that of rebellion, defiance, opposing the truth, belittling other, people and degrading the scholars. This is why the Jews - may Allah's continued curses descend on them until the Day of Resurrection - killed many of their Prophets and tried to kill the Messenger of Allah ﷺ several times, as well as, performing magic spells against him and poisoning him. They also incited their likes among the polytheists against the Prophet ﷺ. Allah's statement,\nوَلَتَجِدَنَّ أَقْرَبَهُم مَّوَدَّةً لِّلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا الَّذِينَ قَالُوا إِنَّا نَصَارَىٰ\n(and you will find the nearest in love to the believers those who say: \"We are Christians.\") refers to those who call themselves Christians, who follow the religion of the Messiah and the teachings of his Injil. These people are generally more tolerant of Islam and its people, because of the mercy and kindness that their hearts acquired through part of the Messiah's religion. In another Ayah, Allah said;\nوَجَعَلْنَا فِي قُلُوبِ الَّذِينَ اتَّبَعُوهُ رَأْفَةً وَرَحْمَةً وَرَهْبَانِيَّةً\n(And We ordained in the hearts of those who followed him, compassion, mercy, and monasticism...)[57:27].\nIn their book is the saying; \"He who strikes you on the right cheek, then turn the left cheek for him.\" And fighting was prohibited in their creed, and this is why Allah said,\nذَٰلِكَ بِأَنَّ مِنْهُمْ قِسِّيسِينَ وَرُهْبَانًا وَأَنَّهُمْ لَا يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ\n(That is because among them are Qissisin (priests) and Ruhban (monks), and they are not proud.)\nThis means that among them are Qissisin (priests). The word Ruhban refers to one dedicated to worship. Allah said,\nذَٰلِكَ بِأَنَّ مِنْهُمْ قِسِّيسِينَ وَرُهْبَانًا وَأَنَّهُمْ لَا يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ\n(That is because among them are priests and monks, and they are not proud.) This describes them with knowledge, worship and humbleness, along with following the truth and fairness.\nوَإِذَا سَمِعُوا مَا أُنزِلَ إِلَى الرَّسُولِ تَرَىٰ أَعْيُنَهُمْ تَفِيضُ مِنَ الدَّمْعِ مِمَّا عَرَفُوا مِنَ الْحَقِّ\n(And when they listen to what has been sent down to the Messenger, you see their eyes overflowing with tears because of the truth they have recognized.)\nThis refers to the good news that they have about the advent of Muhammad ﷺ,\nيَقُولُونَ رَبَّنَا آمَنَّا فَاكْتُبْنَا مَعَ الشَّاهِدِينَ\n(They say: \"Our Lord! We believe; so write us down among the witnesses.\") who testify to the truth and believe in it.\nوَمَا لَنَا لَا نُؤْمِنُ بِاللَّهِ وَمَا جَاءَنَا مِنَ الْحَقِّ وَنَطْمَعُ أَن يُدْخِلَنَا رَبُّنَا مَعَ الْقَوْمِ الصَّالِحِينَ\n(\"And why should we not believe in Allah and in that which has come to us of the truth And We wish that our Lord will admit us (in Paradise) along with the righteous people.\") Such sect of Christians are those mentioned in Allah's statement,\nوَإِنَّ مِنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَابِ لَمَن يُؤْمِنُ بِاللَّهِ وَمَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْكُمْ وَمَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْهِمْ خَاشِعِينَ لِلَّهِ\n(And there are, certainly, among the People of the Scripture, those who believe in Allah and in that which has been revealed to you, and in that which has been revealed to them, humbling themselves before Allah.)[3:199] and,\nالَّذِينَ آتَيْنَاهُمُ الْكِتَابَ مِن قَبْلِهِ هُم بِهِ يُؤْمِنُونَ - وَإِذَا يُتْلَىٰ عَلَيْهِمْ قَالُوا آمَنَّا بِهِ إِنَّهُ الْحَقُّ مِن رَّبِّنَا إِنَّا كُنَّا مِن قَبْلِهِ مُسْلِمِينَ\n(Those to whom We gave the Scripture before it, they believe in it (the Qur'an). And when it is recited to them, they say, \"We believe in it. Verily, it is the truth from our Lord. Indeed even before it we were Muslims\")[28:52-53], until,\nلَا نَبْتَغِي الْجَاهِلِينَ\n(\"We seek not the ignorant.\")[28:55] This is why Allah said here,\nفَأَثَابَهُمُ اللَّهُ بِمَا قَالُوا\n(So because of what they said, Allah awarded them...) rewarding them for embracing the faith and recognizing and believing in the truth,\nجَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا\n(Gardens under which rivers flow (in Paradise), they will abide therein forever.) and they will never be removed from it, for they will dwell and remain in it forever and ever,\nوَذَٰلِكَ جَزَاءُ الْمُحْسِنِينَ\n(Such is the reward of good-doers) who follow the truth and obey it wherever, whenever and with whomever they find it. Allah then describes the condition of the miserable.\nوَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَكَذَّبُوا بِآيَاتِنَا\n(But those who disbelieved and belied Our Ayat,) defied and opposed them,\nأُولَٰئِكَ أَصْحَابُ الْجَحِيمِ\n(they shall be the dwellers of the (Hell) Fire.) For they are the people of the Fire who will enter and reside in it (eternally).","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=82","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:87","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:87–88","text":"O you who believe! Make not unlawful the good things which Allah has made lawful to you, and transgress not. Verily, Allah does not like the transgressors (87)And eat of the things which Allah has provided for you, lawful and good, and have Taqwa of Allah in Whom you believe (88)\n\n## There is No Monasticism in Islam\n\nAli bin Abi Talhah said that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"This Ayah [5:87] was revealed about some of the Companions of the Prophet ﷺ who said, 'We should cut off our male organs, abandon the desires of this life and travel in the land, just as the Ruhban (monks) do.' When the Prophet ﷺ heard of this statement, he summoned them and asked them if they made this statement and they answered 'Yes.' The Prophet ﷺ said,\nلٰكِنِّي أَصُومُ وَأُفْطِرُ، وَأُصَلِّي، وَأَنَامُ، وَأَنْكِحُ النِّسَاءَ، فَمَنْ أَخَذَ بِسُنَّتِي فَهُوَ مِنِّي، وَمَنْ لَمْ يَأْخُذْ بِسُنَّتِي فَلَيْسَ مِنِّي\n(I fast and break my fast, pray and sleep, and marry women. Whoever follows my Sunnah is of me, and whoever abandons my Sunnah is not of me.)\"\nIbn Abi Hatim also collected this Hadith. Ibn Marduwyah recorded that Al-'Awfi said that Ibn 'Abbas narrated a similar Hadith. It is recorded in the Two Sahihs that 'A'ishah said that some of the Companions asked the wives of the Prophet ﷺ about the acts of worship that he performed in private. One of them said, \"I will not eat meat,\" another said, \"I will not marry women,\" while the third said, \"I will not sleep on the bed.\" When the Prophet ﷺ heard this statement, he said,\nمَا بَالُ أَقْوَامٍ يَقُولُ أَحَدُهُمْ كَذَا وَكَذَا، لكِنِّي أَصُومُ وَأُفْطِرُ، وَأَنَامُ وَأَقُومُ، وَآكُلُ اللَّحْمَ، وَأَتَزَوَّجُ النِّسَاءَ، فَمَنْ رَغِبَ عَنْ سُنَّتِي فَلَيْسَ مِنِّي\n(What is the matter with some people who said such and such? I fast and break the fast, sleep and wake to stand to pray, eat meat, and marry women. He who is not pleased with my Sunnah is not of me.) Allah's statement,\nوَلَا تَعْتَدُوا\n(and transgress not.) means, do not exaggerate and make it hard for yourselves by prohibiting the permissible things. Do not transgress the limits by excessively indulging in the permissible matters; only use of it what satisfies your need; and do not fall into extravagance. Allah said in other Ayat,\nوَكُلُوا وَاشْرَبُوا وَلَا تُسْرِفُوا\n(And eat and drink but waste not by extravagance.)[7:31], and,\nوَالَّذِينَ إِذَا أَنفَقُوا لَمْ يُسْرِفُوا وَلَمْ يَقْتُرُوا وَكَانَ بَيْنَ ذَٰلِكَ قَوَامًا\n(And those, who, when they spend, are neither extravagant nor miserly, but hold a medium (way) between those (extremes).)[25:67]\nSo Allah legislated a medium way between those who are extreme and those who fall into shortcomings, and it does not allow excessive application, nor lack of application. This is why Allah said here,\nلَا تُحَرِّمُوا طَيِّبَاتِ مَا أَحَلَّ اللَّهُ لَكُمْ وَلَا تَعْتَدُوا إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يُحِبُّ الْمُعْتَدِينَ\n(Make not unlawful the good things which Allah has made lawful to you, and transgress not. Verily, Allah does not like the transgressors.) then He said,\nوَكُلُوا مِمَّا رَزَقَكُمُ اللَّهُ حَلَالًا طَيِّبًا\n(And eat of the things which Allah has provided for you, lawful and good,)[5:88], eat of those items that are pure and lawful for you,\nوَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ\n(and have Taqwa of Allah,) in all your affairs, obey Him and seek His pleasure, all the while staying away from defiance and disobedience of Allah,\nوَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ الَّذِي أَنتُم بِهِ مُؤْمِنُونَ\n(and have Taqwa of Allah in Whom you believe.)","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=87","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:89","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:89","text":"Allah will not punish you for what is unintentional in your oaths, but He will punish you for your deliberate oaths; for its expiation feed ten poor, on a scale of the Awsat of that with which you feed your own families; or clothe them; or free a slave. But whosoever cannot afford, then he should fast for three days. That is the expiation for the oaths when you have sworn. And protect your oaths. Thus Allah makes clear to you His Ayat that you may be grateful (89)\n\n## Unintentional Oaths\n\nWe mentioned the subject of unintentional oaths in Surat Al-Baqarah, all praise and thanks are due to Allah, and so we do not need to repeat it here. We also mentioned that the Laghw in oaths refers to one's saying, \"No by Allah,\" or, \"Yes, by Allah,\" unintentionally.\n\n## Expiation for Breaking the Oaths\n\nAllah said,\nوَلَٰكِن يُؤَاخِذُكُم بِمَا عَقَّدتُّمُ الْأَيْمَانَ\n(but He will punish you for your deliberate oaths.) in reference to the oaths that you intend in your hearts,\nفَكَفَّارَتُهُ إِطْعَامُ عَشَرَةِ مَسَاكِينَ\n(for its expiation (a deliberate oath) feed ten poor,), who are needy, not able to find necessities of the life. Allah's statement,\nمِنْ أَوْسَطِ مَا تُطْعِمُونَ أَهْلِيكُمْ\n(on a scale of the Awsat of that with which you feed your own families;) means, \"On the average scale of what you feed your families,\" according to Ibn 'Abbas, Sa'id bin Jubayr and 'Ikrimah. 'Ata' Al-Khurasani commented on the Ayah, \"From the best of what you feed your families\". Allah's statement,\nأَوْ كِسْوَتُهُمْ\n(or clothe them,) refers to clothing each of the ten persons with what is suitable to pray in, whether the poor person was male or female. Allah knows best. Al-'Awfi said that Ibn 'Abbas said that the Ayah means a robe or garment for each poor person (of the ten). Mujahid also said that the least of clothing, referred to in the Ayah, is a garment, and the most is whatever you wish. Al-Hasan, Abu Ja'far Al-Baqir, 'Ata', Tawus, Ibrahim An-Nakha'i, Hammad bin Abi Sulayman and Abu Malik said that it means (giving each of the ten poor persons) a garment each. Allah's statement,\nأَوْ تَحْرِيرُ رَقَبَةٍ\n(or free a slave) refers to freeing a believing slave. In the Muwatta' of Malik, the Musnad of Ash-Shafi'i and the Sahih of Muslim, a lengthy Hadith was recorded that 'Umar bin Al-Hakam As-Sulami said that he once had to free a slave (as atonement) and he brought a black slave girl before the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, who asked her;\nأَيْنَ اللهُ؟\n(Where is Allah?) She said, \"Above the heavens.\" He said,\nمَنْ أَنَا؟\n(Who am I?) She said, \"The Messenger of Allah.\" He said,\nأَعْتِقْهَا فَإِنَّهَا مُؤْمِنَةٌ\n(Free her, for she is a believer.) There are three types of expiation for breaking deliberate oaths, and whichever one chooses, it will suffice, according to the consensus (of the scholars). Allah mentioned the easiest, then the more difficult options, since feeding is easier than giving away clothes, and giving away clothes is easier than freeing a slave. If one is unable to fulfill any of these options, then he fasts for three days for expiation, just as Allah said,\nفَمَن لَّمْ يَجِدْ فَصِيَامُ ثَلَاثَةِ أَيَّامٍ\n(But whosoever cannot afford (that), then he should fast for three days.)\nUbayy bin Ka'b and Ibn Mas'ud and his students read this Ayah as follows, \"Then he should fast three consecutive days.\" Even if this statement was not narrated to us as a part of the Qur'an through Mutawatir narration, it would still be an explanation of the Qur'an by the Companions that has the ruling of being related from the Prophet ﷺ. Allah's statement,\nذَٰلِكَ كَفَّارَةُ أَيْمَانِكُمْ إِذَا حَلَفْتُمْ\n(That is the expiation for the oaths when you have sworn.)[5:89] means, this is the legal way to atone for deliberate oaths,\nوَاحْفَظُوا أَيْمَانَكُمْ\n(And protect your oaths.) Do not leave your broken oaths without paying the expiation for them, according to the meaning given by Ibn Jarir.\nكَذَٰلِكَ يُبَيِّنُ اللَّهُ لَكُمْ آيَاتِهِ\n(Thus Allah makes clear to you His Ayat) and explains them to you,\nلَعَلَّكُمْ تَشْكُرُونَ\n(that you may be grateful.)","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=89","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:90","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:90–93","text":"O you who believe! Khamr, Maysir, Ansab, and Azlam are a Rijs of Shaytan's handiwork. So avoid that in order that you may be successful (90)Shaytan wants only to excite enmity and hatred between you with Khamr and Maysir, and hinder you from the remembrance of Allah and from the Salah (the prayer). So, will you not then abstai (91)And obey Allah and obey the Messenger, and beware. Then if you turn away, you should know that it is Our Messenger's duty to convey in the clearest way (92)Those who believe and do righteous good deeds, there is no sin on them for what they ate, if they have Taqwa and believe and do righteous good deeds, and they (again) have Taqwa and believe, and then (once again) have Taqwa and perform good. And Allah loves the good-doers (93)\n\n## Prohibiting Khamr (Intoxicants) and Maysir (Gambling)\n\nAllah forbids His believing servants from consuming Khamr and Maysir which is gambling. Ibn Abi Hatim recorded that 'Ali bin Abi Talib, the Leader of the Faithful, said that chess is a type of gambling. Ibn Abi Hatim recorded that 'Ata', Mujahid and Tawus, or , two of them, said that every type of gambling, including children's playing with (a certain type of) nuts, is Maysir. Ibn 'Umar said that Al-Maysir means gambling, and this is the same statement that Ad-Dahhak reported from Ibn 'Abbas, who added, \"They used to gamble during the time of Jahiliyyah, until Islam came. Allah then forbade them from this evil behavior.\"\n\n## Meaning of Ansab and Azlam\n\nAl-Ansab were altar stones, in whose vicinity sacrifices were offered (during the time of Jahiliyyah), according to Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, 'Ata', Sa'id bin Jubayr and Al-Hasan. They also said that Al-Azlam were arrows that they used for lotteries to make decisions, as Ibn Abi Hatim narrated. Allah said,\nرِجْسٌ مِّنْ عَمَلِ الشَّيْطَانِ\n(A Rijs of Shaytan's handiwork) meaning, abomination of Shaytan's handiwork, according to 'Ali bin Abi Talhah who reported it from Ibn 'Abbas. Sa'id bin Jubayr said that Rijs means 'sin' while Zayd bin Aslam said; \"An evil handiwork of Shaytan.\"\nفَاجْتَنِبُوهُ\n(So avoid that) avoid all of these abominations,\nلَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ\n(in order that you may be successful.) and this is a statement of encouragement. Allah said next,\nإِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ الشَّيْطَانُ أَن يُوقِعَ بَيْنَكُمُ الْعَدَاوَةَ وَالْبَغْضَاءَ فِي الْخَمْرِ وَالْمَيْسِرِ وَيَصُدَّكُمْ عَن ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ وَعَنِ الصَّلَاةِ فَهَلْ أَنتُم مُّنتَهُونَ\n(Shaytan wants only to excite enmity and hatred between you with Khamr (intoxicants) and Maysir (gambling), and hinder you from the remembrance of Allah and from the Salah (the prayer). So, will you not then abstain) This is a threat and a warning.\n\n## Hadiths that Prohibit Khamr (Intoxicants)\n\nImam Ahmad recorded that Abu Hurayrah said, \"There were three stages to prohibiting Khamr (intoxicants). When the Messenger of Allah ﷺ migrated to Al-Madinah, the people were consuming alcohol and gambling, so they asked the Messenger of Allah ﷺ about these things, Allah revealed,\nيَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْخَمْرِ وَالْمَيْسِرِ قُلْ فِيهِمَا إِثْمٌ كَبِيرٌ وَمَنَافِعُ لِلنَّاسِ\n(They ask you about alcoholic drink and gambling. Say: \"In them is a great sin, and (some) benefit for men.\")[2:219], until the end of the Ayah. The people said, 'They (intoxicants and gambling) were not prohibited for us. Allah only said,\nفِيهِمَا إِثْمٌ كَبِيرٌ وَمَنَافِعُ لِلنَّاسِ\n(In them is a great sin, and (some) benefit for men.)'\nSo they went on drinking Khamr until one day, one of the emigrants lead his companions in the Maghrib prayer and mixed up the Ayat in his recitation. Thereafter, Allah sent down a tougher statement,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَقْرَبُوا الصَّلَاةَ وَأَنتُمْ سُكَارَىٰ حَتَّىٰ تَعْلَمُوا مَا تَقُولُونَ\n(O you who believe! Approach not the Salah (the prayer) when you are in a drunken state until you know (the meaning of) what you utter.)[4:43]\nThen, the people would drink before the time of the prayer so that they would attend the prayer while sober. A firmer Ayah was later revealed,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِنَّمَا الْخَمْرُ وَالْمَيْسِرُ وَالْأَنصَابُ وَالْأَزْلَامُ رِجْسٌ مِّنْ عَمَلِ الشَّيْطَانِ فَاجْتَنِبُوهُ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ\n(O you who believe! Khamr, Maysir, Ansab, and Azlam are an abomination of Shaytan's handiwork. So avoid that in order that you may be successful.)[5:90-91]\nSo they said, 'We abstained, O Lord!' Later, some people said, 'O Allah's Messenger! Some people died in the cause of Allah, while some others died in their beds, but they used to drink alcohol and indulge in gambling, which Allah has made a Rijs of the work of Shaytan.' So Allah sent down,\nلَيْسَ عَلَى الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ جُنَاحٌ فِيمَا طَعِمُوا\n(Those who believe and do righteous good deeds, there is no sin on them for what they ate...)[5:93], until the end of the Ayah. The Prophet ﷺ said,\nلَوْ حُرِّمَ عَلَيْهِمْ لَتَرَكُوهُ كَمَا تَرَكْتُم\n(Had they been made impermissible for them, they would have abandoned them as you have abandoned them.) Ahmad recorded this Hadith.\nImam Ahmad recorded that 'Umar bin Al-Khattab said, \"O Allah! Explain the verdict about Khamr to us clearly.\" The Ayah in Surat Al-Baqarah was revealed,\nيَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْخَمْرِ وَالْمَيْسِرِ قُلْ فِيهِمَا إِثْمٌ كَبِيرٌ\n(They ask you about alcoholic drink and gambling. Say: \"In them is a great sin.\")[2:219]\n'Umar was summoned and this Ayah was recited to him, but he still said, \"O Allah! Make the verdict of Khamr clear to us.\" Then the Ayah in Surat An-Nisa' was revealed,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَقْرَبُوا الصَّلَاةَ وَأَنتُمْ سُكَارَىٰ\n(O you who believe! Do not approach the Salah when you are in a drunken state.)[4:43]\nThereafter, the Prophet ﷺ had someone herald when it was time to pray, \"Those in a drunken state are not to approach the prayer.\" 'Umar was again summoned and the Ayah was recited to him, but he still said, \"O Allah! Make the verdict concerning Khamr clear to us.\" Then, the Ayah in Surat Al-Ma'idah [5:91] was revealed, and 'Umar was summoned and it was recited to him. When he reached the part of the Ayah that reads,\nفَهَلْ أَنتُم مُّنتَهُونَ\n(So, will you not then abstain)[5:91],\nUmar said, \"We abstained, we abstained.\" Abu Dawud, At-Tirmidhi, and An-Nasa'i recorded this Hadith. 'Ali bin Al-Madini and At-Tirmidhi graded it Sahih.\nIt is recorded in the Two Sahihs, that 'Umar bin Al-Khattab said in a speech; while standing on the Minbar of the Messenger of Allah (in the Prophet's Masjid in Al-Madinah) \"O people! The prohibition of Khamr was revealed; and Khamr was extracted from five things: From grapes, dates, honey, wheat and barley. Khamr is what intoxicates the mind.\" Al-Bukhari recorded that Ibn 'Umar said, \"The prohibition of Khamr was revealed when there were five kinds of intoxicants in Al-Madinah, besides what was produced from grapes.\"\n\n## Another Hadith\n\nImam Ahmad recorded that Anas said, \"I once was giving an alcoholic beverage to Abu 'Ubaydah bin Al-Jarrah, 'Ubayy bin Ka'b, Suhayl bin Bayda' and several of their friends meeting at Abu Talhah's house. When they were almost intoxicated, some Muslims came and said, 'Did you not know that Khamr has been prohibited?' They said, 'We'll wait and ask.' They then said, 'O Anas! Spill the remaining alcohol out of your container.' By Allah! They never drank it again, and their Khamr at that time was made from unripe and normal dates.\" This is also recorded in the Two Sahihs. In another narration by Anas, \"I was the butler of the people in the house of Abu Talhah when Khamr was prohibited, and in those days alcohol was made from unripe and normal dates. A caller then heralded, and Abu Talhah ordered me to see what it was about. So I found that a person was announcing that alcoholic drinks had been prohibited. Abu Talhah ordered me to go out and spill the wine. I went out and spilled it, and it flowed in the streets of Al-Madinah. Some people said, 'Some people were killed and wine was still in their stomachs.' Later on, Allah's revelation came,\nلَيْسَ عَلَى الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ جُنَاحٌ فِيمَا طَعِمُوا\n(Those who believe and do righteous good deeds, there is no sin on them for what they ate...)[5:93].\"\nIbn Jarir recorded that Anas bin Malik said, \"I was serving Abu Talhah, Abu 'Ubaydah bin Al-Jarrah, Abu Dujanah, Mu'adh bin Jabal and Suhayl bin Bayda', until they became intoxicated from an alcoholic drink made of mixed unripe and normal dates. Then I heard someone herald, 'Khamr has been made illegal.' So no one went in or out until we spilled the alcohol and broke its barrels. Some of us then performed ablution and others took a shower, and we wore some perfume. We then went out to the Masjid while the Messenger of Allah ﷺ was reciting,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِنَّمَا الْخَمْرُ وَالْمَيْسِرُ وَالْأَنصَابُ وَالْأَزْلَامُ رِجْسٌ مِّنْ عَمَلِ الشَّيْطَانِ فَاجْتَنِبُوهُ\n(O you who believe! Khamr, Maysir, Ansab, and Azlam are only an abomination of Shaytan's handiwork. So avoid that...)[5:90], until,\nفَهَلْ أَنتُم مُّنتَهُونَ\n(So, will you not then abstain?)[5:91]. A man asked, 'O Allah's Messenger! What about those who died drinking it?' Allah sent down the verse,\nلَيْسَ عَلَى الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ جُنَاحٌ فِيمَا طَعِمُوا\n(Those who believe and do righteous good deeds, there is no sin on them for what they ate.)[5:93].\"\n\n## Another Hadith\n\nImam Ahmad recorded that Ibn 'Umar said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nلُعِنَتِ الْخَمْرُ عَلى عَشْرَةِ أَوْجُهٍ: لُعِنَتِ الْخَمْرُ بِعَيْنِهَا، وَشَارِبُهَا، وَسَاقِيهَا، وَبَائِعُهَا، وَمُبْتَاعُهَا، وَعَاصِرُهَا، وَمُعْتَصِرُهَا، وَحَامِلُها، وَالْمَحْمُولَةُ إِلَيْهِ، وَآكِلُ ثَمَنِهَا\n(Ten matters related to Khamr were cursed. Khamr itself was cursed, whoever drinks it, its server, seller, buyer, brewer, who asks for it to be brewed, whoever carries it, whomever it is carried to and whoever consumes its price.) Abu Dawud and Ibn Majah recorded this Hadith.\nAhmad recorded that Ibn 'Umar said, \"Once, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ went out and I went out with him. I walked to his right, but Abu Bakr came along and I gave way to him, and Abu Bakr was walking on the Prophet's right, while I was walking on his left. Then 'Umar came along and he was walking on the Prophet's left, since I gave way to him. The Messenger of Allah then found a leather skin hanging containing alcohol, so he asked for a knife and ordered that the skin be cut open. He then said,\nلُعِنَتِ الْخَمْرُ وَشَارِبُهَا، وَسَاقِيهَا، وَبَائِعُهَا، وَمُبْتَاعُهَا، وَحَامِلُهَا، وَالْمَحْمُولَةُ إِلَيْهِ، وَعَاصِرُهَا وَمُعْتَصِرُهَا، وَآكِلُ ثَمَنِهَا\n(Khamr was cursed, and so are those who drink it, serve it, sell it, buy it, carry it, have it carried to them, brew it, have it brewed and consume its price.)\"\n\n## Another Hadith\n\nAl-Hafiz Abu Bakr Al-Bayhaqi recorded that Sa'd said, \"There were four Ayat revealed about Khamr...\" He then said, \"A man from Al-Ansar made some food and invited us. We drank Khamr before it was prohibited and became intoxicated, and thus started to boast about our status. The Ansar said that they were better, while Quraysh (the Muhajirin) said that they were better. So a man from the Ansar took a bone and struck Sa'd's nose with it and made a flesh wound on it. Ever since that happened, Sa'd's nose had a scar from that wound. The Ayah,\nإِنَّمَا الْخَمْرُ وَالْمَيْسِرُ\n(Intoxicants, gambling,) until,\nفَهَلْ أَنتُم مُّنتَهُونَ\n(So, will you not then abstain?) was later revealed.\" Muslim recorded this Hadith.\n\n## Another Hadith\n\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that 'Abdullah bin 'Amr said, \"This Ayah in the Qur'an,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِنَّمَا الْخَمْرُ وَالْمَيْسِرُ وَالْأَنصَابُ وَالْأَزْلَامُ رِجْسٌ مِّنْ عَمَلِ الشَّيْطَانِ فَاجْتَنِبُوهُ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ\n(O you who believe! Khamr, Maysir, Ansab, and Azlam are only an abomination of Shaytan's handiwork. So avoid that in order that you may be successful.)[5:90], was also in the Tawrah; 'Allah has sent down truth to eradicate falsehood, joyful play, flute or wind instruments, Zafan (dances) and Kibarat (refering to cabarets using the lute and bagpipe), tambourine, guitar, harp and lyric and love poetry. And Khamr is bitter for those who taste it. Allah has vowed by His grace and power, 'Whoever drinks it after I prohibited it, I will make him thirsty on the Day of Resurrection. Whoever abandons it after I prohibited it, I will let him taste it in the residence of Grace (Paradise).'\" Its chain of narration is Sahih\n\n## Another Hadith\n\nAsh-Shafi'i narrated that Malik narrated that Nafi' said that Ibn 'Umar said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَنْ شَرِبَ الْخَمْرَ فِي الدُّنْيَا ثُمَّ لَمْ يَتُبْ مِنْهَا حُرِمَهَا فِي الآخِرَةِ\n(Whoever drinks Khamr in the life of this world and does not repent from it, will be deprived of it in the Hereafter.)\nAl-Bukhari and Muslim recorded this Hadith. Muslim recorded that Ibn 'Umar said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nكُلُّ مُسْكِرٍ خَمْرٌ، وَكُلُّ مُسْكِرٍ حَرَامٌ، وَمَنْ شَرِبَ الْخَمْرَ فَمَاتَ وَهُوَ يُدْمِنُهَا وَلَمْ يَتُبْ مِنْهَا، لَمْ يَشْرَبْهَا فِي الْآخِرَةِ\n(Every intoxicant is Khamr, and every intoxicant is unlawful. Whoever drinks Khamr and dies while addicted to it, without repenting from drinking it, will not drink it in the Hereafter.)\nAbdur-Rahman bin Al-Harith bin Hisham said that he heard 'Uthman bin 'Affan saying, \"Avoid Khamr, for it is the mother of all sins. There was a man before your time who used to worship Allah secluded from the people. Later, an evil woman loved him and sent her female servant to him saying that they wanted him to witness something. So he went with the servant. Whenever they went through the door, she locked it behind them, until he reached a beautiful woman with a young servant boy and some alcohol. She said to him, 'By Allah! I did not invite you to be a witness for anything, but called you to have sex with me, kill this boy or drink this alcohol.' So she gave him some alcohol, and he kept asking for more until he [became intoxicated and] had sex with her and killed the boy. Therefore, avoid Khamr, because it is never combined with faith, but one of them is bound to expel the other (from the heart).\" This was recorded by Al-Bayhaqi. This statement has an authentic chain of narration. Abu Bakr bin Abi Ad-Dunya recorded this statement in his book on the prohibition of intoxicants, but he related it from the Prophet ﷺ. Relating it from 'Uthman is more authentic, and Allah knows best.\nAhmad bin Hanbal recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"When Khamr was prohibited, some people said, 'O Allah's Messenger! What about our brethren who died while still drinking Khamr?' Allah sent down the Ayah\nلَيْسَ عَلَى الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ جُنَاحٌ فِيمَا طَعِمُوا\n(Those who believe and do righteous good deeds, there is no sin on them for what they ate,) until the end of the Ayah. When the Qiblah (direction of the prayer) was changed (from Jerusalem to Makkah), some people asked, 'O Allah's Messenger! What about our brethren who died while still praying toward Jerusalem?' Allah sent down,\nوَمَا كَانَ اللَّهُ لِيُضِيعَ إِيمَانَكُمْ\n(And Allah would never make your faith to be lost.)\"[2:143] 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud said that the Prophet ﷺ said when the Ayah,\nلَيْسَ عَلَى الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ جُنَاحٌ فِيمَا طَعِمُوا إِذَا مَا اتَّقَوا وَّآمَنُوا\n(Those who believe and do righteous good deeds, there is no sin on them for what they ate, if they have Taqwa, and believe...) was revealed,\nقِيلَ لِي: أَنْتَ مِنْهُم\n(I was told, that you are among them.) This is the narration that Muslim, At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa'i collected.","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=90","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:94","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:94–95","text":"O you who believe! Allah will certainly make a trial for you with something in the game that is well within reach of your hands and your lances, that Allah may test who fears Him in the unseen. Then whoever transgresses thereafter, for him there is a painful torment (94)O you who believe! Kill not game while you are in a state of Ihram, and whosoever of you kills it intentionally, the penalty is an offering, brought to the Ka'bah, of livestock equivalent to the one he killed, as adjudged by two just men among you; or, for expiation, he should feed the poor, or its equivalent in fasting, that he may taste the heaviness (punishment) of his deed. Allah has forgiven what is past, but whosoever commits it again, Allah will take retribution from him. And Allah is Almighty, All-Able of Retribution (95)\n\n## Prohibiting Hunting Game in the Sacred Area and During the State of Ihram\n\nAli bin Abi Talhah] Al-Walibi said that Ibn 'Abbas said that Allah's statement,\nلَيَبْلُوَنَّكُمُ اللَّهُ بِشَيْءٍ مِّنَ الصَّيْدِ تَنَالُهُ أَيْدِيكُمْ وَرِمَاحُكُمْ\n(Allah will certainly make a trial for you with something in (the matter of) the game that is well within reach of your hands and your lances,)[5:94], refers to, \"The weak and young game. Allah tests His servants with such game during their Ihram, that if they wish, they would be able to catch it with their hands. Allah has commanded them to avoid catching it.\" Mujahid said that,\nتَنَالُهُ أَيْدِيكُمْ\n(well within reach of your hands) refers to the young game and chicks, while\nوَرِمَاحُكُمْ\n(and your lances,) refers to mature game. Muqatil bin Hayyan said that this Ayah was revealed during the 'Umrah of Al-Hudaybiyyah, when wild game and birds were coming to the Muslim camping area, which they had never seen the likes of before. Allah prohibited them from hunting the game while in the state of Ihram,\nلِيَعْلَمَ اللَّهُ مَن يَخَافُهُ بِالْغَيْبِ\n(that Allah may test who fears Him in the unseen.)\nTherefore, Allah tests His servants with the game that comes near their camping area, for if they wish, they can catch it with their hands and spears in public and secret. This is how the obedience of those who obey Allah in public and secret becomes apparent and tested. In another Ayah, Allah said;\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَخْشَوْنَ رَبَّهُم بِالْغَيْبِ لَهُم مَّغْفِرَةٌ وَأَجْرٌ كَبِيرٌ\n(Verily! Those who fear their Lord in the unseen, theirs will be forgiveness and a great reward (i.e. Paradise).)[67:12] Allah said next,\nفَمَنِ اعْتَدَىٰ بَعْدَ ذَٰلِكَ\n(Then whoever transgresses thereafter.) after this warning and threat, according to As-Suddi, then,\nفَلَهُ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ\n(for him there is a painful torment.) for his defiance of Allah's command and what He has decreed. Allah said next,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَقْتُلُوا الصَّيْدَ وَأَنتُمْ حُرُمٌ\n(O you who believe! Kill not game while you are in a state of Ihram,)\nThis Ayah prohibits killing the game in the state of Ihram, except what is exempt from this as mentioned in the Two Sahihs; 'A'ishah narrated that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nخَمْسٌ فَوَاسِقُ يُقْتَلْنَ فِي الْحِلِّ وَالْحَرَمِ: الْغُرَابُ، وَالْحِدَأَةُ، وَالْعَقْرَبُ، وَالْفَأْرَةُ، وَالْكَلْبُ الْعَقُورُ\n(Five are Fawasiq, they may be killed while in Ihram or not; the crow, the kite, the scorpion, the mouse and the rabid dog.) Ibn 'Umar narrated that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nخَمْسٌ مِنَ الدَّوَابِّ لَيْسَ عَلَى الْمُحْرِمِ فِي قَتْلِهِنَّ جُنَاحٌ: الْغُرَابُ، وَالْحِدَأَةُ، وَالْعَقْرَبُ، وَالْفَأْرَةُ، وَالْكَلْبُ الْعَقُورُ\n(It is not harmful in a state of Ihram to kill five kinds of animals: the crow, the kite, the scorpion, the mouse and the rabid dog.)\nThis Hadith was recorded in the Two Sahihs. Ayyub narrated that Nafi' narrated similar wordings for this Hadith from Ibn 'Umar. Ayyub said, \"So I said to Nafi', 'What about the snake' He said, 'There is no doubt that killing the snake is allowed.'\" The ruling concerning the rabid dog also includes the wolf, lion, leopard, tiger and their like, since they are more dangerous than the rabid dog, or because the term Kalb (dog) covers them. Allah knows best.\nAbu Sa'id narrated that the Prophet ﷺ was asked about the animals that the Muhrim is allowed to kill and he said,\nالحَيَّةُ، وَالْعَقْرَبُ، وَالْفُوَيسِقَةُ، وَيَرْمِي الْغُرَابَ وَلَا يُقْتُلُهُ، وَالْكَلْبُ الْعَقُورُ، وَالحِدَأَةُ، وَالسَّبُعُ العَادِي\n(The snake, the scorpion, the mouse, and the crow - which is shot at but not killed – the rabid dog, the kite and wild beasts of prey.) Abu Dawud recorded this Hadith, as did At-Tirmidhi, who said, \"Hasan\", and Ibn Majah.\n\n## The Penalty of Killing Game in the Sacred Area or in the State of Ihram\n\nAllah said,\nوَمَن قَتَلَهُ مِنكُم مُّتَعَمِّدًا فَجَزَاءٌ مِّثْلُ مَا قَتَلَ مِنَ النَّعَمِ\n(And whosoever of you kills it intentionally, the penalty is [an offering of] livestock equivalent to the one he killed.)\nMujahid bin Jabr said, \"The meaning of 'intentionally' here is that one intends to kill the game while forgetting that he is in the state of Ihram. Whoever intentionally kills the game while aware that he is in the state of Ihram, then this offense is more grave than to make an expiation, and he also loses his Ihram.\" This statement is odd, and the view of majority is that they have to pay the expiation for killing the game whether they forgot that they are in Ihram or not. Az-Zuhri said, \"The Book (the Qur'an) asserts the expiation for intentional killing, and the Sunnah included those who forget, as well.\" The meaning of this statement is that the Qur'an mentioned the expiation and sin of those who intentionally kill game,\nلِّيَذُوقَ وَبَالَ أَمْرِهِ عَفَا اللَّهُ عَمَّا سَلَفَ وَمَنْ عَادَ فَيَنتَقِمُ اللَّهُ مِنْهُ\n(that he may taste the heaviness (punishment) of his deed. Allah has forgiven what is past, but whosoever commits it again, Allah will take retribution from him.) the Sunnah that includes the rulings issued by the Prophet ﷺ and his Companions, indicated the necessity of expiation in cases of unintentional killing of game, just as the Book legislated expiation for intentional killing. Killing game is a form of waste, which requires expiation in intentional and unintentional cases, although those who intend it have sinned, rather than those who made an honest error. Allah's statement,\nفَجَزَاءٌ مِّثْلُ مَا قَتَلَ مِنَ النَّعَمِ\n(The penalty is [an offering of] livestock equivalent to the one he killed.) indicates the necessity of offering an equivalent animal to the one the Muhrim killed. The Companions gave rulings that the camel, for instance, is the equivalent of the ostrich, the cow is the equivalent of wild cattle, and the goat for the deer. As for the cases when there is no equivalent for the killed animal, Ibn 'Abbas said that one should spend its amount in Makkah (i.e. charity), as Al-Bayhaqi recorded. Allah's statement,\nيَحْكُمُ بِهِ ذَوَا عَدْلٍ مِّنكُمْ\n(As adjudged by two just men among you;) means, two just Muslim men should determine an animal equivalent to the game killed, or the amount of its price. Ibn Jarir recorded that Abu Jarir Al-Bajali said, \"I killed a deer when I was in the state of Ihram and mentioned this fact to 'Umar, who said, 'Bring two of your brethren and let them judge you.' So I went to 'Abdur-Rahman and Sa'd and they said that I should offer a male sheep.\" Ibn Jarir recorded that Tariq said, \"Arbad killed a deer while in the state of Ihram and he went to 'Umar to judge him. 'Umar said to him, 'Let us both judge,' and they judged that Arbad should offer a goat that was fed on abundant water and grass. 'Umar commented,\nيَحْكُمُ بِهِ ذَوَا عَدْلٍ مِّنكُمْ\n(As adjudged by two just men among you;).\" Allah's statement,\nهَدْيًا بَالِغَ الْكَعْبَةِ\n(...an offering brought to the Ka'bah.) indicates that this equivalent animal should be brought to the Ka'bah, meaning, the Sacred Area, where it should be slaughtered and its meat divided between the poor of the Sacred Area. There is a consensus on this ruling. Allah said,\nأَوْ كَفَّارَةٌ طَعَامُ مَسَاكِينَ أَوْ عَدْلُ ذَٰلِكَ صِيَامًا\n(or, for expiation, he should feed the poor, or its equivalent in fasting,) that is, if the Muhrim does not find an equivalent to what he killed, or the animal hunted is not comparable to anything else.\n'Ali bin Abi Talhah said that Ibn 'Abbas commented on the Ayah,\nهَدْيًا بَالِغَ الْكَعْبَةِ أَوْ كَفَّارَةٌ طَعَامُ مَسَاكِينَ أَوْ عَدْلُ ذَٰلِكَ صِيَامًا\n(...an offering brought to the Ka'bah, or, for expiation, he should feed the poor, or its equivalent in fasting.)\n\"If the Muhrim killed game, then his judgement is its equivalent. If he kills an antelope, he offers a sheep slaughtered in Makkah. If he cannot, then he feeds six poor people, otherwise he should fast for three days. If he kills a deer, he offers a cow. If unable, he feeds twenty poor people, or otherwise if unable, he fasts for twenty days. If he kills an ostrich or zebra, he offers a camel, or he feeds thirty poor people, or fasts thirty days.\" Ibn Abi Hatim and Ibn Jarir recorded this statement, and in Ibn Jarir's narration, the food measurement is a Mudd (4 handfuls of food) each that suffices for the poor. Allah's statement,\nلِّيَذُوقَ وَبَالَ أَمْرِهِ\n(that he may taste the heaviness (punishment) of his deed.) means, We have required him to pay this expiation so that he tastes the punishment of his error,\nعَفَا اللَّهُ عَمَّا سَلَفَ\n(Allah has forgiven what is past.) during the time of Jahiliyyah, provided that one becomes good in Islam and follows Allah's Law, all the while avoiding the sin. Allah then said,\nوَمَنْ عَادَ فَيَنتَقِمُ اللَّهُ مِنْهُ\n(but whosoever commits it again, Allah will take retribution from him.) meaning, whoever does this after it has been prohibited in Islam and having knowledge that it is prohibited,\nفَيَنتَقِمُ اللَّهُ مِنْهُ وَاللَّهُ عَزِيزٌ ذُو انتِقَامٍ\n(Allah will take retribution from him. And Allah is Almighty, All-Able of retribution.)\nIbn Jurayj said, \"I said to 'Ata', 'What is the meaning of,\nعَفَا اللَّهُ عَمَّا سَلَفَ\n(Allah has forgiven what is past.)?' He said, 'Meaning, during the time of Jahiliyyah.' I asked about,\nوَمَنْ عَادَ فَيَنتَقِمُ اللَّهُ مِنْهُ\n(but whosoever commits it again, Allah will take retribution from him.)\nHe said, 'Whoever commits this offense again in Islam, then Allah will take retribution from him and he also has to pay the expiation.' I asked, 'Is there any punishment for repeating this offense that you know of?' He said, 'No.' I said, 'Do you think that the authorities should punish him?' He said, 'No, for it is a sin that he committed between him and Allah. He should pay the expiation.'\" Ibn Jarir recorded this statement.\nIt was said that the 'Allah will take retribution' refers to the expiation, according to Sa'id bin Jubayr, 'Ata', and the majority among the earlier and later generations. They stated that when the Muhrim kills game, the expiation becomes necessary, regardless of whether it was the first, second or third offense, and whether intentional or by error. Ibn Jarir commented on Allah's statement;\nوَاللَّهُ عَزِيزٌ ذُو انتِقَامٍ\n(And Allah is Almighty, All-Able of retribution.) \"Allah says that He is invincible in His control, none can resist Him, prevent Him from exacting retribution from anyone, or stop Him from punishing anyone. This is because all creation is His creation and the decision is His, His is the might, and His is the control. His statement,\nذُو انتِقَامٍ\n(All-Able of retribution.) meaning, He punishes those who disobey Him for their disobedience of Him.\"","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=94","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:96","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:96–99","text":"Lawful to you is water game and its use for food – for the benefit of yourselves and those who travel, but forbidden is (the pursuit of) land game as long as you are in a state of Ihram. And have Taqwa of Allah to Whom you shall be gathered back (96)Allah has made the Ka'bah, the Sacred House, an asylum of security and benefits for mankind, and also the Sacred Month and the animals of offerings and the garlanded, that you may know that Allah has knowledge of all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth, and that Allah is the All-Knower of each and everything (97)Know that Allah is severe in punishment and that Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful (98)The Messenger's duty is but to convey. And Allah knows all that you reveal and all that you conceal (99)\n\n## Water Game is Allowed for the Muhrim\n\nSa'id bin Al-Musayyib, Sa'id bin Jubayr and others commented on Allah's statement;\nأُحِلَّ لَكُمْ صَيْدُ الْبَحْرِ\n(Lawful to you is (the pursuit of) water game...) that it means, what one eats fresh from it, while,\nوَطَعَامُهُ\n(And its use for food) what is eaten dry and salted. Ibn 'Abbas said that 'water game' refers to what is taken from water while still alive, while,\nوَطَعَامُهُ\n(and its use for food) refers to what the water throws ashore dead. Similar statements were reported from Abu Bakr As-Siddiq, Zayd bin Thabit, 'Abdullah bin 'Amr, Abu Ayyub Al-Ansari, 'Ikrimah, Abu Salamah bin 'Abdur-Rahman, Ibrahim An-Nakha'i and Al-Hasan Al-Basri. Allah's statement,\nمَتَاعًا لَّكُمْ وَلِلسَّيَّارَةِ\n(for the benefit of yourselves and those who travel,) as food and provision for you,\nوَلِلسَّيَّارَةِ\n(and those who travel,) those who are in the sea and traveling along the sea, according to 'Ikrimah. Other scholars said that water game is allowed for those who fish it from the sea, as well as, when it is salted and used as food for travelers inland. A similar statement was reported from Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid and As-Suddi and others. Imam Malik bin Anas recorded that Jabir bin 'Abdullah said, \"Allah's Messenger ﷺ sent an army towards the east coast and appointed Abu 'Ubaydah bin Al-Jarrah as their commander, and the army consisted of three hundred men, including myself. We marched on until we reached a place where our food was about to finish. Abu 'Ubaydah ordered us to collect all the food for our journey, and it was collected in two bags of dates. Abu 'Ubaydah kept on giving us our daily ration in small amounts from it, until it was exhausted. The share of each of us used to be one date only.\" I (one of the narrators from Jabir) said, \"How could one date suffice for you?\" Jabir replied, \"We came to know its value when even that finished.\" Jabir added, \"When we reached the seashore, we saw a huge fish which was like a small mountain. The army ate from it for eighteen days. Then Abu 'Ubaydah ordered that two of its ribs be affixed in the ground. Then he ordered that a she-camel be ridden, and it passed under the two ribs (forming an arch) without touching them.\" This Hadith was also collected in the Two Sahihs.\nMalik recorded that Abu Hurayrah said, \"A man asked Allah's Messenger, 'O Allah's Messenger! We go to sea and carry little water with us. If we use it for Wudu', we get thirsty, so should we use seawater for Wudu?\" The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nهُوَ الطَّهُورُ مَاؤُهُ الْحِلُّ مَيْتَتُهُ\n(Its water is pure and its dead are lawful).\"\nThe two Imams, Ash-Shafi'i and Ahmad bin Hanbal, recorded this Hadith, along with the Four Sunan compilers. Al-Bukhari, At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Hibban graded it Sahih. This Hadith was also recorded from the Prophet ﷺ by several other Companions.\n\n## Hunting Land Game is Prohibited During Ihram\n\nAllah said,\nوَحُرِّمَ عَلَيْكُمْ صَيْدُ الْبَرِّ مَا دُمْتُمْ حُرُمًا\n(but forbidden is land game as long as you are in a state of Ihram.)\nTherefore, hunting land game during Ihram is not allowed, and if someone who is in the state of Ihram hunts, he will have to pay expiation, along with the sin he earns if he does it intentionally. If he hunts by mistake, he will have to pay the expiation and is not allowed to eat from it, because this type of game is just like dead animals, be he a Muhrim or a non-Muhrim.\nIf someone who is not in the state of Ihram hunts and gives the food to a Muhrim, the Muhrim is not allowed to eat from its meat if it was killed for him in particular. As-Sa'b bin Jaththamah said that he gave a zebra as a gift to the Prophet ﷺ in the area of Waddan or Abwa', the Prophet ﷺ gave it back. When the Prophet ﷺ saw the effect of his returning the gift on As-Sa'b's face, he said,\nإِنَّا لَمْ نَرُدَّهُ عَلَيْكَ إِلَّا أَنَّا حُرُمٌ\n(We only gave it back to you because we are in a state of Ihram.)\nThis Hadith was collected in the Two Sahihs. The Prophet ﷺ thought that As-Sa'b hunted the zebra for him, and this is why he refused to take it. Otherwise, the Muhrim is allowed to eat from the game if one who is not in Ihram hunts it. For when Abu Qatadah hunted a zebra when he was not a Muhrim and offered it to those who were in the state of Ihram, they hesitated to eat from it. They asked the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and he said,\nهَلْ كَانَ مِنْكُمْ أَحَدٌ أَشَارَ إِلَيْهَا أَوْ أَعَانَ فِي قَتْلِهَا؟\n(Did any of you point at it or help kill it?) They said, \"No.\" He said,\nفَكُلُوا\n(Then eat,) and he also ate from it. This Hadith is also in the Two Sahihs with various wordings.\n[Ibn Kathir only mentioned Ayat 96 to 99 here and explained the better part of Ayah number 96, but he did not mention the explanation of the rest of that Ayah or the other Ayat (97 to 99). This is the case in all of the copies of his Tafsir in existence, and he might have forgotten to do that, for it is less likely that all who copied this book forgot to copy only this part. So we used a summary of the Tafsir of these Ayat from the Imam of Tafsir, Ibn Jarir At-Tabari. We tried to summarize At-Tabari's eloquent words to the best of our ability, by Allah's help and leave.]\nوَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ الَّذِي إِلَيْهِ تُحْشَرُونَ\n(And have Taqwa of Allah to Whom you shall be gathered back.)\nAllah says, fear Allah, O people, and beware of His might, by obeying what He commands you and avoiding what He prohibits for you in these Ayat revealed to your Prophet ﷺ. These Ayat forbid Khamr, gambling, Al-Ansab and Al-Azlam, along with hunting land game and killing it while in the state of Ihram. To Allah will be your return and destination, and He will punish you for disobeying Him and will reward you for obeying Him.\nجَعَلَ اللَّهُ الْكَعْبَةَ الْبَيْتَ الْحَرَامَ قِيَامًا لِّلنَّاسِ\n(Allah has made the Ka'bah, the Sacred House, an asylum of security and benefits for mankind,)\nAllah says, Allah made the Ka'bah, the Sacred House, an asylum of safety for the people who have no chief to prevent the strong from transgressing against the weak, the evil from the good-doers, and the oppressors from the oppressed.\nوَالشَّهْرَ الْحَرَامَ وَالْهَدْيَ وَالْقَلَائِدَ\n(And also the Sacred Month and the animals of offerings and the garlanded.)\nAllah says that He made these symbols an asylum of safety for the people, just as He made the Ka'bah an asylum of safety for them, so that He distinguishes them from each other, for this is their asylum and symbol for their livelihood and religion. Allah made the Ka'bah, the Sacred Month, the Hady, the garlanded animals and people an asylum of safety for the Arabs who used to consider these symbols sacred. Thus, these symbols were just like the chief who is obeyed by his followers, and who upholds harmony and public safety. As for the Ka'bah, it includes the entire sacred boundary. Allah termed it \"Haram\" because He prohibited hunting its game and cutting its trees or grass. Similarly, the Ka'bah, the Sacred Month, the animals of offerings and the garlands were the landmarks of existing Arabs. These symbols were sacred during the time of Jahiliyyah and the people's affairs were guided and protected by them. With Islam they became the symbols of their Hajj, their rituals, and the direction of the prayer. [i.e., the Ka'bah in Makkah.]\nذَٰلِكَ لِتَعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ يَعْلَمُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ وَأَنَّ اللَّهَ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ عَلِيمٌ\n(that you may know that Allah has knowledge of all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth, and that Allah is the All-Knower of each and everything.)\nAllah says; O people, I made these symbols an asylum for you, so that you know that He Who made these symbols that benefit your life and provide you with security, also knows everything in the heavens and earth that brings about your immediate or eventual benefit. Know that He has perfect knowledge of everything and that none of your deeds or affairs ever escapes His observation; and He will count them for you so that He rewards those who do good with the same and those who do evil in kind.\nاعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ شَدِيدُ الْعِقَابِ وَأَنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ\n(Know that Allah is severe in punishment and that Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.)\nAllah says, know that your Lord, Who has perfect knowledge of whatever is in the heavens and earth, and Who is never unaware of your deeds - public or secret - is severe in punishment for those who disobey and defy Him. He also pardons the sins of those who obey and repent to Him, more Merciful than to punish them for the sins that they repented from.\nمَّا عَلَى الرَّسُولِ إِلَّا الْبَلَاغُ وَاللَّهُ يَعْلَمُ مَا تُبْدُونَ وَمَا تَكْتُمُونَ\n(The Messenger's duty is but to convey. And Allah knows all that you reveal and all that you conceal.)\nThis is a warning from Allah for His servants in which He says: Our Messenger, whom We sent to you, has only to convey Our Message and then the reward for the obedience, and punishment for the disobedience is on Us. The obedience of those who accept Our Message never escapes Our knowledge, just as in the case of those who disobey and defy Our Message. We know what one of you does, demonstrates physically, announces, and utters with his tongue, and what you hide in your hearts, be it of faith, disbelief, certainty, doubt or hypocrisy. He Who is so capable, then nothing that the hearts conceal, nor any of the apparent acts of the souls in the heavens and earth could escape His knowledge. In His Hand, alone, is the reward and punishment, and He is worthy to be feared, obeyed and never disobeyed.","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=96","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:100","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:100–102","text":"Say: \"Not equal are the bad things and the good things, even though the abundance of the bad may please you. \" So have Taqwa of Allah, O men of understanding in order that you may be successful (100)O you who believe! Ask not about things which, if made plain to you, may cause you trouble. But if you ask about them while the Qur'an is being revealed, they will be made plain to you. Allah has forgiven that, and Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Forbearing (101)Before you, a community asked such questions, then on that account they became disbelievers.) Allah says to His Messenger (pbuh (102)\nقُلْ\n(Say,) O Muhammad ﷺ,\nلَّا يَسْتَوِي الْخَبِيثُ وَالطَّيِّبُ وَلَوْ أَعْجَبَكَ\n(Not equal are the bad things and the good things, even though they may please you) O human,\nكَثْرَةُ الْخَبِيثِ\n(the abundance of bad.) This Ayah means, the little permissible is better than the abundant evil.\nفَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ يَا أُولِي الْأَلْبَابِ\n(have Taqwa of Allah, O men of understanding...) who have sound minds, avoid and abandon the impermissible, and let the permissible be sufficient for you,\nلَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ\n(in order that you may be successful.) in this life and the Hereafter.\n\n## Unnecessary Questioning is Disapproved of\n\nAllah said next,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَسْأَلُوا عَنْ أَشْيَاءَ إِن تُبْدَ لَكُمْ تَسُؤْكُمْ\n(O you who believe! Ask not about things which, if made plain to you, may cause you trouble.)\nThis Ayah refers to good conduct that Allah is teaching His believing servants, by forbidding them from asking about useless things. Since if they get the answers they sought, they might be troublesome for them and difficult on their ears. Al-Bukhari recorded that Anas bin Malik said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ gave a speech unlike anything I heard before. In this speech, he said,\nلَو تَعْلَمُونَ مَا أَعْلَمُ، لَضَحِكْتُمْ قَلِيلًا، وَلَبَكَيْتُمْ كَثِيرًا\n(If you but know what I know, you will laugh little and cry a lot.)\nThe companions of Allah's Messenger ﷺ covered their faces and the sound of crying was coming out of their chests. A man asked, 'Who is my father?' The Prophet ﷺ said, 'So-and-so'. This Ayah was later revealed,\nلَا تَسْأَلُوا عَنْ أَشْيَاءَ\n(Ask not about things...).\" Muslim, Ahmad, At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa'i recorded this Hadith.\nIbn Jarir recorded that Qatadah said about Allah's statement,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَسْأَلُوا عَنْ أَشْيَاءَ إِن تُبْدَ لَكُمْ تَسُؤْكُمْ\n(O you who believe! Ask not about things which, if made plain to you, may cause you trouble.)\nAnas bin Malik narrated that once, the people were questioning the Messenger of Allah ﷺ until they made him angry. So he ascended the Minbar and said,\nلَا تَسْأَلُونِي الْيَوْمَ عَنْ شَيْءٍ إِلَّا بَيَّنْتُهُ لَكُم\n(You will not ask me about anything today but I will explain it to you.)\nSo the Companions of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ feared that it was the commencement of a momentous event, and I looked to my right and left and found only people who covered their faces, crying. An argumentative man who was said to be the son of someone other than his true father asked, \"O Allah's Messenger! Who is my father? The Prophet ﷺ said, 'Your father is Hudhafah.\" 'Umar stood up (when he saw anger on the Prophet's face) and said, \"We accept Allah as our Lord, Islam as our religion and Muhammad ﷺ as our Messenger, I seek refuge with Allah from the evil of the Fitan (trials in life and religion).\" The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nلَمْ أَرَ فِي الْخَيْرِ وَالشَّرِّ كَالْيَومِ قَطُّ، صُوِّرَتْ لِي الجَنَّةُ وَالنَّارُ حَتَّى رَأَيْتُهُمَا دُونَ الْحَائِطِ\n(I have never witnessed both goodness and evil like I have today. Paradise and the Fire were shown to me and I saw them before that wall.) This Hadith was recorded in the Two Sahihs from Sa'id.\nAl-Bukhari recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Some people used to question the Messenger of Allah ﷺ to mock him. One of them would ask, 'Who is my father,' while another would ask, 'Where is my camel,' when he lost his camel. Allah sent down this Ayah about them,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَسْأَلُوا عَنْ أَشْيَاءَ إِن تُبْدَ لَكُمْ تَسُؤْكُمْ\n(O you who believe! Ask not about things which, if made plain to you, may cause you trouble...).\"\nImam Ahmad recorded that 'Ali said, \"When this Ayah was revealed,\nوَلِلَّهِ عَلَى النَّاسِ حِجُّ الْبَيْتِ مَنِ اسْتَطَاعَ إِلَيْهِ سَبِيلًا\n(And Hajj to the House is a duty that mankind owes to Allah, those who can bear the journey.)[3:97], they asked, 'O Allah's Messenger! Is it required every year?' He did not answer them, and they asked again, 'Is it every year?' He still did not answer them, so they asked, 'Is it every year?' He said,\nلَا، وَلَوْ قُلْتُ: نَعَمْ لَوَجَبَتْ وَلَوْ وَجَبَتْ لَمَا اسْتَطَعْتُم\n(No, and had I said 'yes', it would have become obligated, and had it become obligated, you would not be able to bear it.) Allah sent down,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَسْأَلُوا عَنْ أَشْيَاءَ إِن تُبْدَ لَكُمْ تَسُؤْكُمْ\n(O you who believe! Ask not about things which, if made plain to you, may cause you trouble.).\"\nAt-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah also recorded this Hadith. The apparent wording of this Ayah indicates that we are forbidden to ask about things that if one has knowledge of, he would be sorry he had asked. Consequently, it is better to avoid such questions. Allah's statement,\nوَإِن تَسْأَلُوا عَنْهَا حِينَ يُنَزَّلُ الْقُرْآنُ تُبْدَ لَكُمْ\n(But if you ask about them while the Qur'an is being revealed, they will be made plain to you.) means, if you ask about things that you are prohibited from asking about, then when the revelation about them comes to the Messenger ﷺ, they will be made plain for you,\nوَذَٰلِكَ عَلَى اللَّهِ يَسِيرٌ\n(Verily! That is easy for Allah.) Allah said next,\nعَفَا اللَّهُ عَنْهَا\n(Allah has forgiven that,) what you did before this,\nوَاللَّهُ غَفُورٌ حَلِيمٌ\n(and Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Forbearing.)\nDo not ask about things that do not have a ruling yet, for because of your questions, a difficult ruling may be ordained. A Hadith states,\nأَعْظَمُ الْمُسْلِمِينَ جُرْمًا مَنْ سَأَلَ عَنْ شَيْءٍ لَمْ يُحَرَّمْ، فَحُرِّمَ مِنْ أَجْلِ مَسْأَلَتِهِ\n(The worst criminal among the Muslims is he who asks if a matter is unlawful (or not), and it becomes unlawful because of his asking about it.)\nIt is recorded in the Sahih that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nذَرُونِي مَا تَرَكْتُكُمْ، فَإِنَّمَا أَهْلَكَ مَنْ كَانَ قَبْلَكُمْ كَثْرَةُ سُؤَالِهِمْ وَاخْتِلَافُهُمْ عَلَى أَنْبِيَائِهِم\n(Leave me as I have left you, those before you were destroyed because of many questions and disputing with their Prophets.) An authentic Hadith also states,\nأَنَّ اللهَ تَعَالَى فَرَضَ فَرَائِضَ فَلَا تُضَيِّعُوهَا، وَحَدَّ حُدُودًا فَلَا تَعْتَدُوهَا، وَحَرَّمَ أَشْيَاءَ فَلَا تَنْتَهِكُوهَا، وَسَكَتَ عَنْ أَشْيَاءَ رَحْمَةً بِكُمْ غَيْرَ نِسْيَانٍ فَلَا تَسْأَلُوا عَنْهَا\n(Allah, the Most Honored, has ordained some obligations, so do not ignore them; has set some limits, so do not trespass them; has prohibited some things, so do not commit them; and has left some things without rulings, out of mercy for you, not that He forgot them, so do not ask about them.) Allah said next,\nقَدْ سَأَلَهَا قَوْمٌ مِّن قَبْلِكُمْ ثُمَّ أَصْبَحُوا بِهَا كَافِرِينَ\n(Before you, a community asked such questions, then on that account they became disbelievers.) meaning, some people before your time asked such questions and they were given answers. They did not believe the answers, so they became disbelievers because of that. This occurred because these rulings were made plain to them, yet they did not benefit at all from that, for they asked about these things not to gain guidance, but only to mock and defy.","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=100","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:103","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:103–104","text":"Allah has not instituted things like Bahirah or a Sa'ibah or a Wasilah or a Ham. But those who disbelieve invent lies against Allah, and most of them have no understanding (103)And when it is said to them: \"Come to what Allah has revealed and unto the Messenger.\" They say: \"Enough for us is that which we found our fathers following,\" even though their fathers had no knowledge whatsoever and no guidance (104)\n\n## The Meaning of Bahirah, Sa'ibah, Wasilah and Ham\n\nAl-Bukhari recorded that Sa'id bin Al-Musayyib said, \"The Bahirah is a female camel whose milk was spared for the idols and no one was allowed to milk it. The Sa'ibah is a female camel let loose for free pasture for the idols, and nothing was allowed to be carried on it. Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nرَأَيْتُ عَمْرَو بْنَ عَامِرٍ الْخُزَاعِيَّ يَجُرُّ قُصْبَهُ فِي النَّارِ، وَكَانَ أَوَّلَ مَنْ سَيَّبَ السَّوَائِبَ\n(I saw 'Amr bin 'Amir Al-Khuza'i pulling his intestines behind him in the Fire, and he was the first to start the practice of Sa'ibah.)\nAs for the Wasilah, it is a female camel set free for the idols, because it had given birth to a she-camel in its first delivery and then another she-camel at its second delivery. They used to set such camel free if she gave birth to two females without a male between them. As for the Ham, it is a male camel which would be freed from work for the idols, after it had finished a number of copulations assigned for it. The male camel freed from work in this case is called a Hami.\" Muslim and An-Nasa'i recorded this Hadith.\nImam Ahmad recorded that 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud said that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ أَوَّلَ مَنْ سَيَّبَ السَّوَائِبَ وَعَبَدَ الْأَصْنَامَ أَبُو خُزَاعَةَ عَمْرُو بْنُ عَامِرٍ، وَإِنِّي رَأَيْتُهُ يَجُرُّ أَمْعَاءَهُ فِي النَّارِ\n(The first to start the practice of Sa'ibah and worshipping idols was Abu Khuza'ah, 'Amr bin 'Amir. I saw him pulling his intestines behind him in the Fire.)\nThe 'Amr mentioned in the above Hadith is the son of Luhay bin Qam'ah, one of the chiefs of the tribe of Khuza'ah who were the caretakers of the House of Allah after the tribe of Jurhum, (and before the Prophet's ﷺ tribe, Quraysh). He was the first to change the religion of Ibrahim (Al-Khalil in Makkah) bringing idol worshipping to the area of Hijaz (Western Arabia). He also called the foolish people to worship idols and offer sacrifices to them and started these ignorant rituals concerning the animals as well as other rituals of Jahiliyyah. Allah said in Surat Al-An'am,\nوَجَعَلُوا لِلَّهِ مِمَّا ذَرَأَ مِنَ الْحَرْثِ وَالْأَنْعَامِ نَصِيبًا\n(And they assign to Allah a share of the tilth and cattle which He has created...)[3:136].\nAs for the Bahirah, 'Ali bin Abi Talhah said that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"It is the female camel that has given delivery five times. After that, they looked at the fifth delivery, if it were a male, they would slaughter it and give it to the men only and not the women. If it were a female, they would cut off its ears and proclaim, 'This is a Bahirah (no one is allowed to milk it).'\" As-Suddi and others mentioned a similar statement. As for the Sa'ibah, Mujahid said that it is for sheep, and mentioned a similar meaning as for Bahirah. He said that it delivers six females and then a male, female or two males, and that they then would slaughter it (the newly born sheep) and feed its meat to the men, but not to the woman.\nMuhammad bin Ishaq said that the Sa'ibah is the female camel that delivers ten females, without giving birth to a single male between them. They would then set it free and no one was allowed to ride it, cut its wool or milk it, except for a guest. Abu Rawq said, \"The Sa'ibah was made as such when one goes out for some of his affairs and succeeds in whatever he intended to do. So he would designate a Sa'ibah from his property, a female camel or another type, and would set it free for the idols (in appreciation for his success). Then, whatever this camel gave birth to was set free for the idols too.\" As-Suddi said, \"When one's affair was successful, or if he was cured from an illness, or if his wealth increased, he would set some of his wealth free for the idols. Those who would try to acquire any of the Sa'ibah property were punished in this world.\"\nAs for the Wasilah, 'Ali bin Abi Talhah said that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"It is the sheep that gives birth seven times, if she gives birth to a male or a female stillborn at its seventh delivery, the men, but not the women, would eat from it. If she gave birth to a female, or a female and a male, they would set them free, proclaiming (about the male in this case), His sister Wasalat (literally, 'connected him to being forbidden on us').\" Ibn Abi Hatim recorded this statement. 'Abdur-Razzaq narrated that Ma'mar said that Az-Zuhri said that Sa'id bin Al-Musayyib said that,\nوَلَا وَصِيلَةٍ\n(Or a Wasilah)\n\"It is the female camel that gives delivery to a female and then another female at its second delivery. They would call such a camel a Wasilah, proclaiming that she has Wasalat (connected) between two females without giving birth to a male between them. So they used to cut off the ears of the Wasilah and let it roam free to pasture for their idols.\" A similar explanation was reported from Imam Malik bin Anas. Muhammad bin Ishaq said, \"The Wasilah sheep is the ewe that gives birth to ten females in five deliveries, giving birth to two females at each delivery. This sheep would be called Wasilah and would be set free. Whatever this sheep delivers afterwards, male or female, would be given to the men, but not the women, but if it delivers a stillborn, men and women would share it!\"\nAs for the Ham, Al-'Awfi said that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"If a man's camel performs ten copulations, they would call him a Ham, 'So set him free.,\" Similar was reported from Abu Rawq and Qatadah. 'Ali bin Abi Talhah said that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"The Ham is the male camel whose offspring gave birth to their own offspring; they would then proclaim, 'This camel has Hama (protected) its back.' Therefore, they would not carry anything on this male camel, cut his wool, prevent him from grazing wherever he likes or drinking from any pool, even if the pool did not belong to its owner.\" Ibn  Wahb said, \"I heard Malik saying, 'As for the Ham, it is the male camel who is assigned a certain number of copulations, and when having finished what was assigned to him, would have peacock feathers placed on him and be set free.'\" Other opinions were also mentioned to explain this Ayah.\nThere is a Hadith on this subject that Ibn Abi Hatim collected from Abu Ishaq As-Subay'i from Al-Ahwas Al-Jushami from his father Malik bin Nadlah who said, \"I came to the Prophet ﷺ wearing old clothes. So he said to me,\nهَلْ لَكَ مِنْ مَالٍ؟\n(Do you have any property?) I said, 'Yes.' He asked,\nمِنْ أَيِّ الْمَالِ؟\n(What type?) I said, 'All types; camels, sheep, horses and slaves.' He said,\nفَإِذَا آتَاكَ اللهُ مَالًا فَلْيُرَ عَلَيْكَ\n(If Allah gives you wealth, then let it show on you.) He then asked,\nتُنْتِجُ إِبِلُكَ وَافِيَةً آذَانُهَا؟\n(Do your camels deliver calves that have full ears?) I said, 'Yes, and do camels give birth but to whole calves?' He said,\nفَلَعَلَّكَ تَأْخُذُ الْمُوسَى فَتَقْطَعَ آذَانَ طَائِفَةٍ مِنْهَا وَتَقُولَ: هَذِهِ بَحِيَرةٌ، تَشُقَّ آذَانَ طَائِفَةٍ مِنْهَا وَتَقُولَ: هَذِهِ حُرِّم\n(Do you take the knife and cut off the ears of some of them saying, 'This is a Bahirah,' and tear the ears of some of them and proclaim, 'This is Sacred?') I said, 'Yes.' He said,\nفَلَا تَفْعَلْ إِنَّ كُلَّ مَا آتَاكَ اللهُ لَكَ حِلٌّ\n(Then do not do that, for all the wealth that Allah has given you is allowed for you.) Then he said;\nمَا جَعَلَ اللَّهُ مِن بَحِيرَةٍ وَلَا سَائِبَةٍ وَلَا وَصِيلَةٍ وَلَا حَامٍ\n(Allah has not instituted things like Bahirah or a Sa'ibah or a Wasilah or a Ham.)\nAs for the Bahirah, it is the animal whose ears were cut, one would not allow his wife, daughters, or any of his household to benefit from its wool, hair or milk. But, if it died, they would share it. As for the Sa'ibah, they used to set it free for their idols and announce this fact in the vicinity of the idols. As for the Wasilah, it is the sheep that gives birth to six offspring. When she delivered for the seventh time, they would cut its ears and horns, saying, 'It has Wasalat (connected deliveries),' and they would not slaughter it, hit it or prevent it from drinking from any pool.\" This Hadith was narrated with the addition of the explanation of these words in it. In another narration for this Hadith from Abu Ishaq from Abu Al-Ahwas, 'Awf bin Malik used his own words (i.e., he explained these words not as a part of the Hadith itself) and this is more sound. Imam Ahmad recorded this Hadith from Sufyan bin 'Uyaynah, from Abu Az-Za'ra' 'Amr bin 'Amr, from his uncle Abu Al-Ahwas 'Awf bin Malik bin Nadlah from his father, Malik bin Nadlah. This narration also does not contain the explanation of Bahirah, Ham etc., that is added to the Hadith above, and Allah knows best.\nAllah's statement,\nوَلَٰكِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا يَفْتَرُونَ عَلَى اللَّهِ الْكَذِبَ وَأَكْثَرُهُمْ لَا يَعْقِلُونَ\n(But those who disbelieve invent lies against Allah, and most of them have no understanding.) means, Allah did not legislate these invented rituals and He does not consider them acts of obedience. Rather, it is the idolators who made them into rituals and acts of worship that they used to draw near to Allah. But they did not and will not help them to draw near to Him, rather, these innovations will only harm them.\nوَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ تَعَالَوْا إِلَىٰ مَا أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ وَإِلَى الرَّسُولِ قَالُوا حَسْبُنَا مَا وَجَدْنَا عَلَيْهِ آبَاءَنَا\n(And when it is said to them: \"Come to what Allah has revealed and to the Messenger.\" They say: \"Enough for us is that which we found our fathers following,\") imeaning, if they are called to Allah's religion, Law and commandments and to avoiding what He prohibited, they say, 'The ways and practices that we found our fathers and forefathers following are good enough for us. ' Allah said,\nأَوَلَوْ كَانَ آبَاؤُهُمْ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ شَيْئًا\n(even though their fathers had no knowledge whatsoever...) That is, even though their fathers did not understand or recognize the truth or find its way. Therefore, who would follow their forefathers, except those who are even more ignorant and misguided than they were?","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=103","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:105","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:105","text":"O you who believe! Take care of yourselves. If you follow the right guidance, no hurt can come to you from those who are in error. The return of you all is to Allah, then He will inform you about (all) that you used to do (105)\n\n## One is Required to Reform Himself First\n\nAllah commands His believing servants to reform themselves and to do as many righteous deeds as possible. He also informs them that whoever reforms himself, he would not be affected by the wickedness of the wicked, whether they were his relatives or otherwise.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Qays said, \"Abu Bakr As-Siddiq stood up, thanked Allah and praised Him and then said, 'O people! You read this Ayah,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا عَلَيْكُمْ أَنفُسَكُمْ لَا يَضُرُّكُم مَّن ضَلَّ إِذَا اهْتَدَيْتُمْ\n(O you who believe! Take care of yourselves. If you follow the right guidance, no hurt can come to you from those who are in error.)\nYou explain it the wrong way. I heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ say,\nإِنَّ النَّاسَ إِذَا رَأَوُا الْمُنْكَرَ وَلَا يُغَيِّرُونَهُ، يُوشِكُ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ أَنْ يَعُمَّهُمْ بِعِقَابِهِ\n(If the people witness evil and do not change it, then Allah is about to send His punishment to encompass them.)\nI (Qays) also heard Abu Bakr say, 'O people! Beware of lying, for lying contradicts faith.'\"","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=105","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:106","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:106–108","text":"O you who believe! When death approaches any of you, and you make a bequest, then take the testimony of two just men of your own folk or two others from outside, if you are traveling through the land and the calamity of death befalls you. Detain them both after the Salah (the prayer), (then) if you are in doubt (about their truthfulness), let them both swear by Allah (saying): \"We wish not for any worldly gain in this, even though he (the beneficiary) be our near relative. We shall not hide the testimony of Allah, for then indeed we should be of the sinful. (106)If it then becomes known that these two had been guilty of sin, let two others stand forth in their places, nearest in kin from among those who claim a lawful right. Let them swear by Allah (saying): \"We affirm that our testimony is truer than that of both of them, and that we have not trespassed (the truth), for then indeed we should be of the wrongdoers. (107)That should make it closer (to the fact) that their testimony would be in its true nature and shape, or else they would fear that (other) oaths would be admitted after their oaths. And have Taqwa of Allah and listen (with obedience to Him). And Allah guides not the rebellious people (108)\n\n## Testimony of Two Just Witnesses for the Final Will and Testament\n\nThis honorable Ayah contains a glorious ruling from Allah. Allah's statement,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا شَهَادَةُ بَيْنِكُمْ إِذَا حَضَرَ أَحَدَكُمُ الْمَوْتُ حِينَ الْوَصِيَّةِ اثْنَانِ\n(O you who believe! When death approaches any of you, and you make a bequest, then take the testimony of two...) meaning that there should be two witnesses in such cases,\nذَوَا عَدْلٍ\n(just men...) thus, describing them as just,\nمِّنكُمْ\n(of your own folk) Muslims.\nأَوْ آخَرَانِ مِنْ غَيْرِكُمْ\n(or two others from outside) non-Muslims, meaning the People of the Book, according to Ibn 'Abbas as Ibn Abi Hatim recorded. Allah said next,\nإِنْ أَنتُمْ ضَرَبْتُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ\n(if you are traveling through the land) on a journey,\nفَأَصَابَتْكُم مُّصِيبَةُ الْمَوْتِ\n(and the calamity of death befalls you.) These are two conditions that permit using non-Muslims from among the Dhimmis for witnesses when there are no Muslims present: When one is traveling and needs to write a will, as Sharih Al-Qadi said. Ibn Jarir recorded that Sharih said, \"The witness of the Jews and Christians is not allowed except while traveling, and even then only to witness the dictation of the will.\" Allah's statement,\nتَحْبِسُونَهُمَا مِن بَعْدِ الصَّلَاةِ\n(Detain them both after the Salah (the prayer),) refers to the 'Asr prayer, according to Al-'Awfi who reported it from Ibn 'Abbas. This is the same explanation reported from Sa'id bin Jubayr, Ibrahim An-Nakha'i, Qatadah, 'Ikrimah and Muhammad bin Sirin. As for Az-Zuhri, he said that they are detained after Muslim prayer (i.e., in congregation). Therefore, these two witnesses will be detained after a congregational prayer,\nفَيُقْسِمَانِ بِاللَّهِ إِنِ ارْتَبْتُمْ\n(let them both swear by Allah if you are in doubt.) meaning, if you are in doubt that they might have committed treachery or theft, then they should swear by Allah,\nلَا نَشْتَرِي بِهِ\n(We wish not in this) in our vows, according to Muqatil bin Hayyan,\nثَمَنًا\n(for any worldly gain) of this soon to end life,\nوَلَوْ كَانَ ذَا قُرْبَىٰ\n(even though he be our near relative.) meaning, if the beneficiary be our near relative, we will still not compromise on the truth.\nوَلَا نَكْتُمُ شَهَادَةَ اللَّهِ\n(We shall not hide the testimony of Allah,) thus stating that the testimony is Allah's, as a way of respecting it and valuing its significance,\nإِنَّا إِذًا لَّمِنَ الْآثِمِينَ\n(for then indeed we should be of the sinful.) if we distort the testimony, change, alter or hide it entirely. Allah said next,\nفَإِنْ عُثِرَ عَلَىٰ أَنَّهُمَا اسْتَحَقَّا إِثْمًا\n(If it then becomes known that these two had been guilty of sin...) if the two witnesses were found to have cheated or stolen from the money that the will is being written about,\nيَقُومَانِ مَقَامَهُمَا مِنَ الَّذِينَ اسْتَحَقَّ عَلَيْهِمُ الْأَوْلَيَانِ\n(let two others stand forth in their places, nearest in kin from among those who claim a lawful right.)\nThis Ayah indicates that if the two witnesses were found to have committed treachery, then two of the nearest rightful inheritors should stand for witness in their place,\nفَيُقْسِمَانِ بِاللَّهِ لَشَهَادَتُنَا أَحَقُّ مِن شَهَادَتِهِمَا\n(Let them swear by Allah (saying): \"We affirm that our testimony is truer than that of both of them...\") Meaning, our testimony that they have cheated is more truthful than the testimony that they have offered,\nوَمَا اعْتَدَيْنَا\n(and that we have not trespassed (the truth),) when we accused them of treachery,\nإِنَّا إِذًا لَّمِنَ الظَّالِمِينَ\n(for then indeed we should be of the wrongdoers.) if we had lied about them.\nThis is the oath of the heirs, and preference is to be given to their saying. Just as in the case with the oath of relative of a murdered person if he attempts to tarnish the case of the murdered person. So his family takes an oath in defense of his honor. This is discussed in the studies of the oaths in the books of Ahkam. Allah's statement,\nذَٰلِكَ أَدْنَىٰ أَن يَأْتُوا بِالشَّهَادَةِ عَلَىٰ وَجْهِهَا\n(That should make it closer (to the fact) that their testimony would be in its true nature and shape (and thus accepted),) means, the ruling requiring the two Dhimmi witnesses to swear, if there is a doubt that they were not truthful, might compel them to admit to the testimony in its true form. Allah's statement,\nأَوْ يَخَافُوا أَن تُرَدَّ أَيْمَانٌ بَعْدَ أَيْمَانِهِمْ\n(or else they would fear that (other) oaths would be admitted after their oaths.) means, requiring them to swear by Allah might encourage them to admit to the true testimony because they respect swearing by Allah and they glorify and revere Him. They also fear exposure if the heirs of the deceased are required to swear instead of them. In this case, the heirs would swear and earn the rightful inheritance that the two witnesses failed to declare. This is why Allah said,\nأَوْ يَخَافُوا أَن تُرَدَّ أَيْمَانٌ بَعْدَ أَيْمَانِهِمْ\n(or else they would fear that (other) oaths would be admitted after their oaths.), then,\nوَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ\n(And have Taqwa of Allah) in all of your affairs,\nوَاسْمَعُوا\n(and listen.) and obey,\nوَاللَّهُ لَا يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ الْفَاسِقِينَ\n(And Allah guides not the rebellious people.) who do not obey Him or follow His Law.","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=106","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:109","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:109","text":"On the Day when Allah will gather the Messengers together and say to them: \"What was the response you received (from men to your teaching)?\" They will say: \"We have no knowledge, verily, only You are the Knower of all that is hidden. (109)\n\n## The Messengers Will be Asked About Their Nations\n\nAllah states that on the Day of Resurrection, He will ask the Messengers about how their nations, to whom He sent them, answered and responded to their teachings. Allah said in other Ayat,\nفَلَنَسْأَلَنَّ الَّذِينَ أُرْسِلَ إِلَيْهِمْ وَلَنَسْأَلَنَّ الْمُرْسَلِينَ\n(Then surely, We shall question those (people) to whom it (the Book) was sent and verily, We shall question the Messengers.)[7:6], and,\nفَوَرَبِّكَ لَنَسْأَلَنَّهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ - عَمَّا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ\n(So, by your Lord, We shall certainly call all of them to account. For all that they used to do.)[15:92-93].\nThe statement of the Messengers here,\nلَا عِلْمَ لَنَا\n(We have no knowledge) is the result of the horror of that Day, according to Mujahid, Al-Hasan Al-Basri and As-Suddi. 'Abdur-Razzaq narrated that Ath-Thawri said that Al-A'mash said that Mujahid said about the Ayah,\nيَوْمَ يَجْمَعُ اللَّهُ الرُّسُلَ فَيَقُولُ مَاذَا أُجِبْتُمْ\n(On the Day when Allah will gather the Messengers together and say to them: \"What was the response you received?\") They will become afraid and reply,\nلَا عِلْمَ لَنَا\n(We have no knowledge...) Ibn Jarir and Ibn Abi Hatim also recorded this explanation. 'Ali bin Abi Talhah said that Ibn 'Abbas commented on the Ayah,\nيَوْمَ يَجْمَعُ اللَّهُ الرُّسُلَ فَيَقُولُ مَاذَا أُجِبْتُمْ قَالُوا لَا عِلْمَ لَنَا إِنَّكَ أَنتَ عَلَّامُ الْغُيُوبِ\n(On the Day when Allah will gather the Messengers together and say to them: \"What was the response you received (from men to your teaching)?\" They will say: \"We have no knowledge, verily, only You are the Knower of all that is hidden.\")\n\"They will say to the Lord, Most Honored, 'We have no knowledge beyond what we know, and even that, You have more knowledge of them than us.\" This response is out of respect before the Lord, Most Honored, and it means, we have no knowledge compared to Your encompassing knowledge. Therefore, our knowledge only grasped the visible behavior of these people, not the secrets of their hearts. You are the Knower of everything, Who has encompassing knowledge of all things, and our knowledge compared to Your knowledge is similar to not having any knowledge at all, for\nأَنتَ عَلَّامُ الْغُيُوبِ\n(only You are the Knower of all that is hidden.)","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=109","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:110","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:110–111","text":"(Remember) when Allah will say (on the Day of Resurrection): \"O 'Isa, son of Maryam! Remember My favor to you and to your mother when I supported you with Ruh - il-Qudus [Jibril] so that you spoke to the people in the cradle and in maturity; and when I taught you the Book, the Hikmah, the Tawrah and the Injil; and when you made out of the clay, as it were, the figure of a bird, by My permission, and you breathed into it, and it became a bird by My permission, and you healed those born blind, and the lepers by My permission, and when you brought forth the dead by My permission; and when I restrained the Children of Israel from you since you came unto them with clear proofs, and the disbelievers among them said: 'This is nothing but evident magic.' (110)\"And when I Awhaytu [put in the hearts of] Al-Hawariyyin to believe in Me and My Messenger, they said: 'We believe. And bear witness that we are Muslims.' (111)\n\n## Reminding 'Isa of the Favors that Allah Granted him\n\nAllah mentions how He blessed His servant and Messenger, 'Isa, son of Maryam, and the miracles and extraordinary acts He granted him. Allah said,\nاذْكُرْ نِعْمَتِي عَلَيْكَ\n(Remember My favor to you) when I created you from your mother, without male intervention, and made you a sign and clear proof of My perfect power over all things.\nوَعَلَىٰ وَالِدَتِكَ\n(And to your mother) when I made you testify to her chastity and you thus absolved her from the sin that the unjust, ignorant liars accused her of,\nإِذْ أَيَّدتُّكَ بِرُوحِ الْقُدُسِ\n(when I supported you with Ruh-il-Qudus) the angel Jibril, and made you a Prophet, calling to Allah in the cradle and manhood. I made you speak in the cradle, and you testified that your mother was free from any immoral behavior, and you proclaimed that you worship Me. You also conveyed the news of My Message and invited them to worship Me.\nتُكَلِّمُ النَّاسَ فِي الْمَهْدِ وَكَهْلًا\n(so that you spoke to the people in the cradle and in maturity;) Meaning you called the people to Allah in childhood and in maturity.\nAnd the word Tukallim means invited, because his speaking to people while a child is nothing strange by itself. Allah's statement,\nوَإِذْ عَلَّمْتُكَ الْكِتَابَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ\n(And when I taught you the Book and the Hikmah,) the power of writing and understanding,\nوَالتَّوْرَاةَ\n(and the Tawrah,) which was revealed to Musa, son of 'Imran, who spoke to Allah directly. Allah's statement,\nوَإِذْ تَخْلُقُ مِنَ الطِّينِ كَهَيْئَةِ الطَّيْرِ بِإِذْنِي\n(and when you made out of the clay, as it were, the figure of a bird, by My permission,) means: 'you shaped it in the figure of a bird by My permission, and it became a bird with My permission, after you blew into it'. Then, it became a flying bird with a soul by Allah's permission. Allah said;\nوَتُبْرِئُ الْأَكْمَهَ وَالْأَبْرَصَ بِإِذْنِي\n(and you healed those born blind, and the lepers by My permission,) This was explained before in Surah Āl-'Imrān (chapter 3) and we do not need to repeat it here. Allah's statement,\nوَإِذْ تُخْرِجُ الْمَوْتَىٰ بِإِذْنِي\n(And when you brought forth the dead by My permission,) meaning, you called them and they rose from their graves by Allah's leave, power, lntent and will. Allah said next,\nوَإِذْ كَفَفْتُ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ عَنكَ إِذْ جِئْتَهُم بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ فَقَالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنْهُمْ إِنْ هَٰذَا إِلَّا سِحْرٌ مُّبِينٌ\n(and when I restrained the Children of Israel from you since you came unto them with clear proofs, and the disbelievers among them said: \"This is nothing but evident magic.\")\nMeaning: 'remember My favor, when I stopped the Children of Israel from harming you, when you brought them the clear proofs and evidence, testifying to your prophethood and Message from Me to them. They rejected you and accused you of being a magician and tried to kill you by crucifixion, but I saved you, raised you to Me, purified you from their vulgarity and protected you from their harm.'\nThe wording of this Ayah indicates that 'Isa will be reminded of these favors on the Day of Resurrection. Allah used the past tense in these Ayat indicating that it is a forgone matter that will certainly occur. This Ayah also contains some of the secrets of the Unseen that Allah revealed to His Messenger Muhammad ﷺ. Allah said,\nوَإِذْ أَوْحَيْتُ إِلَى الْحَوَارِيِّينَ أَنْ آمِنُوا بِي وَبِرَسُولِي\n(And when I (Allah) Awhaytu Al-Hawariyyin to believe in Me and My Messenger.)\nThis is also a reminder of Allah's favor on 'Isa, by making discples and companions for him. It is also said that Awhaytu in the Ayah means, 'inspired', just as in another Ayah, Allah said;\nوَأَوْحَيْنَا إِلَىٰ أُمِّ مُوسَىٰ أَنْ أَرْضِعِيهِ\n(And We inspired the mother of Musa (saying): Suckle him...)[28:7] Allah said in other Ayat,\nوَأَوْحَىٰ رَبُّكَ إِلَى النَّحْلِ أَنِ اتَّخِذِي مِنَ الْجِبَالِ بُيُوتًا وَمِنَ الشَّجَرِ وَمِمَّا يَعْرِشُونَ - ثُمَّ كُلِي مِن كُلِّ الثَّمَرَاتِ فَاسْلُكِي سُبُلَ رَبِّكِ ذُلُلًا\n(And your Lord Awha (inspired) the bee, saying: \"Take habitations in the mountains and in the trees and in what they erect. Then, eat of all fruits, and follow the ways of your Lord made easy (for you).\")[16:68-69]\nAl-Hasan Al-Basri commented about the Hawariyyun, \"Allah inspired them\", while As-Suddi said, \"He put in their hearts,\" and the Hawariyyun said,\nآمَنَّا وَاشْهَدْ بِأَنَّنَا مُسْلِمُونَ\n(We believe. And bear witness that we are Muslims.)","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=110","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:112","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:112–115","text":"(Remember) when Al-Hawariyun said: \"O 'Isa, son of Maryam! Can your Lord send down to us a Ma'idah from heaven?\" 'Isa said: \"Have Taqwa of Allah, if you are indeed believers. (112)They said: \"We wish to eat thereof and to be stronger in faith, and to know that you have indeed told us the truth and that we ourselves be its witnesses. (113)'Isa, son of Maryam, said: \"O Allah, our Lord! Send us from heaven a table spread (with food) that there may be for us – for the first and the last of us – a festival and a sign from You; and provide us sustenance, for You are the Best of sustainers. (114)Allah said: \"I am going to send it down unto you, but if any of you after that disbelieves, then I will punish him with a torment such as I have not inflicted on anyone among the 'Alamin. (115)\n\n## Sending Down the Ma'idah\n\nThis is the story of the Ma'idah, the name of which this Surah bears, Surat Al-Ma'idah. This is also among the favors that Allah granted His servant and Messenger, 'Isa, accepting his request to send the Ma'idah down, and doing so as clear proof and unequivocal evidence. Allah said,\nإِذْ قَالَ الْحَوَارِيُّونَ\n((Remember) when Al-Hawaryun said...) the disciples of 'Isa said,\nيَا عِيسَى ابْنَ مَرْيَمَ هَلْ يَسْتَطِيعُ رَبُّكَ أَن يُنَزِّلَ عَلَيْنَا مَائِدَةً مِّنَ السَّمَاءِ\n(O 'Isa, son of Maryam! Can your Lord send down to us a Ma'idah from heaven)\nThe Ma'idah is the table that has food on it. Some scholars said that the disciples requested this table because they were poor and deprived. So they asked 'Isa to supplicate to Allah to send a table of food down to them that they could eat from every day and thus be more able to perform the acts of worship.\nقَالَ اتَّقُوا اللَّهَ إِن كُنتُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ\n('Isa said: \"Have Taqwa of Allah, if you are indeed believers.\")\nIsa answered them by saying, 'Have Taqwa of Allah! And do not ask for this, for it may become a trial for you, but trust in Allah for your provisions, if you are truly believers.'\nقَالُوا نُرِيدُ أَن نَّأْكُلَ مِنْهَا\n(They said: \"We wish to eat thereof.\") we need to eat from it,\nوَتَطْمَئِنَّ قُلُوبُنَا\n(and to be stronger in faith,) when we witness it descending from heaven as sustenance for us,\nوَنَعْلَمَ أَن قَدْ صَدَقْتَنَا\n(and to know that you have indeed told us the truth,) of your Message and our faith in you increases and also our knowledge,\nوَنَكُونَ عَلَيْهَا مِنَ الشَّاهِدِينَ\n(and that we ourselves be its witnesses.) testifying that it is a sign from Allah, as proof and evidence that you are a Prophet, and attesting to the truth of what you brought us,\nقَالَ عِيسَى ابْنُ مَرْيَمَ اللَّهُمَّ رَبَّنَا أَنزِلْ عَلَيْنَا مَائِدَةً مِّنَ السَّمَاءِ تَكُونُ لَنَا عِيدًا لِّأَوَّلِنَا وَآخِرِنَا\n('Isa, son of Maryam, said: \"O Allah, our Lord! Send us from heaven a table spread (with food) that there may be for us – for the first and the last of us – a festival...\")\nAs-Suddi commented that the Ayah means, \"We will take that day on which the table was sent down as a day of celebration, that we and those who come after us would consider sacred.\" Sufyan Ath-Thawri said that it means, \"A day of prayer.\"\nوَآيَةً مِّنكَ\n(and a sign from You.) proving that You are able to do all things and to accept my supplication, so that they accept what I convey to them from You,\nوَارْزُقْنَا\n(and provide us sustenance,) a delicious food from You that does not require any effort or hardship,\nوَأَنتَ خَيْرُ الرَّازِقِينَ - قَالَ اللَّهُ إِنِّي مُنَزِّلُهَا عَلَيْكُمْ فَمَن يَكْفُرْ بَعْدُ مِنكُمْ\n(\"For You are the Best of sustainers.\" Allah said: \"I am going to send it down unto you, but if any of you after that disbelieves...\") by denying this sign and defying its implication, O 'Isa,\nفَإِنِّي أُعَذِّبُهُ عَذَابًا لَّا أُعَذِّبُهُ أَحَدًا مِّنَ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(then I will punish him with a torment such as I have not inflicted on anyone among the 'Alamin.) among the people of your time. Allah said in similar Ayat,\nوَيَوْمَ تَقُومُ السَّاعَةُ أَدْخِلُوا آلَ فِرْعَوْنَ أَشَدَّ الْعَذَابِ\n(And on the Day when the Hour will be established (it will be said to the angels): \"Cause Fir'awn's people to enter the severest torment!\")[40:46], and,\nإِنَّ الْمُنَافِقِينَ فِي الدَّرْكِ الْأَسْفَلِ مِنَ النَّارِ\n(Verily, the hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of the Fire.)[4:145]\nIbn Jarir said that 'Abdullah bin 'Amr said, \"Those who will receive the severest torment on the Day of Resurrection are three: The hypocrites, those from the people of Al-Ma'idah who disbelieved in it, and the people of Fir'awn.\"\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"They said to 'Isa, son of Maryam, 'Supplicate to Allah to send down to us from heaven, a table spread with food.' He also said, 'So the angels brought the table down containing seven fish and seven pieces of bread and placed it before them. So the last group of people ate as the first group did.\" Ibn Jarir recorded that Ishaq bin 'Abdullah said that the table was sent down to 'Isa son of Maryam having seven pieces of bread and seven fish, and they ate from it as much as they wished. But when some of them stole food from it, saying, \"It might not come down tomorrow,\" the table ascended.\nThese statements testify that the table was sent down to the Children of Israel during the time of 'Isa, son of Maryam, as a result of Allah's accepting his supplication to Him. The apparent wording of this Ayah also states so,\nقَالَ اللَّهُ إِنِّي مُنَزِّلُهَا عَلَيْكُمْ\n(Allah said: \"I am going to send it down unto you...\")[5:115].","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=112","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:116","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:116–118","text":"And (remember) when Allah will say (on the Day of Resurrection): \"O 'Isa, son of Maryam! Did you say unto men: 'Worship me and my mother as two gods besides Allah?'\" He will say: \"Glory be to You! It was not for me to say what I had no right (to say). Had I said such a thing, You would surely have known it. You know what is in my inner self though I do not know what is in Yours, truly, You, only You, are the Knower of all that is hidden and unseen. (116)\"Never did I say to them ought except what You (Allah) did command me to say: 'Worship Allah, my Lord and your Lord.' And I was a witness over them while I dwelled amongst them, but when You took me [up], You were the Watcher over them, and You are a Witness to all things. (117)\"If You punish them, they are Your servants, and if You forgive them, verily You, only You are the Almighty, the All-Wise. (118)\n\n## Isa Rejects Shirk and Affirms Tawhid\n\nAllah will also speak to His servant and Messenger, 'Isa son of Maryam, peace be upon him, saying to him on the Day of Resurrection in the presence of those who worshipped 'Isa and his mother as gods besides Allah,\nيَا عِيسَى ابْنَ مَرْيَمَ أَأَنتَ قُلْتَ لِلنَّاسِ اتَّخِذُونِي وَأُمِّيَ إِلَٰهَيْنِ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ\n(O 'Isa, son of Maryam! Did you say unto men: 'Worship me and my mother as two gods besides Allah')\nThis is a threat and a warning to Christians, chastising them in public, as Qatadah and others said, and Qatadah mentioned this Ayah as evidence,\nهَٰذَا يَوْمُ يَنفَعُ الصَّادِقِينَ صِدْقُهُمْ\n(\"This is a Day on which the truthful will profit from their truth.\")[5:119] Allah's statement,\nسُبْحَانَكَ مَا يَكُونُ لِي أَنْ أَقُولَ مَا لَيْسَ لِي بِحَقٍّ\n(Glory be to You! It was not for me to say what I had no right (to say)...) contains Allah's direction for 'Isa to utter the perfect answer. Ibn Abi Hatim recorded that Abu Hurayrah said, \"'Isa will be taught his argument in reply to what Allah will ask him,\nوَإِذْ قَالَ اللَّهُ يَا عِيسَى ابْنَ مَرْيَمَ أَأَنتَ قُلْتَ لِلنَّاسِ اتَّخِذُونِي وَأُمِّيَ إِلَٰهَيْنِ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ\n(And (remember) when Allah will say (on the Day of Resurrection): \"O 'Isa, son of Maryam! Did you say unto men: 'Worship me and my mother as two gods besides Allah')[5:116].\"\nAbu Hurayrah then narrated that the Prophet ﷺ said that Allah taught 'Isa to say,\nسُبْحَانَكَ مَا يَكُونُ لِي أَنْ أَقُولَ مَا لَيْسَ لِي بِحَقٍّ\n(Glory be to You! It was not for me to say what I had no right (to say)...)\nAth-Thawri narrated this Hadith from Ma'mar from Ibn Tawus from Tawus. 'Isa's statement,\nإِن كُنتُ قُلْتُهُ فَقَدْ عَلِمْتَهُ\n(Had I said such a thing, You would surely have known it.) means, had I said it, You, my Lord, would have known it, for nothing escapes Your knowledge. Rather, I have not said these words nor did the thought even cross my mind, this why he said,\nتَعْلَمُ مَا فِي نَفْسِي وَلَا أَعْلَمُ مَا فِي نَفْسِكَ إِنَّكَ أَنتَ عَلَّامُ الْغُيُوبِ - مَا قُلْتُ لَهُمْ إِلَّا مَا أَمَرْتَنِي بِهِ\n(You know what is in my inner self though I do not know what is in Yours, truly, You, only You, are the Knower of all that is hidden and unseen. Never did I say to them ought except what You (Allah) did command me to say...) and convey,\nأَنِ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ رَبِّي وَرَبَّكُمْ\n(Worship Allah, my Lord and your Lord.) I only called them to what You sent me with and commanded me to convey to them,\nأَنِ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ رَبِّي وَرَبَّكُمْ\n(Worship Allah, my Lord and your Lord) and this is what I conveyed to them,\nوَكُنتُ عَلَيْهِمْ شَهِيدًا مَّا دُمْتُ فِيهِمْ\n(And I was a witness over them while I dwelled amongst them,) I was a witness over what they did when I was amongst them,\nفَلَمَّا تَوَفَّيْتَنِي كُنتَ أَنتَ الرَّقِيبَ عَلَيْهِمْ وَأَنتَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ شَهِيدٌ\n(but when You took me [up], You were the Watcher over them, and You are a Witness to all things.)\nAbu Dawud At-Tayalisi recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ stood up once and gave us a speech in which he said,\nيَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ! إِنَّكُمْ مَحْشُورُونَ إِلَى اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ حُفَاةً، عُرَاةً، غُرْلاً\n(O people! You will be gathered to Allah while barefooted, naked and uncircumcised;\nكَمَا بَدَأْنَا أَوَّلَ خَلْقٍ نُّعِيدُهُ\n(As We began the first creation, We shall repeat it.)[21:104]\nوَإِنَّ أَوَّلَ الْخَلَائِقِ يُكْسَى يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ إِبْرَاهِيمُ، أَلَا وَإِنَّهُ يُجَاءُ بِرِجَالٍ مِنْ أُمَّتِي فَيُؤْخَذُ بِهِمْ ذَاتَ الشِّمَالِ، فَأَقُولُ: أَصْحَابِي، فَيُقَالُ: إِنَّكَ لَا تَدْرِي مَا أَحْدَثُوا بَعْدَكَ، فَأَقُولُ كَمَا قَالَ الْعَبْدُ الصَّالِحُ\nThe first among the creation who will be covered with clothes will be Ibrahim. Some men from my Ummah will be brought and taken to the left (to the Fire) and I will yell, 'They are my followers!' It will be said, 'You do not know what they innvovated after you (in religion).' So I will say just as the righteous servant ('Isa) said,\nوَكُنتُ عَلَيْهِمْ شَهِيدًا مَّا دُمْتُ فِيهِمْ فَلَمَّا تَوَفَّيْتَنِي كُنتَ أَنتَ الرَّقِيبَ عَلَيْهِمْ وَأَنتَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ شَهِيدٌ - إِن تُعَذِّبْهُمْ فَإِنَّهُمْ عِبَادُكَ وَإِن تَغْفِرْ لَهُمْ فَإِنَّكَ أَنتَ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ\n(And I was a witness over them while I dwelled amongst them, but when You took me [up], You were the Watcher over them, and You are a Witness to all things. If You punish them, they are Your servants, and if You forgive them, verily You, only You are the Almighty, the All-Wise.)\nفَيُقَالُ: إِنَّ هؤُلَاءِ لَمْ يَزَالُوا مُرْتَدِّينَ عَلَى أَعْقَابِهِمْ مُنْذُ فَارَقْتَهُم\n(It will further be said, 'These people kept reverting back on their heels after you left them.')\" Al-Bukhari also recorded this Hadith in the explanation of this Ayah. Allah said;\nإِن تُعَذِّبْهُمْ فَإِنَّهُمْ عِبَادُكَ وَإِن تَغْفِرْ لَهُمْ فَإِنَّكَ أَنتَ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ\n(If You punish them, they are Your servants, and if You forgive them, verily You, only You are the Almighty, the All-Wise.)\nAll matters refer back to Allah, for He does what He Wills and none can question Him about what He does, while He will question them. This Ayah also shows the crime of the Christians who invented a lie against Allah and His Messenger, thus making a rival, wife and son for Allah. Allah is glorified in that He is far above what they attribute to Him. So this Ayah [5:118] has tremendous value and delivers unique news.","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=116","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:5:119","title":"Ibn Kathir · 5:119–120","text":"Allah will say: \"This is a Day on which the truthful will profit from their truth: Theirs are Gardens under which rivers flow (in Paradise) – they shall abide therein forever. Allah is pleased with them and they with Him. That is the great success (119)To Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is therein, and He is able to do all things (120)\n\n## Only Truth will be of Benefit on the Day of Resurrection\n\nAllah answers His servant and Messenger 'Isa, son of Maryam, after he disowns the disbelieving Christians who lied about Allah and His Messenger, and when 'Isa refers their end to the will of his Lord,\nهَٰذَا يَوْمُ يَنفَعُ الصَّادِقِينَ صِدْقُهُمْ\n(This is a Day on which the truthful will profit from their truth.)\nAd-Dahhak said that Ibn 'Abbas commented, \"This is the Day when Tawhid will benefit those who believed in it.\"\nلَهُمْ جَنَّاتٌ تَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا أَبَدًا\n(Theirs are Gardens under which rivers flow (in Paradise) – they shall abide therein forever.) and they will never be removed from it,\nرَّضِيَ اللَّهُ عَنْهُمْ وَرَضُوا عَنْهُ\n(Allah is pleased with them and they with Him.)\nوَرِضْوَانٌ مِّنَ اللَّهِ أَكْبَرُ\n(But the greatest bliss is the good pleasure of Allah.)[9:72] We will mention the Hadiths about this Ayah [9:72] later on. Allah's statement,\nذَٰلِكَ الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ\n(That is the great success.) means, this is the great success, other than which there is no greater success. Allah said in another Ayat,\nلِمِثْلِ هَٰذَا فَلْيَعْمَلِ الْعَامِلُونَ\n(For the like of this let the workers work.)[37:61], and,\nوَفِي ذَٰلِكَ فَلْيَتَنَافَسِ الْمُتَنَافِسُونَ\n(And for this let (all) those strive who want to strive.)[83:26] Allah's statement,\nلِلَّهِ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَمَا فِيهِنَّ وَهُوَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ\n(To Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is therein, and He is able to do all things.) means, He created everything, owns everything, controls the affairs of everything and is able to do all things. Therefore, everything and everyone are in His domain and under His power and will. There is none like Him, nor is there rival, ancestor, son, or wife for Him, nor a lord or god besides Him. Ibn Wahb said that he heard Huyay bin 'Abdullah saying that Abu 'Abdur-Rahman Al-Habli said that 'Abdullah bin 'Amr said, \"The last revealed Surah was Surat Al-Ma'idah.\"","href":"/tafsir/5?verse=119","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:6:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 6:1–3","text":"## The Virtue of Surat Al-An'ām and When it Was Revealed\n\nAl-'Awfi, 'Ikrimah and 'Ata' said that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Surat Al-An'am was revealed in Makkah\" At-Tabarani recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"All of Surat Al-An'am was revealed in Makkah at night, accompanied by seventy thousand angels, raising their voices in glorification of Allah\" As-Suddi said that Murrah said that 'Abdullah said, \"Surat Al-An'am was revealed in the company of seventy thousand angels.\"\nبِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nالْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ وَجَعَلَ الظُّلُمَاتِ وَالنُّورَ ثُمَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِرَبِّهِمْ يَعْدِلُونَ - هُوَ الَّذِي خَلَقَكُم مِّن طِينٍ ثُمَّ قَضَىٰ أَجَلًا وَأَجَلٌ مُّسَمًّى عِندَهُ ثُمَّ أَنتُمْ تَمْتَرُونَ - وَهُوَ اللَّهُ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَفِي الْأَرْضِ يَعْلَمُ سِرَّكُمْ وَجَهْرَكُمْ وَيَعْلَمُ مَا تَكْسِبُونَ\n(1. All praise be to Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth, and originated the darkness and the light, yet those who disbelieve hold others as equal with their Lord.)(2. He it is Who has created you from clay, and then has decreed a stated term. And there is with Him another determined term, yet you doubt.)(3. And He is Allah, in the heavens and the earth, He knows what you conceal and what you reveal, and He knows what you earn.)\n\n## All Praise is Due to Allah for His Glorious Ability and Great Power\n\nAllah praises and glorifies His Most Honorable Self for creating the heavens and earth, as a dwelling for His servants, and for making the darkness and the light to benefit them in the night and the day. In this Ayah, Allah describes darkness in the plural, Zulumat [where Zulmah is singular for darkness], while describing the light in the singular, An-Nur, because An-Nur is more honored. In other Ayat, Allah said,\nعَنِ الْيَمِينِ وَالشَّمَائِلِ\n(To the right and to the lefts.)[16:48] Near the end of this Surah (chapter 6), Allah also said;\nوَأَنَّ هَٰذَا صِرَاطِي مُسْتَقِيمًا فَاتَّبِعُوهُ وَلَا تَتَّبِعُوا السُّبُلَ فَتَفَرَّقَ بِكُمْ عَن سَبِيلِهِ\n(And verily, this is my straight path, so follow it, and follow no (other) ways, for they will separate you away from His way.)[6:153] Allah said next,\nثُمَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِرَبِّهِمْ يَعْدِلُونَ\n(Yet those who disbelieve hold others as equal with their Lord.) meaning, in spite of all this, some of Allah's servants disbelieve in Him and hold others as partners and rivals with Him. Some of Allah's servants claimed a wife and a son for Allah, hallowed be He far above what they attribute to Him. Allah's statement,\nهُوَ الَّذِي خَلَقَكُم مِّن طِينٍ\n(He it is Who has created you from clay,) refers to the father of mankind, Adam, from whom mankind originated, multiplied in numbers and spread about, east and west. Allah said,\nثُمَّ قَضَىٰ أَجَلًا وَأَجَلٌ مُّسَمًّى عِندَهُ\n(Then has decreed a stated term. And there is with Him another determined term...) His saying;\nثُمَّ قَضَىٰ أَجَلًا\n(Then has decreed a stated term,) refers to death, while,\nوَأَجَلٌ مُّسَمًّى عِندَهُ\n(And there is with Him another determined term...) refers to the Hereafter, according to Sa'id bin Jubayr who reported this from Ibn 'Abbas. Similar statements were narrated from Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak, Zayd bin Aslam, 'Atiyyah, As-Suddi, Muqatil bin Hayyan and others. Ibn 'Abbas and Mujahid said that,\nثُمَّ قَضَىٰ أَجَلًا\n(And then has decreed a stated term,) is the term of this earthly life, while,\nوَأَجَلٌ مُّسَمًّى عِندَهُ\n(And there is with Him another determined term) refers to man's extent of life until he dies as mentioned in Allah's statement;\nوَهُوَ الَّذِي يَتَوَفَّاكُم بِاللَّيْلِ وَيَعْلَمُ مَا جَرَحْتُم بِالنَّهَارِ\n(It is He, Who takes your souls by night (when you are asleep), and has knowledge of all that you have done by day, then He raises (wakes) you up again that a term appointed (life) be fulfilled.)[6:60] The meaning of Allah's statement,\nعِندَهُ\n(With Him) is that none but Him knows when it will occur. Allah said in other Ayat,\nإِنَّمَا عِلْمُهَا عِندَ رَبِّي لَا يُجَلِّيهَا لِوَقْتِهَا إِلَّا هُوَ\n(The knowledge thereof is with my Lord. None can reveal its time but He.)[7:187], and,\nيَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ السَّاعَةِ أَيَّانَ مُرْسَاهَا - فِيمَ أَنتَ مِن ذِكْرَاهَا - إِلَىٰ رَبِّكَ مُنتَهَاهَا\n(They ask you about the Hour – when will be its appointed time? You have no knowledge to say anything about it. To your Lord belongs (the knowledge of) the term thereof.)[79:42-44] Allah said,\nثُمَّ أَنتُمْ تَمْتَرُونَ\n(Yet you doubt.) the coming of the (last) Hour, according to As-Suddi. Allah said next,\nوَهُوَ اللَّهُ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَفِي الْأَرْضِ يَعْلَمُ سِرَّكُمْ وَجَهْرَكُمْ وَيَعْلَمُ مَا تَكْسِبُونَ\n(And He is Allah in the heavens and the earth, He knows what you conceal and what you reveal, and He knows what you earn.)\nMeaning, it is He Who is called Allah, throughout the heavens and the earth, that is, it is He who is worshipped, singled out, whose divinity is believed in by the inhabitants of the heavens and the earth. They call Him Allah, and they supplicate to Him in fear and hope, except those who disbelieve among the Jinns and mankind. In another Ayah, Allah said;\nوَهُوَ الَّذِي فِي السَّمَاءِ إِلَٰهٌ وَفِي الْأَرْضِ إِلَٰهٌ\n(It is He Who is God in the heavens and the earth.)[43:84] meaning, He is the God of those in heaven and those on earth, and He knows all affairs, public and secret.\nوَيَعْلَمُ مَا تَكْسِبُونَ\n(And He knows what you earn) all the good and bad deeds that you perform.","href":"/tafsir/6?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:6:4","title":"Ibn Kathir · 6:4–6","text":"And never an Ayah comes to them from the Ayat of their Lord, but that they have been turning away from it (4)Indeed, they rejected the truth when it came to them, but there will come to them the news of that which they used to mock at (5)Have they not seen how many a generation before them We have destroyed whom We had established on the earth such as We have not established you? And We poured out on them rain from the sky in abundance, and made the rivers flow under them. Yet We destroyed them for their sins, and created after them other generations (6)\n\n## Threatening the Idolators for their Stubbornness\n\nAllah states that the rebellious, stubborn polytheists will turn away from every Ayah, meaning, sign, miracle and proof that is evidence of Allah's Uniqueness and the truth of His honorable Messengers. They will not contemplate about these Ayat or care about them. Allah said,\nفَقَدْ كَذَّبُوا بِالْحَقِّ لَمَّا جَاءَهُمْ فَسَوْفَ يَأْتِيهِمْ أَنبَاءُ مَا كَانُوا بِهِ يَسْتَهْزِئُونَ\n(Indeed, they rejected the truth when it came to them, but there will come to them the news of that which they used to mock at.)\nThis Ayah contains a warning and a stern threat for the disbelievers' rejection of the truth, stating that the disbelievers will surely know the truth of what they used to deny and taste the evil end of their behavior. Allah advises and warns the disbelievers, that they should avoid the torments and afflictions of this life, similar to what befell their likes from previous nations, who were stronger, wealthier, had more offspring, and were more exploitive on the earth. Allah said,\nأَلَمْ يَرَوْا كَمْ أَهْلَكْنَا مِن قَبْلِهِم مِّن قَرْنٍ مَّكَّنَّاهُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ مَا لَمْ نُمَكِّن لَّكُمْ\n(Have they not seen how many a generation before them We have destroyed whom We had established on the earth such as We have not established you?) meaning, they had more wealth, children, buildings, abundant provision, riches and soldiers. Allah said next,\nوَأَرْسَلْنَا السَّمَاءَ عَلَيْهِم مِّدْرَارًا\n(and We poured out on them rain from the sky in abundance,) in reference to rain that comes often,\nوَجَعَلْنَا الْأَنْهَارَ تَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِهِمْ\n(And made the rivers flow under them.) as rain was abundant and the springs were plentiful, so that We deceived them.\nفَأَهْلَكْنَاهُم بِذُنُوبِهِمْ\n(Yet We destroyed them for their sins) meaning the mistakes and errors that they committed,\nوَأَنشَأْنَا مِن بَعْدِهِمْ قَرْنًا آخَرِينَ\n(and created after them other generations,) for, these generations of old perished and became as legends and stories,\nوَأَنشَأْنَا مِن بَعْدِهِمْ قَرْنًا آخَرِينَ\n(And created after them other generations.) so that We test the new generations, as well. Yet, they committed similar errors and were destroyed, as their ancestors were destroyed. Therefore, beware of the same end that might befall you, for you are not dearer to Allah than these previous nations, but the Messenger whom you defied is dearer to Allah than the Messengers they defied. Thus, you are more liable than them to receive torment, if it was not for Allah's mercy and kindness.","href":"/tafsir/6?verse=4","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:6:7","title":"Ibn Kathir · 6:7–11","text":"And even if We had sent down unto you a Message written on paper so that they could touch it with their hands, the disbelievers would have said: \"This is nothing but obvious magic! (7)And they say: \"Why has not an angel been sent down to him\" Had We sent down an angel, the matter would have been judged at once, and no respite would be granted to them (8)And had We appointed him an angel, We indeed would have made him a man, and We would have certainly caused them confusion in a matter which they have already covered with confusion (9)And indeed Messengers were mocked before you, but their scoffers were surrounded by the very thing that they used to mock at (10)Say: \"Travel in the land and see what was the end of those who rejected truth. (11)\n\n## Censuring the Rebellious and their Refusal to Accept Human Messengers\n\nAllah describes the rebellion and stubbornness of the idolators in defying the truth and arguing against it,\nوَلَوْ نَزَّلْنَا عَلَيْكَ كِتَابًا فِي قِرْطَاسٍ فَلَمَسُوهُ بِأَيْدِيهِمْ\n(And even if We had sent down unto you a Message written on paper so that they could touch it with their hands,) meaning, if they saw this Message's descent and were eye-witnesses to that,\nلَقَالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا إِنْ هَٰذَا إِلَّا سِحْرٌ مُّبِينٌ\n(the disbelievers would have said: \"This is nothing but obvious magic!\") This is similar to Allah's description of the disbelievers' defiance of facts and truth,\nوَلَوْ فَتَحْنَا عَلَيْهِم بَابًا مِّنَ السَّمَاءِ فَظَلُّوا فِيهِ يَعْرُجُونَ - لَقَالُوا إِنَّمَا سُكِّرَتْ أَبْصَارُنَا بَلْ نَحْنُ قَوْمٌ مَّسْحُورُونَ\n(And even if We opened to them a gate from the heaven and they were to continue ascending thereto. They would surely say: \"Our eyes have been (as if) dazzled. Nay, we are a people bewitched.\")[15:14-15], and,\nوَإِن يَرَوْا كِسْفًا مِّنَ السَّمَاءِ سَاقِطًا يَقُولُوا سَحَابٌ مَّرْكُومٌ\n(And if they were to see a piece of the heaven falling down, they would say, \"Clouds gathered in heaps!\")[52:44].\nوَقَالُوا لَوْلَا أُنزِلَ عَلَيْهِ مَلَكٌ\n(And they say: \"Why has not an angel been sent down to him?\") to convey the Message with admonition along with him. Allah replied,\nوَلَوْ أَنزَلْنَا مَلَكًا لَّقُضِيَ الْأَمْرُ ثُمَّ لَا يُنظَرُونَ\n(Had We sent down an angel, the matter would have been judged at once, and no respite would be granted to them.)\nConsequently, even if the angels descend, while the disbelievers still had the same attitude, then the torment will surely befall them from Allah as a consequence. Allah said in other Ayat,\nمَا نُنَزِّلُ الْمَلَائِكَةَ إِلَّا بِالْحَقِّ وَمَا كَانُوا إِذًا مُّنظَرِينَ\n(We send not the angels down except with the truth (i.e. for torment, etc.), and in that case, they (the disbelievers) would have no respite!)[15:8], and,\nيَوْمَ يَرَوْنَ الْمَلَائِكَةَ لَا بُشْرَىٰ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِّلْمُجْرِمِينَ\n(On the Day they will see the angels, no glad tidings will there be for the criminals that day.)[25:22] Allah's statement,\nوَلَوْ جَعَلْنَاهُ مَلَكًا لَّجَعَلْنَاهُ رَجُلًا وَلَلَبَسْنَا عَلَيْهِم مَّا يَلْبِسُونَ\n(And had We appointed him an angel, We indeed would have made him a man, and We would have certainly caused them confusion in a matter which they have already covered with confusion.) meaning, if We send an angel along with the human Messenger, or if We send an angel as a Messenger to mankind, he would be in the shape of a man so that they would be able to speak to him and benefit from his teachings. In this case, the angel (in the shape of a human) will also cause confusion for them, just as the confusion they caused themselves over accepting humans as Messengers! Allah said,\nقُل لَّوْ كَانَ فِي الْأَرْضِ مَلَائِكَةٌ يَمْشُونَ مُطْمَئِنِّينَ لَنَزَّلْنَا عَلَيْهِم مِّنَ السَّمَاءِ مَلَكًا رَّسُولًا\n(Say: \"If there were on the earth, angels walking about in peace and security, We should certainly have sent down for them from the heaven an angel as a Messenger.\")[17:95]\nIt is a mercy from Allah to His creation that He sends every type of creation, Messengers from among their kind, so that they are able to call their people to Allah, and their people able to talk to them, ask them and benefit from them. In another Ayah, Allah said;\nلَقَدْ مَنَّ اللَّهُ عَلَى الْمُؤْمِنِينَ إِذْ بَعَثَ فِيهِمْ رَسُولًا مِّنْ أَنفُسِهِمْ يَتْلُو عَلَيْهِمْ آيَاتِهِ وَيُزَكِّيهِمْ\n(Indeed Allah conferred a great favor on the believers when He sent among them a Messenger from among themselves, reciting unto them His verses (the Qur'an), and purifying them.)[3:164]\nAd-Dahhak said that Ibn 'Abbas said about the Ayah [6:9 above], \"If an angel was sent to them, he would come in the shape of a man. This is because they will not be able to look at the angel due to light.\"\nوَلَلَبَسْنَا عَلَيْهِم مَّا يَلْبِسُونَ\n(... and We would have certainly caused them confusion in a matter which they have already covered with confusion.) meaning, We would confuse them over their confusion. And Al-Walibi reported Ibn 'Abbas saying; \"We brought doubts around them.\" Allah's statement,\nوَلَقَدِ اسْتُهْزِئَ بِرُسُلٍ مِّن قَبْلِكَ فَحَاقَ بِالَّذِينَ سَخِرُوا مِنْهُم مَّا كَانُوا بِهِ يَسْتَهْزِئُونَ\n(And indeed Messengers were mocked before you, but their scoffers were surrounded by the very thing that they used to mock at.) comforts the Messenger ﷺ concerning the denial of him by his people. The Ayah also promises the Messenger ﷺ, and his believers, of Allah's victory and the good end in this life and the Hereafter. Allah said next,\nقُلْ سِيرُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ ثُمَّ انظُرُوا كَيْفَ كَانَ عَاقِبَةُ الْمُكَذِّبِينَ\n(Say: \"Travel in the land and see what was the end of those who rejected truth.\") meaning, contemplate about yourselves and think about the afflictions Allah struck the previous nations with, those who defied His Messengers and denied them. Allah sent torment, afflictions and punishment on them in this life, as well as the painful torment in the Hereafter, while saving His Messengers and believing servants.","href":"/tafsir/6?verse=7","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:6:12","title":"Ibn Kathir · 6:12–16","text":"Say: \"To whom belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth?\" Say: \"To Allah.\" He has prescribed mercy for Himself. Indeed He will gather you together on the Day of Resurrection, about which there is no doubt. Those who destroy themselves will not believe (12)And to Him belongs whatsoever exists in the night and the day, and He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing. (13)Say: \"Shall I take as a guardian any other than Allah, the Creator of the heavens and the earth? And it is He Who feeds but is not fed.\" Say: \"Verily, I am commanded to be the first of those who submit. \"And be not you of the idolators (14)Say: \"I fear, if I disobey my Lord, the torment of a Mighty Day. (15)Who is averted from (such a torment) on that Day; then He (Allah) has surely been Merciful to him. And that would be the obvious success (16)\n\n## Allah is the Creator and the Sustainer\n\nAllah states that He is the King and Owner of the heavens and earth and all of what is in them, and that He has written mercy on His Most Honorable Self. It is recorded in the Two Sahihs, that Abu Hurayrah said that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ اللهَ لَمَّا خَلَقَ الْخَلْقَ، كَتَبَ كِتَابًا عِنْدَهُ فَوْقَ الْعَرْشِ، إِنَّ رَحْمَتِي تَغْلِبُ غَضَبِي\n(When Allah created the creation, He wrote in a Book that He has with Him above the Throne; 'My mercy overcomes My anger.') Allah said;\nلَيَجْمَعَنَّكُمْ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ لَا رَيْبَ فِيهِ\n(Indeed He will gather you together on the Day of Resurrection, about which there is no doubt.) swearing by His Most Honored Self that He will gather His servants,\nإِلَىٰ مِيقَاتِ يَوْمٍ مَّعْلُومٍ\n(For appointed meeting of a known Day.)[56:50], the Day of Resurrection that will certainly occur, and there is no doubt for His believing servants in this fact. As for those who deny and refuse, they are in confusion and disarray. Allah's statement,\nالَّذِينَ خَسِرُوا أَنفُسَهُمْ\n(Those who destroy themselves) on the Day of Resurrection,\nفَهُمْ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ\n(will not believe.) in the Return and thus do not fear the repercussions of that Day. Allah said next,\nوَلَهُ مَا سَكَنَ فِي اللَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ\n(And to Him belongs whatsoever exists in the night and the day.) meaning, all creatures in the heavens and earth are Allah's servants and creatures, and they are all under His authority, power and will; there is no deity worthy of worship except Him,\nوَهُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ\n(and He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.)\nHe hears the statements of His servants and knows their actions, secrets and what they conceal. Allah then said to His servant and Messenger Muhammad ﷺ, whom He sent with the pure Tawhid and the straight religion, commanding him to call the people to Allah's straight path;\nقُلْ أَغَيْرَ اللَّهِ أَتَّخِذُ وَلِيًّا فَاطِرِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ\n(Say: \"Shall I take as a guardian any other than Allah, the Creator of the heavens and the earth?\") Similarly, Allah said,\nقُلْ أَفَغَيْرَ اللَّهِ تَأْمُرُونِّي أَعْبُدُ أَيُّهَا الْجَاهِلُونَ\n(Say: \"Do you order me to worship other than Allah, O you fools?\")[39:64].\nThe meaning here is, I will not take a guardian except Allah, without partners, for He is the Creator of the heavens and earth Who orignated them without precedent,\nوَهُوَ يُطْعِمُ وَلَا يُطْعَمُ\n(And it is He Who feeds but is not fed.) For He sustains His creatures without needing them. Allah also said;\nوَمَا خَلَقْتُ الْجِنَّ وَالْإِنسَ إِلَّا لِيَعْبُدُونِ\n(And I created not the Jinn and humans except that they should worship Me (Alone).)[51:56] Some scholars read it,\nوَهُوَ يُطْعِمُ وَلَا يَطْعَمُ\n\"And it is He Who feeds but He does not eat.\" meaning, Allah does not eat. Abu Hurayrah narrated, \"A man from Al-Ansar from the area of Quba' invited the Prophet ﷺ to eat some food, and we went along with the Prophet ﷺ. When the Prophet ﷺ ate and washed his hands, he said,\nالْحَمْدُ للهِ الَّذِي يُطْعِمُ وَلَا يُطْعَمُ، وَمَنَّ عَلَيْنَا فَهَدَانَا وَأَطْعَمَنَا، وَسَقَانَا مِنَ الشَّرَابِ، وَكَسَانَا مِنَ العُرْيِ، وَكُلَّ بَلَاءٍ حَسَنٍ أَبْلَانَا، الْحَمْدُ للهِ غَيْرَ مُوَدَّعٍ رَبِّي وَلَا مُكَافأً وَلَا مَكْفُورٍ، وَلَا مُسْتَغْنًى عَنْهُ، الْحَمْدُ للهِ الَّذِي أَطْعَمَنَا مِنَ الطَّعَامِ، وَسَقَانَا مِنَ الشَّرَابِ، وَكَسَانَا مِنَ الْعُرْيِ، وَهَدَانَا مِنَ الضَّلَالِ، وَبَصَّرَنَا مِنَ العَمَى، وَفَضَّلَنَا عَلَى كَثِيرٍ مِمَّنَ خَلَقَ تَفْضِيلًا، الْحَمْدُ للهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(All praise is due to Allah, Who feeds but is never fed, He bestowed bounty unto us, Who gave us guidance and fed us, gave us something to drink, covered our nakedness; and for every favor He has given us. All praise is due to Allah, praise that should not be neglected, my Lord, all the while affirming that we will never be able to duly thank Him; nor be appreciative enough of Him, nor be free of needing Him. All thanks and praises are due to Allah Who fed us the food, gave us the drink, covered our nudity, guided us from misguidance, gave us sight from blindness, and honored us above many of His creaturers. All praise is due to Allah, Lord of all that exists.\")\nقُلْ إِنِّي أُمِرْتُ أَنْ أَكُونَ أَوَّلَ مَنْ أَسْلَمَ\n(Say: \"Verily, I am commanded to be the first of those who submit themselves to Allah as (Muslims).\") from this Ummah,\nوَلَا تَكُونَنَّ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ - قُلْ إِنِّي أَخَافُ إِنْ عَصَيْتُ رَبِّي عَذَابَ يَوْمٍ عَظِيمٍ\n(And be not you of the idolaters. Say: \"I fear, if I disobey my Lord, the torment of a Mighty Day.\")[6:14-15], the Day of Resurrection,\nمَّن يُصْرَفْ عَنْهُ\n(Who is averted from) such a torment,\nيَوْمَئِذٍ فَقَدْ رَحِمَهُ\n(on that Day, He has surely been Merciful to him) meaning, Allah will have been merciful to him,\nوَذَٰلِكَ الْفَوْزُ الْمُبِينُ\n(And that would be the obvious success.) Allah also said,\nفَمَن زُحْزِحَ عَنِ النَّارِ وَأُدْخِلَ الْجَنَّةَ فَقَدْ فَازَ\n(And whoever is moved away from the Fire and admitted to Paradise, he indeed is successful.)[3:185], success here indicates acquiring profit and negates loss.","href":"/tafsir/6?verse=12","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:6:17","title":"Ibn Kathir · 6:17–21","text":"And if Allah touches you with harm, none can remove it but He, and if He touches you with good, then He is able to do all things (17)And He is the Irresistible, above His servants, and He is the All-Wise, Well-Acquainted with all things (18)Say: \"What thing is the most great in witness?\" Say: \"Allah is Witness between you and I; this Qur'an has been revealed to me that I may therewith warn you and whomsoever it may reach. Can you verily bear witness that besides Allah there are other gods?\" Say \"I bear no (such) witness!\" Say: \"Only He is God, alone, and truly I am innocent of what you join in worship with Him. (19)Those to whom We have given the Scripture recognize him, as they recognize their own children. Those who have lost (destroyed) themselves will not believe (20)And who does more wrong than he who invents a lie against Allah or rejects His Ayat? Verily, the wrongdoers shall never be successful (21)\n\n## Allah is the Irresistible, Able to Bring Benefit and Protect from Harm\n\nAllah states that He Alone brings benefit or harm, and that He does what He wills with His creatures, none can resist His judgment or prevent what He decrees,\nوَإِن يَمْسَسْكَ اللَّهُ بِضُرٍّ فَلَا كَاشِفَ لَهُ إِلَّا هُوَ وَإِن يَمْسَسْكَ بِخَيْرٍ فَهُوَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ\n(And if Allah touches you with harm, none can remove it but He, and if He touches you with good, then He is able to do all things.) Similarly, Allah said,\nمَّا يَفْتَحِ اللَّهُ لِلنَّاسِ مِن رَّحْمَةٍ فَلَا مُمْسِكَ لَهَا وَمَا يُمْسِكْ فَلَا مُرْسِلَ لَهُ مِن بَعْدِهِ\n(Whatever mercy, Allah may grant to mankind, none can withhold it, and whatever He may withhold, none can grant it thereafter)[35:2].\nIt is recorded in the Sahih that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to supplicate,\nاللَّهُمَّ لَا مَانِعَ لِمَا أَعْطَيْتَ وَلَا مُعْطِيَ لِمَا مَنَعْتَ، وَلَا يَنْفَعُ ذَا الْجَدِّ مِنْكَ الْجَدُّ\n(O Allah, there is none Who can avert what You grant or give what You deprive, and no fortune ever helps the fortunate against You.) This is why Allah said,\nوَهُوَ الْقَاهِرُ فَوْقَ عِبَادِهِ\n(And He is the Irresistible, above His servants,) meaning, to Him the necks are subservient, the tyrants humble before Him and He has complete control over all things. The creatures have all bowed to Allah and are humbled before His grace, honor, pride, greatness, highness and ability over all things. The creatures are insignificant before Him, for they are all under His irresistible decision and power,\nوَهُوَ الْحَكِيمُ\n(and He is the All-Wise,) in all His actions,\nالْخَبِيرُ\n(Well-Acquainted with all things.) Who places everything in its rightful place, grants and favors whomever deserves His favor. Allah said next,\nقُلْ أَيُّ شَيْءٍ أَكْبَرُ شَهَادَةً\n(Say: \"What thing is the most great in witness\") or what is the greatest witness,\nقُلِ اللَّهُ شَهِيدٌ بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَكُمْ\n(Say: \"Allah (the Most Great!) is Witness between you and I\") for He knows what I brought you and what you will answer me with,\nوَأُوحِيَ إِلَيَّ هَٰذَا الْقُرْآنُ لِأُنذِرَكُم بِهِ وَمَن بَلَغَ\n(this Qur'an has been revealed to me that I may therewith warn you and whomsoever it may reach.)\nTherefore, this Qur'an is a warner for all those who hear of it. In another Ayah, Allah said,\nوَمَن يَكْفُرْ بِهِ مِنَ الْأَحْزَابِ فَالنَّارُ مَوْعِدُهُ\n(But those of the sects that reject it, the Fire will be their promised meeting place.)[11:17] Ar-Rabi' bin Anas said, \"Those who follow the Messenger of Allah ﷺ ought to call to what the Messenger of Allah ﷺ called to and warn against what he warned against.\" Allah said next,\nأَئِنَّكُمْ لَتَشْهَدُونَ\n(\"Can you verily bear witness...\") O idolators,\nأَنَّ مَعَ اللَّهِ آلِهَةً أُخْرَىٰ قُل لَّا أَشْهَدُ\n(\"that besides Allah there are other gods\" Say, \"I bear no (such) witness!\") Similarly, in another Ayah, Allah said;\nفَإِن شَهِدُوا فَلَا تَشْهَدْ مَعَهُمْ\n(Then if they testify, testify not you with them.)[6:150] Allah said next,\nقُلْ إِنَّمَا هُوَ إِلَٰهٌ وَاحِدٌ وَإِنَّنِي بَرِيءٌ مِّمَّا تُشْرِكُونَ\n(Say: \"Only He is God, alone, and truly I am innocent of what you join in worship with Him.\")\n\n## People of the Book Recognize the Prophet (ﷺ) Just as They Recognize Their Own Children\n\nAllah says, the People of the Book know what you brought them, O Muhammad ﷺ, as they know their own children. This is because they received good news from the previous Messengers and Prophets about the coming of Muhammad ﷺ, his attributes, homeland, his migration, and the description of his Ummah. Allah said next,\nالَّذِينَ خَسِرُوا أَنفُسَهُمْ\n(Those who have lost (destroyed) themselves) and thus incurred the ultimate loss,\nفَهُمْ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ\n(will not believe.) in this clear matter. A matter about which the previous Prophets gave good news, and a matter extolled about in ancient and modern times. Allah said next,\nوَمَنْ أَظْلَمُ مِمَّنِ افْتَرَىٰ عَلَى اللَّهِ كَذِبًا أَوْ كَذَّبَ بِآيَاتِهِ\n(And who does more wrong than he who invents a lie against Allah or rejects His Ayat?) meaning, there is no person more unjust than he who lies about Allah and claims that Allah has sent him, while Allah did not send him. There is no person more unjust than he who denies Allah's proofs, signs and evidences,\nإِنَّهُ لَا يُفْلِحُ الظَّالِمُونَ\n(Verily, the wrongdoers shall never be successful.)\nSurely, both of these people will never acquire success, whoever falsely (claims that Allah sent him) and whoever refuses [Allah's Ayat].","href":"/tafsir/6?verse=17","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:6:22","title":"Ibn Kathir · 6:22–26","text":"And on the Day when We shall gather them all together, We shall say to those who joined partners in worship (with Us): \"Where are your partners (false deities) whom you used to assert (as partners in worship with Allah)? (22)There will then be (left) no Fitnah for them but to say: \"By Allah, our Lord, we were not those who joined others (in worship with Allah). (23)Look! How they lie against themselves! But the (lie) which they invented will disappear from them (24)And of them there are some who listen to you; but We have set veils on their hearts, so they understand it not, and deafness in their ears; if they see every one of the Ayat they will not believe therein; to the point that when they come to you to argue with you, those who disbelieve say: \"These are nothing but tales of the men of old. (25)And they prevent others from him and they themselves keep away from him, and (by doing so) they destroy none but themselves, yet they perceive (it) not (26)\n\n## The Polythiests Shall be Questioned About the Shirk They Committed\n\nAbout the polytheists, Allah said:\nوَيَوْمَ نَحْشُرُهُمْ جَمِيعًا\n(And on the Day when We shall gather them all together,)\nThis is on the Day of Resurrection, when He will ask them about the idols and rivals that they worshipped instead of Him. Allah will say to them,\nأَيْنَ شُرَكَاؤُكُمُ الَّذِينَ كُنتُمْ تَزْعُمُونَ\n(Where are your partners (false deities) whom you used to assert (as partners in worship with Allah)?)\nAllah said in Surat Al-Qasas,\nوَيَوْمَ يُنَادِيهِمْ فَيَقُولُ أَيْنَ شُرَكَائِيَ الَّذِينَ كُنتُمْ تَزْعُمُونَ\n(And (remember) the Day when He will call to them, and say, \"Where are My (so-called) partners whom you used to assert?\")[28:62]. Allah's statement,\nثُمَّ لَمْ تَكُن فِتْنَتُهُمْ\n(There will then be (left) no Fitnah for them) means, argument. 'Ata' Al-Khurasani said that,\nثُمَّ لَمْ تَكُن فِتْنَتُهُمْ\n(There will then be (left) no Fitnah for them) in the face of the affliction that will be placed on them,\nإِلَّا أَن قَالُوا وَاللَّهِ رَبِّنَا مَا كُنَّا مُشْرِكِينَ\n(but to say: \"By Allah, our Lord, we were not those who joined others (in worship with Allah).\") Allah said next,\nانظُرْ كَيْفَ كَذَبُوا عَلَىٰ أَنفُسِهِمْ وَضَلَّ عَنْهُم مَّا كَانُوا يَفْتَرُونَ\n(Look! How they lie against themselves! But the (lie) which they invented will disappear from them.) which is similar to His other statement,\nثُمَّ قِيلَ لَهُمْ أَيْنَ مَا كُنتُمْ تُشْرِكُونَ - مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ قَالُوا ضَلُّوا عَنَّا بَل لَّمْ نَكُن نَّدْعُو مِن قَبْلُ شَيْئًا كَذَٰلِكَ يُضِلُّ اللَّهُ الْكَافِرِينَ\n(Then it will be said to them: \"Where are (all) those whom you used to join in worship as partners. Besides Allah?\" They will say, \"They have vanished from us: Nay, we did not invoke (worship) anything before.\" Thus Allah leads astray the disbelievers.)[40:73-74]\n\n## The Miserable Do Not Benefit from the Qur'an\n\nAllah's statement,\nوَمِنْهُم مَّن يَسْتَمِعُ إِلَيْكَ وَجَعَلْنَا عَلَىٰ قُلُوبِهِمْ أَكِنَّةً أَن يَفْقَهُوهُ وَفِي آذَانِهِمْ وَقْرًا وَإِن يَرَوْا كُلَّ آيَةٍ لَّا يُؤْمِنُوا بِهَا\n(And of them there are some who listen to you; but We have set veils on their hearts, so they understand it not, and deafness in their ears; if they see every one of the Ayat they will not believe therein;) means, they come to you, (O Muhammad ﷺ), so that they hear you recite the Qur'an, but its recitation does not benefit them, because Allah has set veils on their hearts, and so they do not understand the Qur'an,\nوَفِي آذَانِهِمْ وَقْرًا\n(and (set) deafness in their ears;) that prevents them from hearing what benefits them. In another Ayah, Allah said;\nوَمَثَلُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا كَمَثَلِ الَّذِي يَنْعِقُ بِمَا لَا يَسْمَعُ إِلَّا دُعَاءً وَنِدَاءً\n(And the example of those who disbelieve, is as that of him who shouts at one who hears nothing but calls and cries.)[2:171] Allah said next,\nوَإِن يَرَوْا كُلَّ آيَةٍ لَّا يُؤْمِنُوا بِهَا\n(if they see every one of the Ayat they will not believe therein;) meaning, they will not believe in any of the Ayat, proofs, clear evidences and signs they witness because they do not have sound comprehension or fair judgment. In another Ayah, Allah said,\nوَلَوْ عَلِمَ اللَّهُ فِيهِمْ خَيْرًا لَّأَسْمَعَهُمْ\n(Had Allah known of any good in them, He would indeed have made them listen.)[8:23] Allah said,\nحَتَّىٰ إِذَا جَاءُوكَ يُجَادِلُونَكَ\n(to the point that when they come to you to argue with you...) using falsehood against truth,\nيَقُولُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا إِنْ هَٰذَا إِلَّا أَسَاطِيرُ الْأَوَّلِينَ\n(those who disbelieve say: \"These are nothing but tales of the men of old.\")\nThe disbelievers say, what you (O Muhammad ﷺ) brought us was taken from the books of those who were before us, meaning plagiarized,\nوَهُمْ يَنْهَوْنَ عَنْهُ وَيَنْأَوْنَ عَنْهُ\n(And they prevent others from him and they themselves keep away from him,) They discourage people from following the truth, believing in Muhammad ﷺ and obeying the Qur'an,\nوَيَنْأَوْنَ عَنْهُ\n(and they themselves keep away from him,) They thus combine both evil acts, for they neither benefit themselves, nor let others benefit from the Prophet ﷺ. 'Ali bin Abi Talhah said that Ibn 'Abbas said that the Ayah,\nوَهُمْ يَنْهَوْنَ عَنْهُ\n(And they prevent others from him.) means, they hinder people from believing in Muhammad ﷺ. Muhammad bin Al-Hanafiyyah said, \"The disbelievers of Quraysh used to refrain from meeting Muhammad ﷺ and they discouraged people from coming to him.\" Similar was reported from Qatadah, Mujahid and Ad-Dahhak and several others.\nوَإِن يُهْلِكُونَ إِلَّا أَنفُسَهُمْ وَمَا يَشْعُرُونَ\n(and (by doing so) they destroy not but themselves, yet they perceive (it) not.) They destroy themselves by committing this evil action, and its harm will only touch them. Yet, they do not perceive this fact!","href":"/tafsir/6?verse=22","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:6:27","title":"Ibn Kathir · 6:27–30","text":"If you could but see when they will be held over the (Hell) Fire! They will say: \"Would that we were but sent back (to the world)! Then we would not deny the Ayat of our Lord, and we would be of the believers! (27)Nay, what they had been concealing before has become manifest to them. But if they were returned (to the world), they would certainly revert to that which they were forbidden. And indeed they are liars (28)And they said: \"There is no (other life) but our (present) life of this world, and never shall we be resurrected. (29)If you could but see when they will stand before their Lord! He will say: \"Is not this the truth?\" They will say: \"Yes, by our Lord!\" He will then say: \"So taste you the torment because you used not to believe. (30)\n\n## Wishes and Hopes Do Not Help One When He Sees the Torment\n\nAllah mentions the condition of the disbelievers when they are made to stand before the Fire on the Day of Resurrection and witness its chains and restraints, along with seeing the horrible, momentous conditions in the Fire with their own eyes. This is when the disbelievers will say,\nيَا لَيْتَنَا نُرَدُّ وَلَا نُكَذِّبَ بِآيَاتِ رَبِّنَا وَنَكُونَ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ\n(\"Would that we were but sent back (to the world)! Then we would not deny the Ayat of our Lord, and we would be of the believers!\")\nThey wish that they would be sent back to the life of the world so that they could perform righteous deeds, refrain from disbelieving in the Ayat of their Lord and be among the believers. Allah said,\nبَلْ بَدَا لَهُم مَّا كَانُوا يُخْفُونَ مِن قَبْلُ\n(Nay, what they had been concealing before has become manifest to them.) meaning, the disbelief, denial and rebellion that they used to hide in their hearts will then be uncovered, even though they will try to hide this fact in this life and the Hereafter. Earlier, Allah said,\nثُمَّ لَمْ تَكُن فِتْنَتُهُمْ إِلَّا أَن قَالُوا وَاللَّهِ رَبِّنَا مَا كُنَّا مُشْرِكِينَ - انظُرْ كَيْفَ كَذَبُوا عَلَىٰ أَنفُسِهِمْ وَضَلَّ عَنْهُم مَّا كَانُوا يَفْتَرُونَ\n(There will then be (left) no trial for them but to say: \"By Allah, our Lord, we were not those who joined others in worship with Allah.\" Look! How they lie against themselves! But the (lie) which they invented will disappear from them.)\nIt is also possible that the meaning here is that the disbelievers will realize the truth that they knew all along in their hearts, that is, that what the Messengers brought them in this life is true, although they used to deny his Message before their followers. Allah said that Musa said to Fir'awn,\nلَقَدْ عَلِمْتَ مَا أَنزَلَ هَٰؤُلَاءِ إِلَّا رَبُّ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ بَصَائِرَ\n(\"Verily, you know that these signs have clearly been sent down by none but the Lord of the heavens and the earth as eye-opening evidence.\")[17:102] Allah said about Fir'awn and his people,\nوَجَحَدُوا بِهَا وَاسْتَيْقَنَتْهَا أَنفُسُهُمْ ظُلْمًا وَعُلُوًّا\n(And they belied them (those Ayat) wrongfully and arrogantly, though they were themselves convinced thereof.)[27:14]\nبَلْ بَدَا لَهُم مَّا كَانُوا يُخْفُونَ مِن قَبْلُ\n(Nay, it has become manifest to them what they had been concealing before.)[6:28]\nWhen this occurs, and the disbelievers ask to be returned to this life, they will not do so because they truly wish to embrace the faith. Rather, they ask to be returned to this life for fear of the torment that they are witnessing before them, as punishment for the disbelief they committed, and to try and avoid the Fire that they see before their eyes.\nوَلَوْ رُدُّوا لَعَادُوا لِمَا نُهُوا عَنْهُ وَإِنَّهُمْ لَكَاذِبُونَ\n(But if they were returned, they would certainly revert to that which they were forbidden. And indeed they are liars.) meaning, they lie when they say they wish to go back to this life so that they can embrace the faith. Allah states that even if they were sent back to the life of this world, they will again commit the disbelief and defiance that they were prohibited.\nوَإِنَّهُمْ لَكَاذِبُونَ\n(And indeed they are liars.) in their statement that,\nيَا لَيْتَنَا نُرَدُّ وَلَا نُكَذِّبَ بِآيَاتِ رَبِّنَا وَنَكُونَ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ - بَلْ بَدَا لَهُم مَّا كَانُوا يُخْفُونَ مِن قَبْلُ وَلَوْ رُدُّوا لَعَادُوا لِمَا نُهُوا عَنْهُ وَإِنَّهُمْ لَكَاذِبُونَ - وَقَالُوا إِنْ هِيَ إِلَّا حَيَاتُنَا الدُّنْيَا وَمَا نَحْنُ بِمَبْعُوثِينَ\n(\"Would that we were but sent back! Then we would not deny the Ayat of our Lord, and we would be of the believers!\" Nay, what they had been concealing before has become manifest to them. But if they were returned, they would certainly revert to that which they were forbidden. And indeed they are liars. And they said: \"There is no (other life) but our (present) life of this world, and never shall we be resurrected.\") Therefore, they will revert to their old behavior and say,\nإِنْ هِيَ إِلَّا حَيَاتُنَا الدُّنْيَا\n(There is no life but our life of this world) and there is no Hereafter,\nوَمَا نَحْنُ بِمَبْعُوثِينَ\n(and never shall we be resurrected.) Allah said,\nوَلَوْ تَرَىٰ إِذْ وُقِفُوا عَلَىٰ رَبِّهِمْ\n(If you could but see when they will stand before their Lord!) in front of Him,\nأَلَيْسَ هَٰذَا بِالْحَقِّ\n(\"Is not this the truth?\") meaning, is not Resurrection true, contarary to what you thought,\nقَالُوا بَلَىٰ وَرَبِّنَا قَالَ فَذُوقُوا الْعَذَابَ بِمَا كُنتُمْ تَكْفُرُونَ\n(They will say: \"Yes, by our Lord!\" He will then say: \"So taste you the torment because you used not to believe.\") and because you today denied Resurrection. Therefore, taste the torment,\nأَفَسِحْرٌ هَٰذَا أَمْ أَنتُمْ لَا تُبْصِرُونَ\n(\"Is this magic, or do you not see\")[52:15]","href":"/tafsir/6?verse=27","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:6:31","title":"Ibn Kathir · 6:31–32","text":"They indeed are losers who denied their meeting with Allah, until all of a sudden, the Hour (signs of death) is upon them, and they say: \"Alas for us that we gave no thought to it,\" while they will bear their burdens on their backs; and evil indeed are the burdens that they will bear (31)And the life of this world is nothing but play and amusement. But far better is the abode of the Hereafter for those have Taqwa. Will you not then understand (32)\n\n## Allah describes the regret of the disbelievers when facing Him, and their disappointment at the commencement, along with their sorrow for not performing good deeds and for their evil deeds.\n\nThis is why Allah said,\nحَتَّىٰ إِذَا جَاءَتْهُمُ السَّاعَةُ بَغْتَةً قَالُوا يَا حَسْرَتَنَا عَلَىٰ مَا فَرَّطْنَا فِيهَا\n(until all of a sudden, the Hour (signs of death) is upon them, and they say: \"Alas for us that we gave no thought to it.\")\nIt' here refers to either the life of this world, or the affairs of the Hereafter. Allah's statement,\nوَهُمْ يَحْمِلُونَ أَوْزَارَهُمْ عَلَىٰ ظُهُورِهِمْ أَلَا سَاءَ مَا يَزِرُونَ\n(while they will bear their burdens on their backs; and evil indeed are the burdens that they will bear!)\nAsbat said that As-Suddi said, \"Upon entering his grave, every unjust person will meet a man with an ugly face, dark skin, awful odor, wearing dirty clothes, who will enter his grave with him. When the unjust person sees him, he will say, 'How ugly is your face!' He will reply, 'So was your work, it was ugly.' The unjust person will say, 'How foul is the odor coming from you!' He will reply, 'Such was the case with your work, it stunk.' The unjust person will say, 'How dirty are your clothes!' He will reply, 'And your work too was dirty.' The unjust person will ask, 'Who are you?' He will reply, 'I am your deeds.' So he will remain with the unjust person in his grave, and when he is resurrected on the Day of Resurrection, his companion will say to him, 'In the life of the world, I used to carry you because you followed desire and lust. Today, you carry me.' So he will ride on the unjust person's back and lead him until he enters the Fire. So Allah said,\nوَهُمْ يَحْمِلُونَ أَوْزَارَهُمْ عَلَىٰ ظُهُورِهِمْ أَلَا سَاءَ مَا يَزِرُونَ\n(while they will bear their burdens on their backs; and evil indeed are the burdens that they will bear!)[6:31]\" Allah's statement,\nوَمَا الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا إِلَّا لَعِبٌ وَلَهْوٌ\n(And the life of this world is nothing but play and amusement.) means, most of it is play and amusement,\nوَلَلدَّارُ الْآخِرَةُ خَيْرٌ لِّلَّذِينَ يَتَّقُونَ أَفَلَا تَعْقِلُونَ\n(But far better is the abode of the Hereafter for those who have Taqwa. Will you not then understand?)","href":"/tafsir/6?verse=31","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:6:33","title":"Ibn Kathir · 6:33–36","text":"We know indeed the grief which their words cause you; it is not you that they deny, but it is the verses of Allah that the wrongdoers deny (33)Verily, (many) Messengers were denied before you, but with patience they bore the denial, and they were hurt, till Our help reached them, and none can alter the Words of Allah. Surely, there has reached you the information about the Messengers (before you)(34)If their aversion is hard on you, then if you were able to seek a tunnel in the ground or a ladder to the sky, so that you may bring them a sign. And had Allah willed, He could have gathered them together upon true guidance, so be not you one of the ignorant (35)It is only those who listen, that will respond, but as for the dead, Allah will raise them up, then to Him they will be returned (36)\n\n## Comforting the Prophet (ﷺ)\n\nAllah comforts the Prophet ﷺ in his grief over his people's denial and defiance of him,\nقَدْ نَعْلَمُ إِنَّهُ لَيَحْزُنُكَ الَّذِي يَقُولُونَ\n(We know indeed the grief which their words cause you;) meaning, We know about their denial of you and your sadness and sorrow for them. Allah said in other Ayat,\nفَلَا تَذْهَبْ نَفْسُكَ عَلَيْهِمْ حَسَرَاتٍ\n(So destroy not yourself in sorrow for them.)[35:8], and\nلَعَلَّكَ بَاخِعٌ نَّفْسَكَ أَلَّا يَكُونُوا مُؤْمِنِينَ\n(It may be that you are going to kill yourself with grief, that they do not become believers.)[26:3], and,\nفَلَعَلَّكَ بَاخِعٌ نَّفْسَكَ عَلَىٰ آثَارِهِمْ إِن لَّمْ يُؤْمِنُوا بِهَٰذَا الْحَدِيثِ أَسَفًا\n(Perhaps, you, would kill yourself in grief, over their footsteps (for their turning away from you), because they believe not in this narration.)[18:6] Allah's statement,\nفَإِنَّهُمْ لَا يُكَذِّبُونَكَ وَلَٰكِنَّ الظَّالِمِينَ بِآيَاتِ اللَّهِ يَجْحَدُونَ\n(it is not you that they deny, but it is the verses of Allah that the wrongdoers deny.) means, they do not accuse you of being a liar,\nوَلَٰكِنَّ الظَّالِمِينَ بِآيَاتِ اللَّهِ يَجْحَدُونَ\n(but it is the Verses of Allah that the wrongdoers deny.)\nIt is only the truth that they reject and refuse. Muhammad bin Ishaq mentioned that Az-Zuhri said that Abu Jahl, Abu Sufyan Sakhr bin Harb and Al-Akhnas bin Shurayq once came to listen to the Prophet ﷺ reciting the Qur'an at night, but these three men were not aware of the presence of each other. So they listened to the Prophet's recitation until the morning, and then left. They met each other on their way back and each one of them asked the others, \"What brought you?\" So they mentioned to each other the reason why they came. They vowed not to repeat this incident so that the young men of Quraysh would not hear of what they did and imitate them. On the second night, each one of the three came back thinking that the other two would not come because of the vows they made to each other. In the morning, they again met each other on their way back and criticized each other, vowing not to repeat what they did. On the third night, they again went to listen to the Prophet ﷺ and in the morning they again vowed not to repeat this incident. During that day, Al-Akhnas bin Shurayq took his staff and went to Abu Sufyan bin Harb in his house saying, \"O Abu Hanzalah! What is your opinion concerning what you heard from Muhammad.\" Abu Sufyan said, \"O Abu Tha'labah! By Allah, I have heard some things that I recognize and know their implications. I also heard some things whose meaning and implications were unknown to me.\" Al-Akhnas said, \"And I the same, by He Whom you swore by!\" Al-Akhnas left Abu Sufyan and went to Abu Jahl and asked him, \"O Abu Al-Hakam! What is your opinion about what you heard from Muhammad. \" Abu Jahl said, \"We competed with Bani 'Abd Manaf (the Prophet's subtribe) and so we fed as they fed and gave away as they gave away. So, when we were neck and neck with them, just as two horses in a race, they said, 'There is a Prophet from among us, to whom revelation from the heaven comes.' So how can we ever beat them at that? By Allah we will never believe in him or accept what he says.' This is when Al-Akhnas left Abu Jahl and went away.\"\nAllah's statement,\nوَلَقَدْ كُذِّبَتْ رُسُلٌ مِّن قَبْلِكَ فَصَبَرُوا عَلَىٰ مَا كُذِّبُوا وَأُوذُوا حَتَّىٰ أَتَاهُمْ نَصْرُنَا\n(Verily, (many) Messengers were denied before you, but with patience they bore the denial, and they were hurt, till Our help reached them,)\nThis comforts the Prophet's concern for those who denied and rejected him. Allah also commands the Prophet ﷺ to be patient, just as the mighty Messengers before him were. He also promised him victory, just as the previous Messengers were victorious and the good end was theirs, after the denial and harm their people placed on them. Then, victory came to them in this life, just as victory is theirs in the Hereafter. Allah said,\nوَلَا مُبَدِّلَ لِكَلِمَاتِ اللَّهِ\n(and none can alter the Words of Allah.)\nThis refers to His decision that victory in this life and the Hereafter is for His believing servants. Allah said in other Ayat,\nوَلَقَدْ سَبَقَتْ كَلِمَتُنَا لِعِبَادِنَا الْمُرْسَلِينَ - إِنَّهُمْ لَهُمُ الْمَنصُورُونَ - وَإِنَّ جُندَنَا لَهُمُ الْغَالِبُونَ\n(And, verily, Our Word has gone forth of old for Our servants, the Messengers. That they verily would be made triumphant. And that Our hosts, they verily would be the victors.)[37:171-173], and,\nكَتَبَ اللَّهُ لَأَغْلِبَنَّ أَنَا وَرُسُلِي إِنَّ اللَّهَ قَوِيٌّ عَزِيزٌ\n(Allah has decreed: \"Verily! It is I and My Messengers who shall be the victorious.\" Verily, Allah is All-Powerful, Almighty.)[58:21] Allah said;\nوَلَقَدْ جَاءَكَ مِن نَّبَإِ الْمُرْسَلِينَ\n(Surely, there has reached you the information about the Messengers (before you).) who were given victory and prevailed over the people who rejected them. And you (O Muhammad ﷺ), have a good example in them. Allah said next,\nوَإِن كَانَ كَبُرَ عَلَيْكَ إِعْرَاضُهُمْ\n(If their aversion is hard on you,) and you cannot be patient because of their aversion,\nفَإِنِ اسْتَطَعْتَ أَن تَبْتَغِيَ نَفَقًا فِي الْأَرْضِ أَوْ سُلَّمًا فِي السَّمَاءِ\n(then if you were able to seek a tunnel in the ground or a ladder to the sky...)\n'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas commented, \"If you were able to seek a tunnel and bring them an Ayah, or go up a ladder in the sky and bring a better Ayah than the one I (Allah) gave them, then do that.\" Similar was reported from Qatadah, As-Suddi and others. Allah's statement,\nوَلَوْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ لَجَمَعَهُمْ عَلَى الْهُدَىٰ فَلَا تَكُونَنَّ مِنَ الْجَاهِلِينَ\n(And had Allah willed, He could have gathered them together upon true guidance, so be not you one of the ignorant.) is similar to His statement,\nوَلَوْ شَاءَ رَبُّكَ لَآمَنَ مَن فِي الْأَرْضِ كُلُّهُمْ جَمِيعًا\n(And had your Lord willed, those on earth would have believed, all of them together) 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas said about Allah's statement,\nوَلَوْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ لَجَمَعَهُمْ عَلَى الْهُدَىٰ\n(And had Allah willed, He could have gathered them together upon true guidance,)\n\"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ was eager that all people believe and be guided to follow him. Allah told him that only those whose happiness Allah has written in the first Dhikr will believe.\" Allah's statement,\nإِنَّمَا يَسْتَجِيبُ الَّذِينَ يَسْمَعُونَ\n(It is only those who listen, that will respond,) means, only those who hear the speech, comprehend and understand it, will accept your call, O Muhammad ﷺ! In another Ayah, Allah said;\nلِّيُنذِرَ مَن كَانَ حَيًّا وَيَحِقَّ الْقَوْلُ عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ\n(That it may give warning to him who is living, and that the Word may be justified against the disbelievers.)[36:70]. Allah's statement,\nوَالْمَوْتَىٰ يَبْعَثُهُمُ اللَّهُ ثُمَّ إِلَيْهِ يُرْجَعُونَ\n(but as for the dead, Allah will raise them up, then to Him they will be returned.) refers to the disbelievers because their hearts are dead. Therefore, Allah resembled them to dead corpses as a way of mocking and belittling them, saying,\nوَالْمَوْتَىٰ يَبْعَثُهُمُ اللَّهُ ثُمَّ إِلَيْهِ يُرْجَعُونَ\n(but as for the dead (disbelievers), Allah will raise them up, then to Him they will be returned (for their recompense).)","href":"/tafsir/6?verse=33","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:6:37","title":"Ibn Kathir · 6:37–39","text":"And they said: \"Why is not a sign sent down to him from his Lord?\" Say: \"Allah is certainly able to send down a sign, but most of them know not. (37)There is not a moving creature on earth, nor a bird that flies with its two wings, but are Umam like you. We have neglected nothing in the Book, then unto their Lord they (all) shall be gathered (38)Those who reject Our Ayat are deaf and dumb in darkness. Allah sends astray whom He wills and He guides on the straight path whom He wills (39)\n\n## The Idolators Ask for a Miracle\n\nAllah states that the idolators used to proclaim, \"Why does not (Muhammad) bring an Ayah from his Lord,\" meaning, a miracle of their choice! They would sometimes say,\nلَن نُّؤْمِنَ لَكَ حَتَّىٰ تَفْجُرَ لَنَا مِنَ الْأَرْضِ يَنبُوعًا\n(\"We shall not believe in you, until you cause a spring to gush forth from the ground for us.\")[17:90].\nقُلْ إِنَّ اللَّهَ قَادِرٌ عَلَىٰ أَن يُنَزِّلَ آيَةً وَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَهُمْ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ\n(Say: \"Allah is certainly able to send down a sign, but most of them know not.\")\nCertainly, Allah is able to send an Ayah (sign). But, He decided out of His wisdom to delay that, because if He sends an Ayah of their liking and they still do not believe, this will hasten their punishment as with the previous nations. Allah said in other Ayat,\nوَمَا مَنَعَنَا أَن نُّرْسِلَ بِالْآيَاتِ إِلَّا أَن كَذَّبَ بِهَا الْأَوَّلُونَ وَآتَيْنَا ثَمُودَ النَّاقَةَ مُبْصِرَةً فَظَلَمُوا بِهَا وَمَا نُرْسِلُ بِالْآيَاتِ إِلَّا تَخْوِيفًا\n(And nothing stops Us from sending the Ayat but that the people of old denied them. And We sent the she-camel to Thamud as a clear sign, but they did her wrong. And We sent not the signs except to warn, and to make them afraid (of destruction).)[17:59], and,\nإِن نَّشَأْ نُنَزِّلْ عَلَيْهِم مِّنَ السَّمَاءِ آيَةً فَظَلَّتْ أَعْنَاقُهُمْ لَهَا خَاضِعِينَ\n(If We will, We could send down to them from the heaven a sign, to which they would bend their necks in humility)[26:4].\n\n## The Meaning of Umam\n\nAllah said,\nوَمَا مِن دَابَّةٍ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَلَا طَائِرٍ يَطِيرُ بِجَنَاحَيْهِ إِلَّا أُمَمٌ أَمْثَالُكُم\n(There is not a moving (living) creature on earth, nor a bird that flies with its two wings, but are Umam like you.)\nMujahid commented, \"Meaning, various species that have distinct names.\" Qatadah said, \"Birds are an Ummah, humans are an Ummah and the Jinns are an Ummah.\" As-Suddi said that,\nإِلَّا أُمَمٌ أَمْثَالُكُم\n(but are Umam like you.) means, creations (or species). Allah's statement,\nمَّا فَرَّطْنَا فِي الْكِتَابِ مِن شَيْءٍ\n(We have neglected nothing in the Book,) means, the knowledge about all things is with Allah, and He never forgets any of His creatures, nor their sustenance, nor their affairs, whether these creatures live in the sea or on land. In another Ayah, Allah said;\nوَمَا مِن دَابَّةٍ فِي الْأَرْضِ إِلَّا عَلَى اللَّهِ رِزْقُهَا وَيَعْلَمُ مُسْتَقَرَّهَا وَمُسْتَوْدَعَهَا كُلٌّ فِي كِتَابٍ مُّبِينٍ\n(And no moving creature is there on earth but its provision is due from Allah. And He knows its dwelling place and its deposit (in the uterus, grave, etc.). All is in a Clear Book.)[11:6], there is a record of their names, numbers, movements, and lack of movement. In another Ayah, Allah said;\nوَكَأَيِّن مِّن دَابَّةٍ لَّا تَحْمِلُ رِزْقَهَا اللَّهُ يَرْزُقُهَا وَإِيَّاكُمْ وَهُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ\n(And so many a moving creature there is, that carries not its own provision! Allah provides for it and for you. And He is the All-Hearer, the All-Knower.)[29:60] Ibn Abi Hatim reported that Ibn 'Abbas said about the Ayah,\nثُمَّ إِلَىٰ رَبِّهِمْ يُحْشَرُونَ\n(then unto their Lord they (all) shall be gathered.) \"Death gathers them.\" It was also said that the Day of Resurrection gathers them, for in another Ayah, Allah said;\nوَإِذَا الْوُحُوشُ حُشِرَتْ\n(And when the wild beasts shall be gathered together.)[81:5] 'Abdur-Razzaq recorded that Abu Hurayrah said about Allah's statement,\nإِلَّا أُمَمٌ أَمْثَالُكُم مَّا فَرَّطْنَا فِي الْكِتَابِ مِن شَيْءٍ ثُمَّ إِلَىٰ رَبِّهِمْ يُحْشَرُونَ\n(but are Umam like you. We have neglected nothing in the Book, then unto their Lord they (all) shall be gathered.)\n\"All creatures will be gathered on the Day of Resurrection, the beasts, birds and all others. Allah's justice will be so perfect, that the un-horned sheep will receive retribution from the horned sheep. Allah will then command them, 'Be dust!' This is when the disbeliever will say,\nيَا لَيْتَنِي كُنتُ تُرَابًا\n(\"Woe to me! Would that I were dust!\")\" [78: 40]. And this was reported from the Prophet ﷺ in the Hadith about the Trumpet.\n\n## The Disbelievers will be Deaf and Mute in Darkness\n\nAllah said,\nوَالَّذِينَ كَذَّبُوا بِآيَاتِنَا صُمٌّ وَبُكْمٌ فِي الظُّلُمَاتِ\n(Those who reject Our Ayat are deaf and dumb in darkness.) due to their ignorance, little knowledge and minute comprehension. Their example is that of the deaf-mute who cannot hear nor speak, as well as being blinded by darkness. Therefore, how can such a person find guidance to the path or change the condition he is in? Allah said in other Ayat,\nمَثَلُهُمْ كَمَثَلِ الَّذِي اسْتَوْقَدَ نَارًا فَلَمَّا أَضَاءَتْ مَا حَوْلَهُ ذَهَبَ اللَّهُ بِنُورِهِمْ وَتَرَكَهُمْ فِي ظُلُمَاتٍ لَّا يُبْصِرُونَ - صُمٌّ بُكْمٌ عُمْيٌ فَهُمْ لَا يَرْجِعُونَ\n(Their parable is that of one who kindled a fire; then, when it illuminated all around him, Allah took away their light and left them in darkness. (So) they could not see. They are deaf, dumb, and blind, so they return not (to the right path))[2:17-18], and,\nأَوْ كَظُلُمَاتٍ فِي بَحْرٍ لُّجِّيٍّ يَغْشَاهُ مَوْجٌ مِّن فَوْقِهِ مَوْجٌ مِّن فَوْقِهِ سَحَابٌ ظُلُمَاتٌ بَعْضُهَا فَوْقَ بَعْضٍ إِذَا أَخْرَجَ يَدَهُ لَمْ يَكَدْ يَرَاهَا وَمَن لَّمْ يَجْعَلِ اللَّهُ لَهُ نُورًا فَمَا لَهُ مِن نُّورٍ\n(Or like the darkness in a vast deep sea, overwhelmed with a great wave topped by a great wave, topped by dark clouds, darkness, one above another, if a man stretches out his hand, he can hardly see it! And he for whom Allah has not appointed light, for him there is no light.)[24:40] This is why Allah said here,\nمَن يَشَإِ اللَّهُ يُضْلِلْهُ وَمَن يَشَأْ يَجْعَلْهُ عَلَىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُّسْتَقِيمٍ\n(Allah sends astray whom He wills and He guides on the straight path whom He wills.) for He does what He wills with His creatures.","href":"/tafsir/6?verse=37","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:6:40","title":"Ibn Kathir · 6:40–45","text":"Say: \"Tell me if Allah's torment comes upon you, or the Hour comes upon you, would you then call upon any one other than Allah? (Reply) if you are truthful! (40)Nay! To Him alone you call, and, if He willed, He would remove that (distress) for which you call upon Him, and you forget at that time whatever partners you joined with Him (in worship)(41)Verily, We sent (Messengers) to many nations before you. And We seized them with extreme poverty and loss of health so that they might believe with humility (42)When Our torment reached them, why then did they not believe with humility? But their hearts became hardened, and Shaytan made fair-seeming to them that which they used to do (43)So, when they forgot (the warning) with which they had been reminded, We opened to them the gates of every (pleasant) thing, until in the midst of their enjoyment in that which they were given, all of a sudden, We took them to punishment, and lo! They were plunged into destruction with deep regrets and sorrows (44)So the roots of the people who did wrong were cut off. And all the praises and thanks be to Allah, the Lord of the all that exists (45)\n\n## The Idolators Call On Allah Alone During Torment and Distress\n\nAllah states that He does what He wills with His creatures and none can resist His decision or avert what He decrees for them. He is the One Who has no partners, Who accepts the supplication from whomever He wills. Allah said,\nقُلْ أَرَأَيْتَكُمْ إِنْ أَتَاكُمْ عَذَابُ اللَّهِ أَوْ أَتَتْكُمُ السَّاعَةُ أَغَيْرَ اللَّهِ تَدْعُونَ إِن كُنتُمْ صَادِقِينَ\n(Say: \"Tell me if Allah's torment comes upon you, or the Hour comes upon you, would you then call upon any one other than Allah? (Reply) if you are truthful!\")\nThis means, you – disbelievers – will not call other than Allah in this case, because you know that none except He is able to remove the affliction. Allah said,\nإِن كُنتُمْ صَادِقِينَ\n(if you are truthful?) by taking gods besides Him.\nبَلْ إِيَّاهُ تَدْعُونَ فَيَكْشِفُ مَا تَدْعُونَ إِلَيْهِ إِن شَاءَ وَتَنسَوْنَ مَا تُشْرِكُونَ\n(Nay! To Him alone you call, and, if He willed, He would remove that (distress) for which you call upon Him, and you forget at that time whatever partners you joined with Him (in worship)!) for in times of necessity, you only call on Allah and forget your idols and false deities. In another Ayah, Allah said;\nوَإِذَا مَسَّكُمُ الضُّرُّ فِي الْبَحْرِ ضَلَّ مَن تَدْعُونَ إِلَّا إِيَّاهُ\n(And when harm touches you upon the sea, those that you call upon besides Him vanish from you except Him (Allah))[17:67]. Allah said;\nوَلَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا إِلَىٰ أُمَمٍ مِّن قَبْلِكَ فَأَخَذْنَاهُم بِالْبَأْسَاءِ\n(Verily, We sent (Messengers) to many nations before you. And We seized them with extreme poverty...) That is, loss of wealth and diminished provisions,\nوَالضَّرَّاءِ\n(and loss of health) various illnesses, diseases and pain,\nلَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَضَرَّعُونَ\n(so that they might believe with humility) and call Allah and supplicate to Him with humbleness and humility. Allah said;\nفَلَوْلَا إِذْ جَاءَهُم بَأْسُنَا تَضَرَّعُوا\n(When Our torment reached them, why then did they not believe with humility?) Meaning: Why do they not believe and humble themselves before Us when We test them with disaster?'\nوَلَٰكِن قَسَتْ قُلُوبُهُمْ\n(But their hearts became hardened,) for their hearts are not soft or humble,\nوَزَيَّنَ لَهُمُ الشَّيْطَانُ مَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ\n(and Shaytan made fair-seeming to them that which they used to do.) That is, Shirk, defiance and rebellion.\nفَلَمَّا نَسُوا مَا ذُكِّرُوا بِهِ\n(So, when they forgot (the warning) with which they had been reminded,) by ignoring and turning away from it,\nفَتَحْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ أَبْوَابَ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ\n(We opened to them the gates of everything,) Meaning: 'We opened the gates of provisions for them from wherever they wished, so that We deceive them.' We seek refuge with Allah from such an end. This is why Allah said,\nحَتَّىٰ إِذَا فَرِحُوا بِمَا أُوتُوا\n(until in the midst of their enjoyment in that which they were given,) such as wealth, children and provisions,\nأَخَذْنَاهُم بَغْتَةً فَإِذَا هُم مُّبْلِسُونَ\n(all of a sudden, We took them to punishment and lo! They were plunged into destruction with deep regrets and sorrows.)\nThey have no hope for any type of good thing. Al-Hasan Al-Basri said, \"Whomever Allah gives provision and he thinks that Allah is not testing him, has no wisdom. Whomever has little provision and thinks that Allah will not look at (provide for) him, has no wisdom.\" He then recited the Ayah,\nفَلَمَّا نَسُوا مَا ذُكِّرُوا بِهِ فَتَحْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ أَبْوَابَ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ حَتَّىٰ إِذَا فَرِحُوا بِمَا أُوتُوا أَخَذْنَاهُم بَغْتَةً فَإِذَا هُم مُّبْلِسُونَ\n(So, when they forgot (the warning) with which they had been reminded, We opened to them the gates of every (pleasant) thing, until in the midst of their enjoyment in that which they were given, all of a sudden, We took them to punishment, and lo! They were plunged into destruction with deep regrets and sorrows.)\nHe added, \"By the Lord of the Ka'bah! Allah deceived these people, when He gave them what they wished, and then they were punished.\" Ibn Abi Hatim recorded this statement.","href":"/tafsir/6?verse=40","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:6:46","title":"Ibn Kathir · 6:46–49","text":"Say: \"Tell me, if Allah took away your hearing and your sight, and sealed up your hearts, is there a god other than Allah who could restore them to you?\" See how variously We explain the Ayat, yet they turn aside (46)Say: \"Tell me, if the punishment of Allah comes to you suddenly, or openly, will any be destroyed except the wrongdoing people? (47)And We send not the Messengers but as givers of glad tidings and as warners. So whosoever believes and does righteous good deeds, upon such shall come no fear, nor shall they grieve (48)But those who reject Our Ayat, the torment will strike them for their rebelling (49)\nAllah said to His Messenger, say, O Muhammad ﷺ, to those rebellious liars,\nأَرَأَيْتُمْ إِنْ أَخَذَ اللَّهُ سَمْعَكُمْ وَأَبْصَارَكُمْ\n(Tell me, if Allah took away your hearing and your sight.) just as He gave these senses to you. In another Ayah, Allah said;\nهُوَ الَّذِي أَنشَأَكُمْ وَجَعَلَ لَكُمُ السَّمْعَ وَالْأَبْصَارَ\n(It is He Who has created you, and endowed you with hearing, seeing.)[67:23].\nThe Ayah above might also mean that Allah will not allow the disbelievers to benefit from these senses in religious terms. This is why He said next,\nوَخَتَمَ عَلَىٰ قُلُوبِكُم\n(and sealed up your hearts,.) He also said in other Ayat,\nأَمَّن يَمْلِكُ السَّمْعَ وَالْأَبْصَارَ\n(Or who owns hearing and sight)[10:31], and,\nوَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ يَحُولُ بَيْنَ الْمَرْءِ وَقَلْبِهِ\n(And know that Allah comes in between a person and his heart.)[8:24] Allah said;\nمَّنْ إِلَٰهٌ غَيْرُ اللَّهِ يَأْتِيكُم بِهِ\n(Is there a god other than Allah who could restore them to you?) Meaning, is there anyone except Allah who is able to give you back these senses if Allah took them from you? Only Allah is able to do so, and this is why He said here,\nانظُرْ كَيْفَ نُصَرِّفُ الْآيَاتِ\n(See how variously We explain the Ayat,) and make them plain and clear, testifying to Allah's Oneness in lordship and that those worshipped besides Him are all false and unworthy.\nثُمَّ هُمْ يَصْدِفُونَ\n(yet they turn aside.) After this explanation, they still turn away from the truth and hinder people from following it. Allah's statement,\nقُلْ أَرَأَيْتَكُمْ إِنْ أَتَاكُمْ عَذَابُ اللَّهِ بَغْتَةً\n(Say: \"Tell me, if the punishment of Allah comes to you suddenly...\") means, while you are unaware – or during the night – striking you all of a sudden,\nأَوْ جَهْرَةً\n(or openly) during the day, or publicly,\nهَلْ يُهْلَكُ إِلَّا الْقَوْمُ الظَّالِمُونَ\n(will any be destroyed except the wrongdoing people)\nThis torment only strikes those who commit injustice against themselves by associating others with Allah, while those who worship Allah alone without partners will be saved from it, and they will have no fear or sorrow. In another Ayah, Allah said;\nالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَلَمْ يَلْبِسُوا إِيمَانَهُم بِظُلْمٍ\n(It is those who believe and confuse not their belief with Zulm, (wrong or Shirk).)[6:82] Allah's statement,\nوَمَا نُرْسِلُ الْمُرْسَلِينَ إِلَّا مُبَشِّرِينَ وَمُنذِرِينَ\n(And We send not the Messengers but as bearers of glad tidings and as warners.) means, the Messengers bring good news to Allah's servants, as well as, command all that is good and righteous. They also warn those who disbelieve in Allah of His anger and of all types of torment. Allah said,\nفَمَنْ آمَنَ وَأَصْلَحَ\n(So whosoever believes and does righteous good deeds.) meaning, whoever believes in his heart with what the Messengers were sent with and makes his works righteous by imitating them;\nفَلَا خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ\n(upon such shall come no fear,) concerning the future,\nوَلَا هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ\n(nor shall they grieve.) about what they missed in the past and left behind them in this world. Certainly, Allah will be the Wali and Protector over what they left behind. Allah said next,\nوَالَّذِينَ كَذَّبُوا بِآيَاتِنَا يَمَسُّهُمُ الْعَذَابُ بِمَا كَانُوا يَفْسُقُونَ\n(But those who reject Our Ayat, the torment will strike them for their rebelling.)\nThe torment will strike them because of disbelieving in the Message of the Messengers, defying Allah's commands, committing what He prohibited and transgressing His set limits.","href":"/tafsir/6?verse=46","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:6:50","title":"Ibn Kathir · 6:50–54","text":"Say: \"I don't tell you that with me are the treasures of Allah, nor (that) I know the Unseen; nor do I tell you that I am an angel. I but follow what is revealed to me.\" Say: \"Are the blind and the one who sees equal? Will you not then consider? (50)And warn therewith those who fear that they will be gathered before their Lord, when there will be neither a protector nor an intercessor for them besides Him, so that they may have Taqwa (51)And turn not away those who invoke their Lord, morning and evening seeking His Face. You are accountable for them in nothing, and they are accountable for you in nothing, that you may turn them away, and thus become of the wrongdoers (52)Thus We have tried some of them with others, that they might say: \"Is it these (poor believers) that Allah has favored from amongst us?\" Does not Allah know best those who are grateful (53)When those who believe in Our Ayat come to you, say: \"Salamun 'Alaykum\" (peace be on you); your Lord has written mercy for Himself, so that, if any of you does evil in ignorance, and thereafter repents and does righteous good deeds, then surely, He is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful (54)\n\n## The Messenger Neither has the Key to Allah's Treasures, Nor Knows the Unseen\n\nAllah said to His Messenger ﷺ,\nقُل لَّا أَقُولُ لَكُمْ عِندِي خَزَائِنُ اللَّهِ\n(Say: \"I don't tell you that with me are the treasures of Allah.\") meaning, I do not own Allah's treasures or have any power over them,\nوَلَا أَعْلَمُ الْغَيْبَ\n(nor (that) I know the Unseen,) and I do not say that I know the Unseen, because its knowledge is with Allah and I only know what He conveys of it to me.\nوَلَا أَقُولُ لَكُمْ إِنِّي مَلَكٌ\n(nor I tell you that I am an angel.) meaning, I do not claim that I am an angel. I am only a human to whom Allah sends revelation, and He honored me with this duty and favored me with it.\nإِنْ أَتَّبِعُ إِلَّا مَا يُوحَىٰ إِلَيَّ\n(I but follow what is revealed to me.) and I never disobey the revelation in the least.\nقُلْ هَلْ يَسْتَوِي الْأَعْمَىٰ وَالْبَصِيرُ\n(Say: \"Are the blind and the one who sees equal?\") meaning, 'Is the one who is guided, following the truth, equal to the one misled?'\nأَفَلَا تَتَفَكَّرُونَ\n(Will you not then consider?) In another Ayah, Allah said;\nأَفَمَن يَعْلَمُ أَنَّمَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْكَ مِن رَّبِّكَ الْحَقُّ كَمَنْ هُوَ أَعْمَىٰ إِنَّمَا يَتَذَكَّرُ أُولُو الْأَلْبَابِ\n(Shall he then who knows that what has been revealed to you from your Lord is the truth, be like him who is blind? But it is only the men of understanding that pay heed.)[13:19] Allah's statement,\nوَأَنذِرْ بِهِ الَّذِينَ يَخَافُونَ أَن يُحْشَرُوا إِلَىٰ رَبِّهِمْ لَيْسَ لَهُم مِّن دُونِهِ وَلِيٌّ وَلَا شَفِيعٌ\n(And warn therewith those who fear that they will be gathered before their Lord, when there will be neither a protector nor an intercessor for them besides Him,) means, warn with this Qur'an, O Muhammad ﷺ,\nالَّذِينَ هُم مِّنْ خَشْيَةِ رَبِّهِم مُّشْفِقُونَ\n(Those who live in awe for fear of their Lord)[23:57], who,\nيَخْشَوْنَ رَبَّهُمْ وَيَخَافُونَ سُوءَ الْحِسَابِ\n(Fear their Lord, and dread the terrible reckoning.)[13:21],\nالَّذِينَ يَخَافُونَ أَن يُحْشَرُوا إِلَىٰ رَبِّهِمْ\n(those who fear that they will be gathered before their Lord,) on the Day of Resurrection,\nلَيْسَ لَهُم مِّن دُونِهِ وَلِيٌّ وَلَا شَفِيعٌ\n(when there will be neither a protector nor an intercessor for them besides Him,) for on that Day, they will have no relative or intercessor who can prevent His torment if He decides to punish them with it,\nلَّعَلَّهُمْ يَتَّقُونَ\n(so that they may have Taqwa.) Therefore, warn of the Day when there will be no judge except Allah,\nلَّعَلَّهُمْ يَتَّقُونَ\n(so that they may have Taqwa.) and thus work good deeds in this life, so that their good deeds may save them on the Day of Resurrection from Allah's torment, and so that He will grant them multiple rewards.\n\n## Prohibiting the Messenger from Turning the Weak Away and the Order to Honor Them\n\nAllah said,\nوَلَا تَطْرُدِ الَّذِينَ يَدْعُونَ رَبَّهُم بِالْغَدَاةِ وَالْعَشِيِّ يُرِيدُونَ وَجْهَهُ\n(And turn not away those who invoke their Lord, morning and evening seeking His Face.) meaning, do not turn away those who have these qualities, instead make them your companions and associates. In another Ayah, Allah said;\nوَاصْبِرْ نَفْسَكَ مَعَ الَّذِينَ يَدْعُونَ رَبَّهُم بِالْغَدَاةِ وَالْعَشِيِّ يُرِيدُونَ وَجْهَهُ وَلَا تَعْدُ عَيْنَاكَ عَنْهُمْ تُرِيدُ زِينَةَ الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَلَا تُطِعْ مَنْ أَغْفَلْنَا قَلْبَهُ عَن ذِكْرِنَا وَاتَّبَعَ هَوَاهُ وَكَانَ أَمْرُهُ فُرُطًا\n(And keep yourself patiently with those who call on their Lord morning and evening, seeking His Face, and let not your eyes overlook them, desiring the pomp and glitter of the life of the world; and obey not him whose heart We have made heedless of Our remembrance, one who follows his own lusts and whose affair (deeds) has been lost.)[18:28] Allah's statement,\nيَدْعُونَ رَبَّهُم\n(invoke their Lord...) refers to those who worship Him and supplicate to Him,\nبِالْغَدَاةِ وَالْعَشِيِّ\n(morning and evening.) referring to the obligatory prayers, according to Sa'id bin Al-Musayyib, Mujahid, Al-Hasan and Qatadah. In another Ayah, Allah said;\nوَقَالَ رَبُّكُمُ ادْعُونِي أَسْتَجِبْ لَكُمْ\n(And your Lord said, \"Invoke Me, I will respond (to your invocation).\")[40:60], I will accept your supplication. Allah said next,\nيُرِيدُونَ وَجْهَهُ\n(seeking His Face.) meaning, they seek Allah's Most Generous Face, by sincerity for Him in the acts of worship and obedience they perform. Allah said;\nمَا عَلَيْكَ مِنْ حِسَابِهِم مِّن شَيْءٍ وَمَا مِنْ حِسَابِكَ عَلَيْهِم مِّن شَيْءٍ\n(You are accountable for them in nothing, and they are accountable for you in nothing,)\nThis is similar to the answer Nuh gave to his people when they said,\nأَنُؤْمِنُ لَكَ وَاتَّبَعَكَ الْأَرْذَلُونَ\n(Shall we believe in you, when the meekest (of the people) follow you?\")[26:111]. Nuh answered them,\nوَمَا عِلْمِي بِمَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ - إِنْ حِسَابُهُمْ إِلَّا عَلَىٰ رَبِّي لَوْ تَشْعُرُونَ\n(And what knowledge have I of what they used to do? Their account is only with my Lord, if you could (but) know.)[26:112-113], meaning, their reckoning is for Allah not me, just as my reckoning is not up to them. Allah said here,\nفَتَطْرُدَهُمْ فَتَكُونَ مِنَ الظَّالِمِينَ\n(that you may turn them away, and thus become of the wrongdoers.) meaning, you will be unjust if you turn them away. Allah's statement,\nوَكَذَٰلِكَ فَتَنَّا بَعْضَهُم بِبَعْضٍ\n(Thus We have tried some of them with others) means, We tested, tried and checked them with each other,\nلِّيَقُولُوا أَهَٰؤُلَاءِ مَنَّ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِم مِّن بَيْنِنَا\n(That they might say: \"Is it these (poor believers) that Allah has favored from amongst us\")\nThis is because at first, most of those who followed the Messenger of Allah ﷺ were the weak among the people, men, women, slaves, and only a few chiefs or noted men followed him. Nuh, was also addressed by his people.\nوَمَا نَرَاكَ اتَّبَعَكَ إِلَّا الَّذِينَ هُمْ أَرَاذِلُنَا بَادِيَ الرَّأْيِ\n(Nor do we see any follow you but the meekest among us and they (too) followed you without thinking.)[11:27]\nHeraclius, emperor of Rome, asked Abu Sufyan, \"Do the noblemen or the weak among people follow him (Muhammad ﷺ)?\" Abu Sufyan replied, \"Rather the weak among them.\" Heraclius commented, \"Such is the case with followers of the Messengers.\"\nThe idolators of Quraysh used to mock the weak among them who believed in the Prophet ﷺ and they even tortured some of them. They used to say, \"Are these the ones whom Allah favored above us?\" meaning, Allah would not guide these people, instead of us, to all that is good, if indeed what they embraced is good. Allah mentioned similar statements in the Qur'an from the disbelievers,\nلَوْ كَانَ خَيْرًا مَّا سَبَقُونَا إِلَيْهِ\n(Had it been a good thing, they (weak and poor) would not have preceded us to it!)[46:11], and,\nوَإِذَا تُتْلَىٰ عَلَيْهِمْ آيَاتُنَا بَيِّنَاتٍ قَالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَيُّ الْفَرِيقَيْنِ خَيْرٌ مَّقَامًا وَأَحْسَنُ نَدِيًّا\n(And when Our clear verses are recited to them, those who disbelieve say to those who believe: \"Which of the two groups is best in position and station.\")[19:73] Allah said in reply,\nوَكَمْ أَهْلَكْنَا قَبْلَهُم مِّن قَرْنٍ هُمْ أَحْسَنُ أَثَاثًا وَرِئْيًا\n(And how many a generation (past nations) have We destroyed before them, who were better in wealth, goods and outward appearance?)[19:74]. Here, Allah answered the disbelievers when they said,\nأَهَٰؤُلَاءِ مَنَّ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِم مِّن بَيْنِنَا أَلَيْسَ اللَّهُ بِأَعْلَمَ بِالشَّاكِرِينَ\n(\"Is it these (poor believers) that Allah has favored from amongst us?\" Does not Allah know best those who are grateful?) Meaning is not Allah more knowledgeable of those who thank and appreciate Him in statement, action and heart? Thus Allah directs these believers to the ways of peace, transfers them from darkness to light by His leave, and guides them to the straight path. In another Ayah, Allah said;\nوَالَّذِينَ جَاهَدُوا فِينَا لَنَهْدِيَنَّهُمْ سُبُلَنَا وَإِنَّ اللَّهَ لَمَعَ الْمُحْسِنِينَ\n(As for those who strive hard for Us (Our cause), We will surely guide them to Our paths (i.e. Allah's religion). And verily, Allah is with the doers of good\")[29:69]. An authentic Hadith states,\nإِنَّ اللهَ لَا يَنْظُرُ إِلَى صُوَرِكُمْ وَلَا إِلَى أَلْوَانِكُمْ، وَلَكِنْ يَنْظُرُ إِلَى قُلُوبِكُمْ وَأَعْمَالِكُم\n(Allah does not look at your shapes or colors, but He looks at your heart and actions.) Allah's statement,\nوَإِذَا جَاءَكَ الَّذِينَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِآيَاتِنَا فَقُلْ سَلَامٌ عَلَيْكُمْ\n(When those who believe in Our Ayat come to you, say: \"Salamun 'Alaykum\" (peace be on you);) means, honor them by returning the Salam and give them the good news of Allah's exclusive, encompassing mercy for them. So Allah said;\nكَتَبَ رَبُّكُمْ عَلَىٰ نَفْسِهِ الرَّحْمَةَ\n(your Lord has written Mercy for Himself,) meaning, He has obliged His Most Honored Self to grant mercy, as a favor, out of His compassion and beneficence,\nأَنَّهُ مَنْ عَمِلَ مِنكُمْ سُوءًا بِجَهَالَةٍ\n(So that, if any of you does evil in ignorance...) as every person who disobeys Allah does it in ignorance,\nثُمَّ تَابَ مِن بَعْدِهِ وَأَصْلَحَ\n(and thereafter repents and does righteous good deeds,) by repenting from the sins that he committed, intending not to repeat the sin in the future, but to perform righteous deeds,\nفَأَنَّهُ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ\n(then surely, He is Oft-Forgiving Most Merciful.)\nImam Ahmad recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nلَمَّا قَضَى اللهُ الْخَلْقَ كَتَبَ فِي كِتَابٍ فَهُوَ عِنْدَهُ فَوْقَ الْعَرْشِ: إِنَّ رَحْمَتِي غَلَبَتْ غَضَبِي\n(When Allah finished with the creation, He wrote in a Book that He has with Him above the Throne, 'My mercy prevails over My anger'.) This Hadith was also recorded in the The Two Sahihs.","href":"/tafsir/6?verse=50","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:6:55","title":"Ibn Kathir · 6:55–59","text":"And thus do We explain the Ayat in detail, that the way of the criminals, may become manifest (55)Say: \"I have been forbidden to worship those whom you invoke (worship) besides Allah.\" Say: \"I will not follow your vain desires. If I did, I would go astray, and I would not be one of the rightly guided. (56)Say: \"I am on clear proof from my Lord, but you deny it. I do not have what you are hastily seeking (the torment). The decision is only for Allah, He declares the truth, and He is the best of judges. (57)Say: \"If I had that which you are asking for impatiently (the torment), the matter would have been settled at once between you and I, but Allah knows best the wrongdoers. (58)And with Him are the keys of the Ghayb (all that is hidden), none knows them but He. And He knows whatever there is on the land and in the sea; not a leaf falls, but he knows it. There is not a grain in the darkness of the earth nor anything fresh or dry, but is written in a Clear Record (59)\n\n## The Prophet (ﷺ) Understands What He Conveys; Torment is in Allah's Hands Not the Prophet's\n\nAllah says, just as We mentioned the clear signs that testify and direct to the path of guidance, all the while chastising useless arguments and defiance,\nكَذَٰلِكَ نُفَصِّلُ الْآيَاتِ\n(And thus do We explain the Ayat in detail,) that is, whatever responsible adults need explained to them, in the affairs of life and religion,\nوَلِتَسْتَبِينَ سَبِيلُ الْمُجْرِمِينَ\n(That the way of the criminals may become manifest.) so that the path of the criminals who defy the Prophets is apparent and clear. This Ayah was also said to mean, so that you, O Muhammad ﷺ, are aware of the path of the criminals. Allah's statement,\nقُلْ إِنِّي عَلَىٰ بَيِّنَةٍ مِّن رَّبِّي\n(Say: \"I am on clear proof from my Lord...\") means: I have a clear understanding of the Law of Allah that He has revealed to me,\nوَكَذَّبْتُم بِهِ\n(but you deny it.) meaning, but you disbelieve in the truth that came to me from Allah.\nمَا عِندِي مَا تَسْتَعْجِلُونَ بِهِ\n(I do not have what you are hastily seeking) meaning, the torment,\nإِنِ الْحُكْمُ إِلَّا لِلَّهِ\n(The decision is only for Allah,) for the ruling of this is with Allah. If He wills, He will punish you soon in response to your wish! If He wills, He will give you respite, out of His great wisdom. This is why Allah said,\nيَقُصُّ الْحَقَّ وَهُوَ خَيْرُ الْفَاصِلِينَ\n(He declares the truth, and He is the best of judges.) and the best in reckoning between His servants. Allah's statement,\nقُل لَّوْ أَنَّ عِندِي مَا تَسْتَعْجِلُونَ بِهِ لَقُضِيَ الْأَمْرُ بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَكُمْ\n(Say: \"If I had that which you are asking for impatiently (the torment), the matter would have been settled at once between you and I,\") means, if I have what you ask for, I will surely send down what you deserve of it,\nوَاللَّهُ أَعْلَمُ بِالظَّالِمِينَ\n(but Allah knows best the wrongdoers)\nSomeone might ask about the meaning of this Ayah compared to the Hadith in the Two Sahihs, from 'A'ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, that she said to the Messenger, \"O Allah's Messenger ﷺ! Have you encountered a day harder than the day (of the battle) of Uhud?\" The Prophet ﷺ replied,\nلَقَدْ لَقِيتُ مِنْ قَوْمِكِ، وَكَانَ أَشَدَّ مَا لَقِيتُ مِنْهُمْ يَوْمَ الْعَقَبَةِ، إِذْ عَرَضْتُ نَفْسِي عَلَى ابْنِ عَبْدِ يَالِيلَ بْنِ عَبْدِ كُلَالٍ، فَلَمْ يُجِبْنِي إِلَى مَا أَرَدْتُ، فَانْطَلَقْتُ وَأَنَا مَهْمُومٌ عَلَى وَجْهِي، فَلَمْ أَسْتَفِقْ إِلَّا بِقَرْنِ الثَّعَالِبِ، فَرَفَعْتُ رَأْسِي، فَإِذَا أَنَا بِسَحَابَةٍ قَدْ ظَلَّلَتْنِي، فَنَظَرْتُ فَإِذَا فِيهَا جِبْرِيلُ عَلَيْهِ السَّلَامُ، فَنَادَانِي فَقَالَ: إِنَّ الله قَدْ سَمِعَ قَوْلَ قَوْمِكَ لَكَ، وَمَا رَدُّوا عَلَيْكَ، وَقَدْ بَعَثَ إِلَيْكَ مَلَكَ الْجِبَالِ، لِتَأْمُرَهُ بِمَا شِئْتَ فِيهِمْ، قَالَ: فَنَادَانِي مَلَكُ الْجِبَالِ وَسَلَّمَ عَلَيَّ، ثُمَّ قَالَ: يَا مُحَمَّدُ! إِنَّ اللهَ قَدْ سَمِعَ قَوْلَ قَوْمِكَ لَكَ، وَقَدْ بَعَثَنِي رَبُّكَ إِلَيْكَ، لِتَأْمُرَنِي بِأَمْرِكَ فِيمَا شِئْتَ، إِنْ شِئْتَ أَطْبَقْتُ عَلَيْهِمُ الْأَخْشَبَيْن\nفَقَالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ صلّى الله عليه وسلّم:\nبَلْ أَرْجُو أَنْ يُخْرِجَ اللهُ مِنْ أَصْلَابِهِمْ، مَنْ يَعْبُدُ اللهَ لَا يُشْرِكُ بِهِ شَيْئًا\n(Your people have troubled me alot and the worst trouble was on the day of 'Aqabah when I presented myself to Ibn 'Abd Yalil bin 'Abd Kulal, who did not respond to my call. So I departed, overwhelmed with severe sorrow, proceeded on and could not relax until I found myself at Qarn Ath-Tha'alib where I raised my head towards the sky to see a cloud unexpectedly shading me. I looked up and saw Jibril in it and he called me saying, 'Indeed Allah has heard what you said to the people and what they have responded to you. Therefore, Allah has sent the Angel of the Mountains to you so that you may order him to do whatever you wish to these people.' The Angel of the Mountains called and greeted me, and then said, 'O Muhammad! verily, Allah has heard how your people responded to you and He has sent me to you so that you could order me to do what you wish. If you like, I will let Al-Akhshabayn (two mountains to the north and south of Makkah) fall on them.' The Prophet ﷺ said, No, but I hope that Allah will let them generate offspring who will worship Allah Alone, and will worship none besides Him.)\nThis is the wording of Muslim. Tormenting the disbelievers of Quraysh was offered to the Prophet ﷺ, but he chose patience and asked Allah for respite for them, so that Allah might let them generate offspring who will not associate anything with Him in worship. Therefore, how can we combine the meaning of this Hadith and the honorable Ayah,\nقُل لَّوْ أَنَّ عِندِي مَا تَسْتَعْجِلُونَ بِهِ لَقُضِيَ الْأَمْرُ بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَكُمْ وَاللَّهُ أَعْلَمُ بِالظَّالِمِينَ\n(Say: \"If I had that which you are asking for impatiently (the torment), the matter would have been settled at once between you and I, but Allah knows best the wrongdoers.\")\nThe answer to this question is, Allah knows the best, that the Ayah states that if the punishment that they asked for was in the Prophet's hand at the time, he would have sent it on them as they asked. As for the Hadith, the disbelievers did not ask the Prophet ﷺ to send the torment down on them. Rather, the angel responsible for the mountains offered him the choice to let the two mountains to the north and south of Makkah close in on the disbelievers and crush them. The Prophet ﷺ did not wish that and asked for respite out of compassion for them.\n\n## Only Allah Knows the Unseen\n\nAllah said next,\nوَعِندَهُ مَفَاتِحُ الْغَيْبِ لَا يَعْلَمُهَا إِلَّا هُوَ\n(And with Him are the keys of the Ghayb (all that is hidden), none knows them but He.)\nAl-Bukhari recorded that Salim bin 'Abdullah said that his father said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَفَاتِيحُ الْغَيْبِ خَمْسٌ لَا يَعْلَمُهُنَّ إِلَّا اللهُ\n(The keys of the Unseen are five and none except Allah knows them:\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ عِندَهُ عِلْمُ السَّاعَةِ وَيُنَزِّلُ الْغَيْثَ وَيَعْلَمُ مَا فِي الْأَرْحَامِ وَمَا تَدْرِي نَفْسٌ مَّاذَا تَكْسِبُ غَدًا وَمَا تَدْرِي نَفْسٌ بِأَيِّ أَرْضٍ تَمُوتُ إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلِيمٌ خَبِيرٌ\n(Verily, Allah! With Him (Alone) is the knowledge of the Hour, He sends down the rain, and knows that which is in the wombs. No person knows what he will earn tomorrow, and no person knows in what land he will die. Verily, Allah is All-Knower, All-Aware)\") [31:34]. Allah's statement,\nوَيَعْلَمُ مَا فِي الْبَرِّ وَالْبَحْرِ\n(And He knows whatever there is on the land and in the sea;) means, Allah's honored knowledge encompasses everything, including the creatures living in the sea and on land, and none of it, not even the weight of an atom on earth or in heaven, ever escapes His knowledge. Allah's statement,\nوَمَا تَسْقُطُ مِن وَرَقَةٍ إِلَّا يَعْلَمُهَا\n(not a leaf falls, but He knows it.) means, He knows the movements of everything including inanimate things. Therefore, what about His knowledge of the living creatures, especially, those whom the Divine laws have been imposed upon such as mankind and the Jinns? In another Ayah, Allah said;\nيَعْلَمُ خَائِنَةَ الْأَعْيُنِ وَمَا تُخْفِي الصُّدُورُ\n(Allah knows the fraud of the eyes, and all that the breasts conceal.)[40:19]","href":"/tafsir/6?verse=55","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:6:60","title":"Ibn Kathir · 6:60–62","text":"It is He, Who takes your souls by night (when you are asleep), and has knowledge of all that you have done by day, then he raises (wakes) you up again, that a term appointed be fulfilled, then (in the end), unto Him will be your return. Then He will inform you of what you used to do (60)He is the Qahir over His servants, and He sends guardians over you, until when death approaches one of you, Our messengers take his soul, and they never neglect their duty (61)Then they are returned to Allah, their Master, the Just Lord. Surely, His is the judgment and He is the swiftest in taking account (62)\n\n## The Servants are in Allah's Hands Before and After Death\n\nAllah states that He brings death to His servants in their sleep at night, for sleep is minor death. Allah said in other Ayat,\nإِذْ قَالَ اللَّهُ يَا عِيسَىٰ إِنِّي مُتَوَفِّيكَ وَرَافِعُكَ إِلَيَّ\n(And (remember) when Allah said: \"O 'Isa! I will take you and raise you to Myself...\")[3:55], and,\nاللَّهُ يَتَوَفَّى الْأَنفُسَ حِينَ مَوْتِهَا وَالَّتِي لَمْ تَمُتْ فِي مَنَامِهَا فَيُمْسِكُ الَّتِي قَضَىٰ عَلَيْهَا الْمَوْتَ وَيُرْسِلُ الْأُخْرَىٰ إِلَىٰ أَجَلٍ مُّسَمًّى\n(It is Allah Who takes away the souls at the time of their death, and those that die not during their sleep. He keeps those (souls) for which He has ordained death and sends the rest for a term appointed.)[39:42], ,thus mentioning both minor and major death. Allah says,\nوَهُوَ الَّذِي يَتَوَفَّاكُم بِاللَّيْلِ وَيَعْلَمُ مَا جَرَحْتُم بِالنَّهَارِ\n(It is He, Who takes your souls by night (when you are asleep), and has knowledge of all that you have done by day,) meaning, He knows the deeds and actions that you perform during the day. This Ayah demonstrates Allah's perfect knowledge of His creation, by day and night, and in their movements and idleness. Allah said in other Ayat,\nسَوَاءٌ مِّنكُم مَّنْ أَسَرَّ الْقَوْلَ وَمَن جَهَرَ بِهِ وَمَنْ هُوَ مُسْتَخْفٍ بِاللَّيْلِ وَسَارِبٌ بِالنَّهَارِ\n(It is the same (to Him) whether any of you conceal his speech or declare it openly, whether he be hid by night or go forth freely by day.)[13:10], and\nوَمِن رَّحْمَتِهِ جَعَلَ لَكُمُ اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ لِتَسْكُنُوا فِيهِ\n(It is out of His mercy that He made night and day, so that you may rest therein)[28:73], by night,\nوَلِتَبْتَغُوا مِن فَضْلِهِ\n(and that you may seek of His bounty) by day. Allah said,\nوَجَعَلْنَا اللَّيْلَ لِبَاسًا - وَجَعَلْنَا النَّهَارَ مَعَاشًا\n(And (We) have made the night as a covering. And (We) have made the day for livelihood.)[78:10-11]. Allah said here,\nوَهُوَ الَّذِي يَتَوَفَّاكُم بِاللَّيْلِ وَيَعْلَمُ مَا جَرَحْتُم بِالنَّهَارِ\n(It is He, Who takes your souls by night (when you are asleep), and has knowledge of all that you have done by day,)[6:60], Then said,\nثُمَّ يَبْعَثُكُمْ فِيهِ\n(then he raises (wakes) you up again,) by day, according to Mujahid, Qatadah and As-Suddi. Allah's statement,\nلِيُقْضَىٰ أَجَلٌ مُّسَمًّى\n(that a term appointed be fulfilled) refers to the life span of every person,\nثُمَّ إِلَيْهِ مَرْجِعُكُمْ\n(then (in the end), unto Him will be your return.) on the Day of Resurrection,\nثُمَّ يُنَبِّئُكُم بِمَا كُنتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ\n(Then He will inform you of what you used to do.)\nHe will reward you, good for good, and evil for evil. Allah's statement,\nوَهُوَ الْقَاهِرُ فَوْقَ عِبَادِهِ\n(He is the Qahir over His servants.)\nThe Qahir means, the one who controls everything, all are subservient to His supreme grace, greatness and majesty,\nوَيُرْسِلُ عَلَيْكُمْ حَفَظَةً\n(and He sends guardians over you,) angels who guard mankind. In another Ayah, Allah said;\nلَهُ مُعَقِّبَاتٌ مِّن بَيْنِ يَدَيْهِ وَمِنْ خَلْفِهِ يَحْفَظُونَهُ مِنْ أَمْرِ اللَّهِ\n(For each (person), there are angels in succession, before and behind him. They guard him by the command of Allah.)[13:11], watching his deeds and recording them. Allah said,\nوَإِنَّ عَلَيْكُمْ لَحَافِظِينَ\n(But verily, over you (are appointed angels in charge of mankind) to watch you.)[82:10], and,\nإِذْ يَتَلَقَّى الْمُتَلَقِّيَانِ عَنِ الْيَمِينِ وَعَنِ الشِّمَالِ قَعِيدٌ - مَّا يَلْفِظُ مِن قَوْلٍ إِلَّا لَدَيْهِ رَقِيبٌ عَتِيدٌ\n((Remember!) that the two receivers (recording angels) receive, one sitting on the right and one on the left. Not a word does he utter, but there is a watcher by him, ready.)[50:17-18]. Allah's statement,\nحَتَّىٰ إِذَا جَاءَ أَحَدَكُمُ الْمَوْتُ\n(until when death approaches one of you...) refers to, when one's life span comes to an end and he is dying,\nتَوَفَّتْهُ رُسُلُنَا\n(Our messengers take his soul...) meaning, there are angels who are responsible for this job. Ibn 'Abbas and several others said that the Angel of Death has angels who pull the soul from its body and when it reaches the throat, the Angel of Death captures it. Allah said;\nوَهُمْ لَا يُفَرِّطُونَ\n(and they never neglect their duty.) They guard the soul of the dead person and take it to wherever Allah wills, to 'Illiyyin if he was among the righteous, and to Sijjin if he was among the wicked (disbelievers, sinners, etc.), we seek refuge with Allah from this end. Allah said next,\nثُمَّ رُدُّوا إِلَى اللَّهِ مَوْلَاهُمُ الْحَقِّ\n(Then they are returned to Allah, their Master, the Just Lord.)\nImam Ahmad recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ الْمَيِّتَ تَحْضُرُهُ الْمَلَائِكَةُ فَإِذَا كَانَ الرَّجُلُ الصَّالِحُ، قَالُوا: اخْرُجِي أَيَّتُهَا النَّفْسُ الطَّيِّبَةُ كَانَتْ فِي الْجَسَدِ الطَّيِّبِ، اخْرُجِي حَمِيدَةً، وَأَبْشِرِي بِرَوْحٍ وَرَيْحَانٍ، وَرَبٍّ غَيْرِ غَضْبَانَ، فَلَا تَزَالُ يُقَالُ لَهَا ذَلِكَ حَتَّى تَخْرُجَ، ثُمَّ يُعْرَجَ بِهَا إِلَى السَّمَاءِ، فَيَسْتَفْتَحُ لَهَا فَيُقَالُ مَنْ هَذَا؟ فَيُقَالُ: فُلَانٌ، فَيُقَالَ: مَرْحبًا بِالنَّفْسِ الطَّيِّبَةِ، كَانَتْ فِي الْجَسَدِ الطَّيِّبِ، ادْخُلي حَمِيدَةً وَأَبْشِرِي بِرَوْحٍ وَرَيْحَانٍ وَرَبٍّ غَيْرِ غَضْبَانَ، فَلَا تَزَالُ يُقَالُ لَهَا ذَلِكَ حَتَّى يُنْتَهَى بِهَا إِلَى السَّمَاءِ الَّتِي فِيهَا اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ، وَإِذَا كَانَ الرَّجُلُ السَّوْءُ، قَالُوا: اخْرُجِي أَيَّتُهَا النَّفْسُ الْخَبِيثَةُ كَانَتْ فِي الْجَسَدِ الْخَبِيثِ، اخْرُجِي ذَمِيمَةً وَأَبْشِري بِحَمِيمٍ وَغَسَّاقٍ، وَآخَرَ مِنْ شَكْلِهِ أَزْوَاج، فَلَا تَزَالُ يُقَالُ لَهَا ذَلِكَ حَتَّى تَخْرُجَ، ثُمَّ يُعْرَجَ بِهَا إِلَى السَّمَاءِ، فَيُسْتَفْتَحُ لَهًا فَيُقَالُ: مَنْ هَذَا؟ فَيُقَالُ: فُلَانٌ، فَيُقَالُ: لَا مَرْحَبًا بِالنَّفْسِ الْخَبِيثَةِ كَانَتْ فِي الْجَسَدِ الْخَبِيثِ، ارْجِعِي ذَمِيمَةً، فَإِنَّهُ لَا يُفْتَحُ لَكَ أَبْوَابُ السَّمَاءِ، فَتُرْسَلُ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ ثُمَّ تَصِيرُ إِلَى الْقَبْرِ، فَيُجْلَسُ الرَّجُلُ الصَّالِحُ، فَيُقَالُ لَهُ مِثْلُ مَا قِيلَ فِي الْحَدِيثِ الأَوَّلِ، وَيُجْلَسُ الرَّجُلُ السَّوْءُ فَيُقَالُ لَهُ مِثْلُ مَا قِيلَ فِي الْحَدِيثِ الثَّانِي\n(The angels attend the dying person. If he is a righteous person, the angels will say, 'O pure soul from a pure body! Come out with honor and receive the good news of rest, satisfaction and a Lord Who is not angry.' The angels will keep saying this until the soul leaves its body, and they will then raise it up to heaven and will ask that the door be opened for the soul and it will be asked, 'Who is this?' It will be said, '(The soul of) so-and-so.' It will be said, 'Welcome, to the pure soul that inhabited the pure body. Enter with honor and receive the good news of rest, satisfaction and a Lord Who is not angry.' This statement will be repeated until the soul reaches the heaven above which there is Allah. If the dying person is evil, the angels will say, 'Get out (of your body), O wicked soul from a wicked body! Get out in disgrace and receive the news of boiling fluid, a fluid dark, murky, intensely cold and other (torments) of similar kind - all together - to match them.' This statement will be said repeatedly until the evil soul leaves its body. The soul will be raised up to heaven and a request will be made that the door be opened for it. It will be asked, 'Who is this?' It will be said, '(The soul of) so and so.' It will be said, 'No welcome to the wicked soul from the wicked body. Return with disgrace, for the doors of heaven will not be opened for you.' So it will be thrown from heaven until it returns to the grave. So the righteous person sits and similar is said to him as before. And the evil person sits and similar is said to him as before.)\nIt is also possible that the meaning of,\nثُمَّ رُدُّوا\n(Then they are returned...) refers to the return of all creation to Allah on the Day of Resurrection, when He will subject them to His just decision. Allah said in other Ayat,\nقُلْ إِنَّ الْأَوَّلِينَ وَالْآخِرِينَ - لَمَجْمُوعُونَ إِلَىٰ مِيقَاتِ يَوْمٍ مَّعْلُومٍ\n(Say: \"(Yes) verily, those of old, and those of later times. All will surely be gathered together for an appointed meeting of a known Day.\")[56:49-50] and,\nوَحَشَرْنَاهُمْ فَلَمْ نُغَادِرْ مِنْهُمْ أَحَدًا\n(And We shall gather them all together so as to leave not one of them behind...)[18:47] until,\nوَلَا يَظْلِمُ رَبُّكَ أَحَدًا\n(And your Lord treats no one with injustice.)[18:49] Allah said here,\nمَوْلَاهُمُ الْحَقِّ أَلَا لَهُ الْحُكْمُ وَهُوَ أَسْرَعُ الْحَاسِبِينَ\n(their Master, the Just Lord. Surely, His is the judgement and He is the swiftest in taking account.)[6:62]","href":"/tafsir/6?verse=60","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:6:63","title":"Ibn Kathir · 6:63–65","text":"Say: \"Who rescues you from the dark recesses of the land and the sea, when you call upon Him begging and in secret (saying): 'If He (Allah) only saves us from these (dangers), we shall truly be grateful. (63)Say: \"Allah rescues you from these (dangers) and from all distress, and yet you commit Shirk. (64)Say: \"He has the power to send torment on you from above or from under your feet, or to Yalbisakum in party strife, and make you taste the violence of one another.\" See how variously We explain the Ayat, so that they may understand (65)\n\n## Allah's Compassion and Generosity, and His Power and Torment\n\nAllah mentions how He favors His servants, saving them during times of need, in the darkness of land and at sea, such as when storms strike. In such cases, they call on Allah alone, without partners, in supplication. In other Ayat, Allah said,\nوَإِذَا مَسَّكُمُ الضُّرُّ فِي الْبَحْرِ ضَلَّ مَن تَدْعُونَ إِلَّا إِيَّاهُ\n(And when harm strikes you at sea, those that you call upon besides Him vanish from you except Him.)[17:67],\nهُوَ الَّذِي يُسَيِّرُكُمْ فِي الْبَرِّ وَالْبَحْرِ حَتَّىٰ إِذَا كُنتُمْ فِي الْفُلْكِ وَجَرَيْنَ بِهِم بِرِيحٍ طَيِّبَةٍ وَفَرِحُوا بِهَا جَاءَتْهَا رِيحٌ عَاصِفٌ وَجَاءَهُمُ الْمَوْجُ مِن كُلِّ مَكَانٍ وَظَنُّوا أَنَّهُمْ أُحِيطَ بِهِمْ دَعَوُا اللَّهَ مُخْلِصِينَ لَهُ الدِّينَ لَئِنْ أَنجَيْتَنَا مِنْ هَٰذِهِ لَنَكُونَنَّ مِنَ الشَّاكِرِينَ\n(He it is Who enables you to travel through the land and the sea, till when you are in the ships and they sail with them with a favorable wind, and they rejoice, then comes a stormy wind and the waves come to them from all sides, and they think that they are encircled therein, they invoke Allah, making their faith pure for Him alone, saying: \"If You deliver us from this, we shall truly be of the grateful\".)[10:22], and,\nأَمَّن يَهْدِيكُمْ فِي ظُلُمَاتِ الْبَرِّ وَالْبَحْرِ وَمَن يُرْسِلُ الرِّيَاحَ بُشْرًا بَيْنَ يَدَيْ رَحْمَتِهِ أَإِلَٰهٌ مَّعَ اللَّهِ تَعَالَى اللَّهُ عَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ\n(Is not He (better than your gods) Who guides you in the darkness of the land and the sea, and Who sends the winds as heralds of glad tidings, going before His mercy Is there any god with Allah? High Exalted be Allah above all that they associate as partners (with Him)!)[27:63].\nAllah said in this honorable Ayah,\nقُلْ مَن يُنَجِّيكُم مِّن ظُلُمَاتِ الْبَرِّ وَالْبَحْرِ تَدْعُونَهُ تَضَرُّعًا وَخُفْيَةً\n(Say: \"Who rescues you from the dark recesses of the land and the sea, when you call upon Him begging and in secret.\") i.e., in public and secret,\nلَّئِنْ أَنجَانَا\n((Saying): 'If He (Allah) only saves us...) from this distress,\nلَنَكُونَنَّ مِنَ الشَّاكِرِينَ\n(we shall truly be grateful.) thereafter. Allah said,\nقُلِ اللَّهُ يُنَجِّيكُم مِّنْهَا وَمِن كُلِّ كَرْبٍ ثُمَّ أَنتُمْ تُشْرِكُونَ\n(Say: \"Allah rescues you from these (dangers) and from all distress, and yet you commit Shirk.\") meaning, yet you call other gods besides Him in times of comfort. Allah said;\nقُلْ هُوَ الْقَادِرُ عَلَىٰ أَن يَبْعَثَ عَلَيْكُمْ عَذَابًا مِّن فَوْقِكُمْ أَوْ مِن تَحْتِ أَرْجُلِكُمْ\n(Say: \"He has the power to send torment on you from above or from under your feet,\") He said this after His statement,\nثُمَّ أَنتُمْ تُشْرِكُونَ\n(And yet you commit Shirk.) Allah said next,\nقُلْ هُوَ الْقَادِرُ عَلَىٰ أَن يَبْعَثَ عَلَيْكُمْ عَذَابًا\n(Say: \"He has the power to send torment on you..\"), after He saves you. Allah said in Surah Subhan (chapter 17),\nرَّبُّكُمُ الَّذِي يُزْجِي لَكُمُ الْفُلْكَ فِي الْبَحْرِ لِتَبْتَغُوا مِن فَضْلِهِ إِنَّهُ كَانَ بِكُمْ رَحِيمًا - وَإِذَا مَسَّكُمُ الضُّرُّ فِي الْبَحْرِ ضَلَّ مَن تَدْعُونَ إِلَّا إِيَّاهُ فَلَمَّا نَجَّاكُمْ إِلَى الْبَرِّ أَعْرَضْتُمْ وَكَانَ الْإِنسَانُ كَفُورًا - أَفَأَمِنتُمْ أَن يَخْسِفَ بِكُمْ جَانِبَ الْبَرِّ أَوْ يُرْسِلَ عَلَيْكُمْ حَاصِبًا ثُمَّ لَا تَجِدُوا لَكُمْ وَكِيلًا - أَمْ أَمِنتُمْ أَن يُعِيدَكُمْ فِيهِ تَارَةً أُخْرَىٰ فَيُرْسِلَ عَلَيْكُمْ قَاصِفًا مِّنَ الرِّيحِ فَيُغْرِقَكُم بِمَا كَفَرْتُمْ ثُمَّ لَا تَجِدُوا لَكُمْ عَلَيْنَا بِهِ تَبِيعًا\n(Your Lord is He Who drives the ship for you through the sea, in order that you may seek of His bounty. Truly! He is Ever Merciful towards you. And when harm strikes you upon the sea, those that you call upon besides Him vanish from you except Him. But when He brings you safely to land, you turn away (from Him). And man is ever ungrateful. Do you then feel secure that He will not cause a side of the land to swallow you up, or that He will not send against you a storm of stones? Then, you shall find no guardian. Or do you feel secure that He will not send you back a second time to sea, and send against you a hurricane of wind and drown you because of your disbelief, then you will not find any avenger therein against Us?)[17:66-69].\nAl-Bukhari, may Allah grant him His mercy, commented on Allah's statement,\nقُلْ هُوَ الْقَادِرُ عَلَىٰ أَن يَبْعَثَ عَلَيْكُمْ عَذَابًا مِّن فَوْقِكُمْ أَوْ مِن تَحْتِ أَرْجُلِكُمْ أَوْ يَلْبِسَكُمْ شِيَعًا وَيُذِيقَ بَعْضَكُم بَأْسَ بَعْضٍ انظُرْ كَيْفَ نُصَرِّفُ الْآيَاتِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَفْقَهُونَ\n(Say: \"He has the power to send torment on you from above or from under your feet, or to 'Yalbisakum' in party strife, and make you taste the violence of one another.\" See how variously We explain the Ayat, so that they may understand.)\n\"Yalbisakum means, 'cover you with confusion', So it means to, 'divide into parties and sects'. Jabir bin 'Abdullah said, 'When this Ayah was revealed,\nقُلْ هُوَ الْقَادِرُ عَلَىٰ أَن يَبْعَثَ عَلَيْكُمْ عَذَابًا مِّن فَوْقِكُمْ\n(Say: \"He has power to send torment on you from above\") Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nأَعُوذُ بِوَجْهِكَ\n(I seek refuge with Your Face.)\nأَوْ مِن تَحْتِ أَرْجُلِكُمْ\n(or from under your feet,) he ﷺ again said,\nأَعُوذُ بِوَجْهِكَ\n(I seek refuge with Your Face.)\nأَوْ يَلْبِسَكُمْ شِيَعاً وَيُذِيقَ بَعْضَكُمْ بَأْسَ بَعْضٍ\n(or to cover you with confusion in party strife, and make you to taste the violence of one another.) he ﷺ said,\nهَذهِ أَهْوَنُ - أَوْ أَيْسَرُ\n(This is less burdensome or easier.)'\"\nAl-Bukhari recorded this Hadith again in the book of Tawhid (in his Sahih), and An-Nasa'i also recorded it in the book of Tafsir.\n\n## Another Hadith\n\nImam Ahmad recorded that Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas said, We accompanied the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and passed by the Masjid of Bani Mu'awiyah. The Prophet ﷺ went in and offered a two Rak'ah prayer, and we prayed behind him. He supplicated to his Lord for a long time and then said,\nسَأَلْتُ رَبِّي ثَلَاثًا: سَأَلْتُهُ أَنْ لَا يُهْلِكَ أُمَّتِي بِالْغَرَقِ فَأَعْطَانِيهَا، وَسَأَلْتُهُ أَنْ لَا يُهْلِكَ أُمَّتِي بِالسَّنَةِ فَأَعْطَانِيهَا، وَسَأَلْتُهُ أَنْ لَا يَجْعَلَ بَأْسَهُمْ بَيْنَهُمْ فَمَنَعَنِيهَا\n(I asked my Lord for three: I asked Him not to destroy my Ummah (Muslims) by drowning and He gave that to me. I asked Him not to destroy my Ummah by famine and He gave that to me. And I asked Him not to make them taste the violence of one another, but He did not give that to me.)\nMuslim, but not Al-Bukhari, recorded this Hadith in the book on Fitan (trials)(of his Sahih).\n\n## Another Hadith\n\nImam Ahmad recorded that Khabbab bin Al-Aratt, who attended the battle of Badr with the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, said, \"I met Allah's Messenger ﷺ during a night in which he prayed throughout it, until dawn. When the Messenger of Allah ﷺ ended his prayer, I said, 'O Allah's Messenger! This night, you have performed a prayer that I never saw you perform before.' Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nأَجَلْ إِنَّهَا صَلَاةُ رَغَبٍ وَرَهَبٍ، سَأَلْتُ رَبِّي عَزَّ وَجَلَّ فِيهَا ثَلَاثَ خِصَالٍ، فَأَعْطَانِي اثْنَتَيْنِ وَمَنَعَنِي وَاحِدَةً، سَأَلْتُ رَبِّي عَزَّ وَجَلَّ أَنْ لَا يُهْلِكْنَا بِمَا أَهْلَكَ بِهِ الْأُمَمَ قَبْلَنَا فَأَعْطَانِيهَا، وَسَأَلْتُ رَبِّي عَزَّ وَجَلَّ أَنْ لَا يُظْهِرَ عَلَيْنَا عَدُوًّا مِنْ غَيْرِنَا فَأَعْطَانِيهَا، وَسَأَلْتُ رَبِّي عَزَّ وَجَلَّ أَنْ لَا يُلْبِسَنَا شِيَعًا فَمَنَعَنِيهَا\n(Yes, it was a prayer of eagerness and fear. During this prayer, I asked my Lord for three things and He gave me two and refused to give me the third. I asked my Lord not to destroy us with what He destroyed the nations before us and He gave me that. I asked my Lord not to make our enemies prevail above us and He gave me that. I asked my Lord not to cover us with confusion in party strife, but He refused.)\nAn-Nasa'i, Ibn Hibban in his Sahih, and At-Tirmidhi also recorded it. In the book on Fitan, in Al-Jami', At-Tirmidhi said, \"Hasan Sahih\". Allah's statement,\nأَوْ يَلْبِسَكُمْ شِيَعًا\n(or to cover you with confusion in party strife,) means, He causes you to be in disarray and separate into opposing parties and groups. Al-Walibi ('Ali bin Abi Talhah) reported that Ibn 'Abbas said that this Ayah refers to desires. Mujahid and several others said similarly. A Hadith from the Prophet ﷺ, collected from various chains of narration, states,\nوَسَتَفْتَرِقُ هَذِهِ الأُمَّةُ عَلَى ثَلَاثٍ وَسَبْعِينَ فِرْقَةً، كُلُّهَا فِي النَّارِ إِلَّا وَاحِدَةً\n(And this Ummah (Muslims) will divide into seventy-three groups, all of them in the Fire except one.) Allah said;\nوَيُذِيقَ بَعْضَكُم بَأْسَ بَعْضٍ\n(and make you taste the violence of one another.) meaning, some of you will esperience torture and murder from one another, according to Ibn 'Abbas and others. Allah said next,\nانظُرْ كَيْفَ نُصَرِّفُ الْآيَاتِ\n(See how variously We explain the Ayat,) by making them clear, plain and duly explained,\nلَعَلَّهُمْ يَفْقَهُونَ\n(So that they may understand.) and comprehend Allah's Ayat, proofs and evidences.","href":"/tafsir/6?verse=63","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:6:66","title":"Ibn Kathir · 6:66–69","text":"But your people have denied it (the Qur'an) though it is the truth. Say: \"I am not responsible for your affairs. (66)For every news there is a reality and you will come to know (67)And when you see those who engage in false conversation about Our verses (of the Qur'an) by mocking at them, stay away from them till they turn to another topic. And if Shaytan causes you to forget, then after the remembrance, sit not you in the company of those people who are the wrongdoers (68)There is no responsibility for them upon those who have Taqwa, but (their duty) is to remind them, that they may (attain) Taqwa (69)\n\n## The Invitation to the Truth is Guidance Without Coercion\n\nAllah said,\nوَكَذَّبَ بِهِ\n(But have denied it) denied the Qur'an, guidance and clear explanation that you (O Muhammad ﷺ) have brought them,\nقَوْمُكَ\n(your people) meaning, Quraysh,\nوَهُوَ الْحَقُّ\n(though it is the truth.) beyond which there is no other truth.\nقُل لَّسْتُ عَلَيْكُم بِوَكِيلٍ\n(Say: \"I am not responsible for your affairs.\") meaning, I have not been appointed a guardian or watcher over you. Allah also said;\nوَقُلِ الْحَقُّ مِن رَّبِّكُمْ فَمَن شَاءَ فَلْيُؤْمِن وَمَن شَاءَ فَلْيَكْفُرْ\n(And say: \"The truth is from your Lord.\" Then whosoever wills, let him believe, and whosoever wills, let him disbelieve.)[18:29],\nThis means, my duty is to convey the Message and your duty is to hear and obey. Those who follow me, will acquire happiness in this life and the Hereafter. Those who defy me will become miserable in this life and the Hereafter. So Allah said;\nلِّكُلِّ نَبَإٍ مُّسْتَقَرٌّ\n(For every news there is a reality...) meaning, for every news, there is a reality, in that, this news will occur, perhaps after a while, according to Ibn 'Abbas and others. Allah said in other Ayat,\nوَلَتَعْلَمُنَّ نَبَأَهُ بَعْدَ حِينٍ\n(And you shall certainly know the truth of it after a while.)[38:88] and,\nلِكُلِّ أَجَلٍ كِتَابٌ\n((For) each and every matter there is a decree (from Allah).)[13:38]. This, indeed, is a warning and a promise that will surely occur,\nوَسَوْفَ تَعْلَمُونَ\n(and you will come to know.) Allah's statement,\nوَإِذَا رَأَيْتَ الَّذِينَ يَخُوضُونَ فِي آيَاتِنَا\n(And when you see those who engage in false conversation about Our verses (of the Qur'an)), by denying and mocking them.\n\n## The Prohibition of Sitting with Those Who Deny and Mock Allah's Ayat\n\nفَأَعْرِضْ عَنْهُمْ حَتَّىٰ يَخُوضُوا فِي حَدِيثٍ غَيْرِهِ\n(stay away from them till they turn to another topic.) until they talk about a subject other than the denial they were engaged in.\nوَإِمَّا يُنسِيَنَّكَ الشَّيْطَانُ\n(And if Shaytan causes you to forget...) This command includes every member of this Ummah. No one is to sit with those who deny and distort Allah's Ayat and explain them incorrectly. If one forgets and sits with such people,\nفَلَا تَقْعُدْ بَعْدَ الذِّكْرَىٰ\n(then after the remembrance sit not you) after you remember,\nمَعَ الْقَوْمِ الظَّالِمِينَ\n(in the company of those people who are the wrongdoers.). A Hadith states,\nرُفِعَ عَنْ أُمَّتِي الْخَطَأُ وَالنِّسْيَانُ وَمَا اسْتُكْرِهُوا عَلَيْهِ\n(My Ummah was forgiven unintentional errors, forgetfulness and what they are coerced to do.)\nThe Ayah above [6:68] is the Ayah mentioned in Allah's statement,\nوَقَدْ نَزَّلَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِي الْكِتَابِ أَنْ إِذَا سَمِعْتُمْ آيَاتِ اللَّهِ يُكْفَرُ بِهَا وَيُسْتَهْزَأُ بِهَا فَلَا تَقْعُدُوا مَعَهُمْ حَتَّىٰ يَخُوضُوا فِي حَدِيثٍ غَيْرِهِ إِنَّكُمْ إِذًا مِّثْلُهُمْ\n(And it has already been revealed to you in the Book that when you hear the Verses of Allah being denied and mocked at, then sit not with them, until they engage in a talk other than that; (but if you stayed with them) certainly in that case you would be like them.)[4:140], for, if you still sit with them, agreeing to what they say, you will be just like them. Allah's statement,\nوَمَا عَلَى الَّذِينَ يَتَّقُونَ مِنْ حِسَابِهِم مِّن شَيْءٍ\n(There is no responsibility for them upon those who have Taqwa,) means, when the believers avoid sitting with wrongdoers in this case, they will be innocent of them and they will have saved themselves from their sin. Allah's statement,\nوَلَٰكِن ذِكْرَىٰ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَّقُونَ\n(but (their duty) is to remind them, that they may avoid that.), means, We commanded you to ignore and avoid them, so that they become aware of the error they are indulging in, that they may avoid this behavior and never repeat it again.","href":"/tafsir/6?verse=66","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:6:70","title":"Ibn Kathir · 6:70","text":"And leave alone those who take their religion as play and amusement, and are deceived by the life of this world. But remind (them) with it (the Qur'an) lest a soul Tubsal for that which one has earned, when he will find for himself no protector or intercessor besides Allah, and even if he offers every ransom, it will not be accepted from him. Such are they who are given up to destruction because of that which they have earned. For them will be a drink of boiling water and a painful torment because they used to disbelieve.) Allah sai (70)\nوَذَرِ الَّذِينَ اتَّخَذُوا دِينَهُمْ لَعِبًا وَلَهْوًا وَغَرَّتْهُمُ الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا\n(And leave alone those who take their religion as play and amusement, and are deceived by the life of this world.)\nThe Ayah commands to leave such people, ignore them and give them respite, for soon, they will taste a tremendous torment. This is why Allah said,\nوَذَكِّرْ بِهِ\n(But remind with it) meaning, remind the people with this Qur'an and warn them against Allah's revenge and painful torment on the Day of Resurrection. Allah said;\nأَن تُبْسَلَ نَفْسٌ بِمَا كَسَبَتْ\n(lest a soul Tubsal for that which one has earned,) meaning, so that it is not Tubsal. Ad-Dahhak from Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Al-Hasan and As-Suddi said that Tubsal means, be submissive. Al-Walibi said that Ibn 'Abbas said that Tubsal means, 'be exposed'. Qatadah said that Tubsal means, 'be prevented', Murrah and Ibn Zayd said that it means, 'be recompensed', Al-Kalbi said, 'be reckoned'. All these statements and expressions are similar, for they all mean exposure to destruction, being kept away from all that is good, and being restrained from attaining what is desired. Allah also said;\nكُلُّ نَفْسٍ بِمَا كَسَبَتْ رَهِينَةٌ - إِلَّا أَصْحَابَ الْيَمِينِ\n(Every person is restrained by what he has earned. Except those on the Right.)[74:38-39], and\nلَيْسَ لَهَا مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ وَلِيٌّ وَلَا شَفِيعٌ\n(when he will find for himself no protector or intercessor besides Allah,) and,\nوَإِن تَعْدِلْ كُلَّ عَدْلٍ لَّا يُؤْخَذْ مِنْهَا\n(and even if he offers every ransom, it will not be accepted from him.) meaning, whatever the ransom such people offer, it will not be accepted from them. Allah said in a similar statement,\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَمَاتُوا وَهُمْ كُفَّارٌ فَلَن يُقْبَلَ مِنْ أَحَدِهِم مِّلْءُ الْأَرْضِ ذَهَبًا\n(Verily, those who disbelieved, and died while they were disbelievers, the (whole) earth full of gold will not be accepted from anyone of them.)[3:91] Allah said here,\nأُولَٰئِكَ الَّذِينَ أُبْسِلُوا بِمَا كَسَبُوا لَهُمْ شَرَابٌ مِّنْ حَمِيمٍ وَعَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ بِمَا كَانُوا يَكْفُرُونَ\n(Such are they who are given up to destruction because of that which they have earned. For them will be a drink of boiling water and a painful torment because they used to disbelieve.)","href":"/tafsir/6?verse=70","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:6:71","title":"Ibn Kathir · 6:71–73","text":"Say: \"Shall we invoke others besides Allah (false deities), that can do us neither good nor harm, and shall we turn on our heels after Allah has guided us? – Like one whom the Shayatin (devils) have made to go astray, confused (wandering) through the land, his companions calling him to guidance (saying): 'Come to us.'\" Say: \"Verily, Allah's guidance is the only guidance, and we have been commanded to submit (ourselves) to the Lord of all that exists (71)And to perform the Salah, and have Taqwa of Him, and it is He to Whom you shall be gathered (72)It is He Who has created the heavens and the earth in truth, and on the Day He will say: \"Be!\" it shall become. His Word is the truth. His will be the dominion on the Day when the Sur will be blown. All-Knower of the unseen and the seen. He is the All-Wise, Well-Aware (73)\n\n## The Parable of Those Who Revert to Disbelief After Faith and Good Deeds\n\nAs-Suddi said, \"Some idolators said to some Muslims, 'Follow us and abandon the religion of Muhammad.' Allah sent down the revelation,\nقُلْ أَنَدْعُو مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ مَا لَا يَنفَعُنَا وَلَا يَضُرُّنَا وَنُرَدُّ عَلَىٰ أَعْقَابِنَا\n(Say: \"Shall we invoke others besides Allah, that can do us neither good nor harm, and shall we turn on our heels...\") by reverting to disbelief,\nبَعْدَ إِذْ هَدَانَا اللَّهُ\n(\"...after Allah has guided us?\") for if we do this, our example will be like he whom the devils have caused to wander in confusion throughout the land. Allah says here, your example, if you revert to disbelief after you believed, is that of a man who went with some people on a road, but he lost his way and the devils led him to wander in confusion over the land. Meanwhile, his companions on the road were calling him to come to them saying, 'Come back to us, for we are on the path.' But, he refused to go back to them. This is the example of he who follows the devil after recognizing Muhammad ﷺ, and Muhammad ﷺ is the person who is calling the people to the path, and the path is Islam.\" Ibn Jarir recorded this statement.Allah's statement,\nكَالَّذِي اسْتَهْوَتْهُ الشَّيَاطِينُ فِي الْأَرْضِ\n(Like one whom the Shayatin (devils) have made to go astray (wandering) through the land,) refers to ghouls,\nيَدْعُونَهُ\n(calling him) by his name, his father's and his grandfather's names. So he follows the devils' call thinking that it is a path of guidance, but by the morning he will find himself destroyed and perhaps they eat him. The Jinns will then let him wander in a wasteland where he will die of thirst. This is the example of those who follow the false gods that are being worshipped instead of Allah, Most Honored. Ibn Jarir also recorded this. Allah said,\nقُلْ إِنَّ هُدَى اللَّهِ هُوَ الْهُدَىٰ\n(Say: \"Verily, Allah's guidance is the only guidance,\") Allah said in other instances,\nوَمَن يَهْدِ اللَّهُ فَمَا لَهُ مِن مُّضِلٍّ\n(And whomsoever Allah guides, for him there will be none to misguide him.)[39:37], and,\nإِن تَحْرِصْ عَلَى هُدَاهُمْ فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ لاَ يَهْدِى مَن يُضِلُّ وَمَا لَهُمْ مِّن نَّـصِرِينَ\n(If you covet for their guidance, then verily Allah guides not those whom He makes to go astray. And they will have no helpers.)[16:37] Allah's statement,\nوَأُمِرْنَا لِنُسْلِمَ لِرَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(and we have been commanded to submit to the Lord of all that exists.) means, we were commanded to worship Allah in sincerity to Him alone, without partners.\nوَأَنْ أَقِيمُوا الصَّلَاةَ وَاتَّقُوهُ\n(And to perform the Salah, and have Taqwa of Him.) meaning, we were commanded to perform the prayer and to fear Allah in all circumstances,\nوَهُوَ الَّذِي إِلَيْهِ تُحْشَرُونَ\n(and it is He to Whom you shall be gathered.) on the Day of Resurrection.\nوَهُوَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ بِالْحَقِّ\n(It is He Who has created the heavens and the earth in truth.) meaning, in justice, and He is their Originator and Owner Who governs their affairs and the affairs of their inhabitants. Allah said,\nوَيَوْمَ يَقُولُ كُن فَيَكُونُ\n(and on the Day He will say: \"Be!\" it shall become.) Referring to the Day of Resurrection, which will come faster than the blink of an eye, when Allah says to it, 'Be.'\n\n## As-Sur; The Trumpet\n\nAllah's statement,\nيَوْمَ يُنفَخُ فِي الصُّورِ\n(on the Day when the Sur will be blown...) refers to His statement,\nوَيَوْمَ يَقُولُ كُن فَيَكُونُ\n(and on the Day He will say: \"Be!\" it shall become.) as we stated above. Or, it means,\nوَلَهُ الْمُلْكُ يَوْمَ يُنفَخُ فِي الصُّورِ\n(His will be the dominion on the Day when the Sur will be blown.) Allah said in other Ayat,\nلِّمَنِ الْمُلْكُ الْيَوْمَ لِلَّهِ الْوَاحِدِ الْقَهَّارِ\n(Whose is the kingdom this Day? It is Allah's, the One, the Irresistible!)[40:16], and,\nالْمُلْكُ يَوْمَئِذٍ الْحَقُّ لِلرَّحْمَٰنِ وَكَانَ يَوْمًا عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ عَسِيرًا\n(The sovereignty on that Day will be the true (sovereignty), belonging to the Most Beneficent (Allah), and it will be a hard Day for the disbelievers.)[25:26]\nThe Sur is the Trumpet into which the angel Israfil, peace be upon him, will blow. The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ إِسْرَافِيلَ قَدِ الْتَقَمَ الصُّورَ، وَحَنَى جَبْهَتَهُ يَنْتَظِرُ مَتَى يُؤْمَر فَيَنْفُخُ\n(Israfil has held the Sur in his mouth and lowered his forehead, awaiting the command to blow in it.)\nMuslim recorded this Hadith in his Sahih. Imam Ahmad recorded that 'Abdullah bin 'Amr said, \"A bedouin man said, 'O Allah's Messenger! What is the Sur?' He said,\nقَرْنٌ يُنْفَخُ فِيهِ\n(A Trumpet which will be blown.)\"","href":"/tafsir/6?verse=71","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:6:74","title":"Ibn Kathir · 6:74–79","text":"And (remember) when Ibrahim said to his father Azar: \"Do you take idols as gods? Verily, I see you and your people in manifest error. (74)Thus did we show Ibrahim the kingdom of the heavens and the earth that he be one of those who have faith with certainty (75)When the night overcame him he saw a Kawkab. He said: \"This is my lord.\" But when it Afala, he said: \"I like not those that set. (76)When he saw the moon rising up, he said: \"This is my lord.\" But when it set, he said: \"Unless my Lord guides me, I shall surely be among the misguided people. (77)When he saw the sun rising up, he said: \"This is my lord. This is greater.\" But when it Afalat, he said: \"O my people! I am indeed free from all that you join as partners in worship with Allah (78)Verily, I have turned my face towards Him Who has created the heavens and the earth, Hanifan, and I am not of the idolators. (79)\n\n## Ibrahim Advises his Father\n\nIbrahim advised, discouraged and forbade his father from worshipping idols, just as Allah stated,\nوَإِذْ قَالَ إِبْرَاهِيمُ لِأَبِيهِ آزَرَ أَتَتَّخِذُ أَصْنَامًا آلِهَةً\n(And (remember) when Ibrahim said to his father Azar: \"Do you take idols as gods?\") meaning, do you worship an idol instead of Allah?\nإِنِّي أَرَاكَ وَقَوْمَكَ\n(Verily, I see you and your people...) who follow your path,\nفِي ضَلَالٍ مُّبِينٍ\n(in manifest error) wandering in confusion unaware of where to go. Therefore, you are in disarray and ignorance, and this fact is clear to all those who have sound reason. Allah also said,\nوَاذْكُرْ فِي الْكِتَابِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ إِنَّهُ كَانَ صِدِّيقًا نَّبِيًّا - إِذْ قَالَ لِأَبِيهِ يَا أَبَتِ لِمَ تَعْبُدُ مَا لَا يَسْمَعُ وَلَا يُبْصِرُ وَلَا يُغْنِي عَنكَ شَيْئًا - يَا أَبَتِ إِنِّي قَدْ جَاءَنِي مِنَ الْعِلْمِ مَا لَمْ يَأْتِكَ فَاتَّبِعْنِي أَهْدِكَ صِرَاطًا سَوِيًّا - يَا أَبَتِ لَا تَعْبُدِ الشَّيْطَانَ إِنَّ الشَّيْطَانَ كَانَ لِلرَّحْمَٰنِ عَصِيًّا - يَا أَبَتِ إِنِّي أَخَافُ أَن يَمَسَّكَ عَذَابٌ مِّنَ الرَّحْمَٰنِ فَتَكُونَ لِلشَّيْطَانِ وَلِيًّا - قَالَ أَرَاغِبٌ أَنتَ عَنْ آلِهَتِي يَا إِبْرَاهِيمُ لَئِن لَّمْ تَنتَهِ لَأَرْجُمَنَّكَ وَاهْجُرْنِي مَلِيًّا - قَالَ سَلَامٌ عَلَيْكَ سَأَسْتَغْفِرُ لَكَ رَبِّي إِنَّهُ كَانَ بِي حَفِيًّا - وَأَعْتَزِلُكُمْ وَمَا تَدْعُونَ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ وَأَدْعُو رَبِّي عَسَىٰ أَلَّا أَكُونَ بِدُعَاءِ رَبِّي شَقِيًّا\n(And mention in the Book (the Qur'an, the story of) Ibrahim. Verily! He was a man of truth, a Prophet. When he said to his father: \"O my father! Why do you worship that which hears not, sees not and cannot avail you in anything? O my father! Verily! There has come to me of knowledge that which came not unto you. So follow me. I will guide you to a straight path. O my father! Worship not Shaytan. Verily! Shaytan has been a rebel against the Most Beneficent (Allah). O my father! Verily! I fear lest a torment from the Most Beneficent (Allah) overtakes you, so that you become a companion of Shaytan (in the Hell-fire).\" He (the father) said: \"Do you reject my gods, O Ibrahim? If you stop not (this), I will indeed stone you. So get away from me safely before I punish you.\" Ibrahim said: \"Peace be on you! I will ask forgiveness of my Lord for you. Verily! He is unto me, Ever Most Gracious. And I shall turn away from you and from those whom you invoke besides Allah. And I shall call on my Lord; and I hope that I shall not be unanswered in my invocation to my Lord.\")[19:41-48]\nIbrahim continued asking for forgiveness for his father for the rest of his father's life. When his father died an idolator and Ibrahim realized this fact, he stopped asking Allah for forgiveness for him and disassociated himself from him. Allah said,\nوَمَا كَانَ اسْتِغْفَارُ إِبْرَاهِيمَ لِأَبِيهِ إِلَّا عَن مَّوْعِدَةٍ وَعَدَهَا إِيَّاهُ فَلَمَّا تَبَيَّنَ لَهُ أَنَّهُ عَدُوٌّ لِّلَّهِ تَبَرَّأَ مِنْهُ إِنَّ إِبْرَاهِيمَ لَأَوَّاهٌ حَلِيمٌ\n(And invoking for his father's forgiveness was only because of a promise he had made to him. But when it became clear to him that he was an enemy to Allah, he dissociated himself from him. Verily Ibrahim was patient in supplication and forbearing.)[9:114].\nIt was recorded in the Sahih that Ibrahim will meet his father Azar on the Day of Resurrection and Azar will say to him, \"My son! This Day, I will not disobey you.\" Ibrahim will say, \"O Lord! You promised me not to disgrace me on the Day they are resurrected; and what will be more disgraceful to me than cursing and dishonoring my father?\" Then Allah will say, \"O Ibrahim! Look behind you!\" He will look and there he will see (that his father was changed into) a male hyena covered in dung, which will be caught by the legs and thrown in the (Hell) Fire.\"\n\n## Tawhid Becomes Apparent to Ibrahim\n\nAllah's statement,\nوَكَذَٰلِكَ نُرِي إِبْرَاهِيمَ مَلَكُوتَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ\n(Thus did We show Ibrahim the kingdom of the heavens and the earth...)[6:75], means, when he contemplated about the creation of the heaven and earth, We showed Ibrahim the proofs of Allah's Oneness over His dominion and His creation, which indicate that there is no god or Lord except Allah. Allah said in other Ayat;\nقُلِ انظُرُوا مَاذَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ\n(Say: \"Behold all that is in the heavens and the earth.\")[10:101], and,\nأَفَلَمْ يَرَوْا إِلَىٰ مَا بَيْنَ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَمَا خَلْفَهُم مِّنَ السَّمَاءِ وَالْأَرْضِ إِن نَّشَأْ نَخْسِفْ بِهِمُ الْأَرْضَ أَوْ نُسْقِطْ عَلَيْهِمْ كِسَفًا مِّنَ السَّمَاءِ إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً لِّكُلِّ عَبْدٍ مُّنِيبٍ\n(See they not what is before them and what is behind them, of the heaven and the earth? If We will, We sink the earth with them, or cause a piece of the sky to fall upon them. Verily, in this is a sign for every servant who turns to Allah.)[34:9] Allah said next,\nفَلَمَّا جَنَّ عَلَيْهِ اللَّيْلُ\n(When the night overcame him) covered him with darkness,\nرَأَىٰ كَوْكَبًا\n(He saw a 'Kawkab') a star.\nقَالَ هَٰذَا رَبِّي فَلَمَّا أَفَلَ\n(He said: \"This is my lord.\" But when it 'Afala',) meaning, set, he said,\nلَا أُحِبُّ الْآفِلِينَ\n(I like not those that set.) Qatadah commented, \"Ibrahim knew that his Lord is Eternal and never ceases.\"\nفَلَمَّا رَأَى الْقَمَرَ بَازِغًا قَالَ هَٰذَا رَبِّي فَلَمَّا أَفَلَ قَالَ لَئِن لَّمْ يَهْدِنِي رَبِّي لَأَكُونَنَّ مِنَ الْقَوْمِ الضَّالِّينَ - فَلَمَّا رَأَى الشَّمْسَ بَازِغَةً قَالَ هَٰذَا رَبِّي\n(When he saw the moon rising up, he said: \"This is my lord.\" But when it set, he said: \"Unless my Lord guides me, I shall surely be among the misguided people.\" When he saw the sun rising up, he said: \"This is my lord.\") this radiating, rising star is my lord,\nهَٰذَا أَكْبَرُ\n(This is greater) bigger than the star and the moon, and more radiant.\nفَلَمَّا أَفَلَتْ\n(But when it 'Afalat') set,\nقَالَ يَا قَوْمِ إِنِّي بَرِيءٌ مِّمَّا تُشْرِكُونَ - إِنِّي وَجَّهْتُ وَجْهِيَ\n(he said: \"O my people! I am indeed free from all that you join as partners in worship with Allah. Verily, I have turned my face...\"), meaning, I have purified my religion and made my worship sincere,\nلِلَّذِي فَطَرَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ\n(\"towards Him Who has created the heavens and the earth,\") Who originated them and shaped them without precedence,\nحَنِيفًا\n('Hanifan') avoiding Shirk and embracing Tawhid. This is why he said next,\nوَمَا أَنَا مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ\n(\"and I am not of the idolators.\")\n\n## Prophet Ibrahim Debates with his People\n\nWe should note here that, in these Ayat, Ibrahim, peace be upon him, was debating with his people, explaining to them the error of their way in worshipping idols and images. In the first case with his father, Ibrahim explained to his people their error in worshipping the idols of earth, which they made in the shape of heavenly angels, so that they intercede on their behalf with the Glorious Creator. His people thought that they are too insignificant to worship Allah directly, and this is why they turned to the worship of angels as intercessors with Allah for their provisions, gaining victory and attaining their various needs.\nHe then explained to them the error and deviation of worshipping the seven planets, which they said were the Moon, Mercury, Venus, the Sun, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn. The brightest of these objects and the most honored to them was the Sun, the Moon then Venus. Ibrahim, may Allah's peace and blessings be on him, first proved that Venus is not worthy of being worshipped, for it is subservient to a term and course appointed that it does not defy, nor swerving right or left. Venus does not have any say in its affairs, for it is only a heavenly object that Allah created and made bright out of His wisdom. Venus rises from the east and sets in the west where it disappears from sight. This rotation is repeated the next night, and so forth. Such an object is not worthy of being a god. Ibrahim then went on to mention the Moon in the same manner in which he mentioned Venus, and then the Sun. When he proved that these three objects were not gods, although they are the brightest objects the eyes can see,\nقَالَ يَا قَوْمِ إِنِّي بَرِيءٌ مِّمَّا تُشْرِكُونَ\n(he said: \"O my people! I am indeed free from all that you join as partners in worship with Allah.\") meaning, I am free from worshipping these objects and from taking them as protectors. Therefore, if they are indeed gods as you claim, then all of you bring your plot against me and do not give me respite.\nإِنِّي وَجَّهْتُ وَجْهِيَ لِلَّذِي فَطَرَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ حَنِيفًا وَمَا أَنَا مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ\n(Verily, I have turned my face towards Him Who has created the heavens and the earth, Hanifan, and I am not one of the idolators.) meaning, I worship the Creator of these things, Who originated and decreed them, and Who governs their affairs and made them subservient. It is He in Whose Hand is the dominion of all things, and He is the Creator, Lord, King and God of all things in existence. In another Ayah, Allah said:\nإِنَّ رَبَّكُمُ اللَّهُ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ فِي سِتَّةِ أَيَّامٍ ثُمَّ اسْتَوَىٰ عَلَى الْعَرْشِ يُغْشِي اللَّيْلَ النَّهَارَ يَطْلُبُهُ حَثِيثًا وَالشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ وَالنُّجُومَ مُسَخَّرَاتٍ بِأَمْرِهِ أَلَا لَهُ الْخَلْقُ وَالْأَمْرُ تَبَارَكَ اللَّهُ رَبُّ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(Indeed your Lord is Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth in six Days, and then He Istawa (rose over) the Throne. He brings the night as a cover over the day, seeking it rapidly, and (He created) the sun, the moon, the stars, subjecting them to His command. Surely, His is the creation and commandment. Blessed be Allah, the Lord of all that exists!)[7:54]. Allah described Prophet Ibrahim,\nوَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَا إِبْرَاهِيمَ رُشْدَهُ مِن قَبْلُ وَكُنَّا بِهِ عَالِمِينَ - إِذْ قَالَ لِأَبِيهِ وَقَوْمِهِ مَا هَٰذِهِ التَّمَاثِيلُ الَّتِي أَنتُمْ لَهَا عَاكِفُونَ\n(And indeed We bestowed aforetime on Ibrahim his (portion of) guidance, and We were well-acquainted with him. When he said to his father and his people: \"What are these images, to which you are devoted?\")[21:51-52].\nThese Ayat indicate that Ibrahim was debating with his people about the Shirk they practiced.","href":"/tafsir/6?verse=74","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:6:80","title":"Ibn Kathir · 6:80–83","text":"His people disputed with him. He said: \"Do you dispute with me about Allah while He has guided me, and I fear not those whom you associate with Allah in worship. (Nothing can happen to me) except when my Lord wills something. My Lord comprehends in His knowledge all things. Will you not then remember (80)And how should I fear those whom you associate in worship with Allah, while you fear not that you have joined in worship with Allah things for which He has not sent down to you any Sultan. (So) which of the two parties has more right to be in security? If you but know. (81)It is those who believe and confuse not their belief with Zulm (wrong), for them (only) there is security and they are the guided (82)And that was Our proof which We gave Ibrahim against his people. We in degrees raise whom We will. Certainly your Lord is All-Wise, All-Knowing (83)\nAllah states that His Khalil, Prophet Ibrahim, said when his people mentioned various doubts and disputed with him about the Tawhid that he called to:\nأَتُحَاجُّونِّي فِي اللَّهِ وَقَدْ هَدَانِ\n(Do you dispute with me about Allah while He has guided me?). The Ayah means, do you argue with me about Allah, other than Whom there is no god worthy of worship, while He has guided me to the Truth and made me aware of it? Therefore, how can I ever consider your misguided statements and false doubts? Ibrahim said next,\nوَلَا أَخَافُ مَا تُشْرِكُونَ بِهِ إِلَّا أَن يَشَاءَ رَبِّي شَيْئًا\n(and I fear not those whom you associate with Allah in worship. (Nothing can happen to me) except when my Lord wills something.)\nIbrahim said, among the proofs to the falsehood of your creed, is that these false gods that you worship do not bring about any effect, and I do not fear them or care about them. Therefore, if these gods are able to cause harm, then use them against me and do not give me respite. Ibrahim's statement,\nإِلَّا أَن يَشَاءَ رَبِّي شَيْئًا\n(except when my Lord wills something.) means, only Allah causes benefit or harm.\nوَسِعَ رَبِّي كُلَّ شَيْءٍ عِلْمًا\n(My Lord comprehends in His knowledge all things.) meaning, Allah's knowledge encompasses all things and nothing escapes His complete observation,\nأَفَلَا تَتَذَكَّرُونَ\n(Will you not then remember?) what I explained to you, considering your idols as false gods and refraining from worshipping them? This reasoning from Prophet Ibrahim is similar to the argument that Prophet Hud used against his people, 'Ad. Allah mentioned this incident in His Book, when He said,\nقَالُوا يَا هُودُ مَا جِئْتَنَا بِبَيِّنَةٍ وَمَا نَحْنُ بِتَارِكِي آلِهَتِنَا عَن قَوْلِكَ وَمَا نَحْنُ لَكَ بِمُؤْمِنِينَ - إِن نَّقُولُ إِلَّا اعْتَرَاكَ بَعْضُ آلِهَتِنَا بِسُوءٍ قَالَ إِنِّي أُشْهِدُ اللَّهَ وَاشْهَدُوا أَنِّي بَرِيءٌ مِّمَّا تُشْرِكُونَ - مِن دُونِهِ فَكِيدُونِي جَمِيعًا ثُمَّ لَا تُنظِرُونِ - إِنِّي تَوَكَّلْتُ عَلَى اللَّهِ رَبِّي وَرَبِّكُم مَّا مِن دَابَّةٍ إِلَّا هُوَ آخِذٌ بِنَاصِيَتِهَا إِنَّ رَبِّي عَلَىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُّسْتَقِيمٍ\n(They said: \"O Hud! No evidence have you brought us, and we shall not leave our gods for your (mere) saying! And we are not believers in you. All that we say is that some of our gods have seized you with evil.\" He said: \"I call Allah to witness - and bear you witness - that I am free from that which you ascribe as partners in worship with Him (Allah). So plot against me, all of you, and give me no respite. I put my trust in Allah, my Lord and your Lord! There is not a moving creature but He has grasp of its forelock. Verily, my Lord is on the straight path (the truth).\")[11:53-56] Ibrahim's statement,\nوَكَيْفَ أَخَافُ مَا أَشْرَكْتُمْ\n(And how should I fear those whom you associate...) means, how should I fear the idols that you worship instead of Allah,\nوَلَا تَخَافُونَ أَنَّكُمْ أَشْرَكْتُم بِاللَّهِ مَا لَمْ يُنَزِّلْ بِهِ عَلَيْكُمْ سُلْطَانًا\n(while you fear not that you have joined in worship with Allah things for which He has not sent down to you any Sultan.) meaning, proof, according to Ibn 'Abbas and others among the Salaf. Allah said in similar Ayat;\nأَمْ لَهُمْ شُرَكَاءُ شَرَعُوا لَهُم مِّنَ الدِّينِ مَا لَمْ يَأْذَن بِهِ اللَّهُ\n(Or have they partners who have instituted for them a religion which Allah has not allowed?)[42:21], and,\nإِنْ هِيَ إِلَّا أَسْمَاءٌ سَمَّيْتُمُوهَا أَنتُمْ وَآبَاؤُكُم مَّا أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ بِهَا مِن سُلْطَانٍ\n(They are but names which you have named, you and your fathers, for which Allah has sent down no authority.)[53:21] His statement,\nفَأَيُّ الْفَرِيقَيْنِ أَحَقُّ بِالْأَمْنِ إِن كُنتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ\n((So) which of the two parties has more right to be in security? If you but know.) means, which of the two parties is on the truth, those who worship Him in Whose Hand is harm and benefit, or those who worship what cannot bring harm or benefit, without authority to justify worshipping them? Who among these two parties has more right to be saved from Allah's torment on the Day of Resurrection? Allah said,\nالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَلَمْ يَلْبِسُوا إِيمَانَهُم بِظُلْمٍ أُولَٰئِكَ لَهُمُ الْأَمْنُ وَهُم مُّهْتَدُونَ\n(It is those who believe and confuse not their belief with Zulm (wrong), for them (only) there is security and they are the guided.)\nTherefore, those who worship Allah alone without partners, will acquire safety on the Day of Resurrection, and they are the guided ones in this life and the Hereafter.\n\n## Shirk is the Greatest Zulm (Wrong)\n\nAl-Bukhari recorded that 'Abdullah said, \"When the Ayah,\nوَلَمْ يَلْبِسُوا إِيمَانَهُم بِظُلْمٍ\n(and confuse not their belief with Zulm (wrong).) was revealed, the Companions of the Prophet ﷺ said, 'And who among us did not commit Zulm against himself?' The Ayah,\nإِنَّ الشِّرْكَ لَظُلْمٌ عَظِيمٌ\n(Verily! Joining others in worship with Allah is a great Zulm (wrong) indeed.)[31:13], was later revealed.\" Imam Ahmad recorded that 'Abdullah said, \"When this Ayah was revealed,\nالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَلَمْ يَلْبِسُوا إِيمَانَهُم بِظُلْمٍ\n(It is those who believe and confuse not their belief with Zulm (wrong),) it was hard on the people. They said, 'O Allah's Messenger! Who among us did not commit Zulm against himself?' He said,\nإِنَّهُ لَيْسَ الَّذِي تَعْنُونَ، أَلَمْ تَسْمَعُوا مَا قَالَ الْعَبْدُ الصَّالِحُ\n(It is not what you understood from it. Did you not hear what the righteous servant (Luqman) said,\nيَا بُنَيَّ لَا تُشْرِكْ بِاللَّهِ إِنَّ الشِّرْكَ لَظُلْمٌ عَظِيمٌ\n(O my son! Join not in worship others with Allah. Verily! Shirk is a great Zulm (wrong) indeed.)) [31:13]. Therefore, it is about Shirk. Allah's statement,\nوَتِلْكَ حُجَّتُنَا آتَيْنَاهَا إِبْرَاهِيمَ عَلَىٰ قَوْمِهِ\n(And that was Our proof which We gave Ibrahim against his people.) means, We directed him to proclaim Our proof against them. Mujahid and others said that 'Our proof' refers to,\nوَكَيْفَ أَخَافُ مَا أَشْرَكْتُمْ وَلَا تَخَافُونَ أَنَّكُمْ أَشْرَكْتُم بِاللَّهِ مَا لَمْ يُنَزِّلْ بِهِ عَلَيْكُمْ سُلْطَانًا فَأَيُّ الْفَرِيقَيْنِ أَحَقُّ بِالْأَمْنِ\n(And how should I fear those whom you associate in worship with Allah (though they can neither benefit nor harm), while you fear not that you have joined in worship with Allah things for which He has not sent down to you any Sultan. (So) which of the two parties has more right to be in security?) Allah has testified Ibrahim's statement and affirmed security and guidance, saying;\nالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَلَمْ يَلْبِسُوا إِيمَانَهُم بِظُلْمٍ أُولَٰئِكَ لَهُمُ الْأَمْنُ وَهُم مُّهْتَدُونَ\n(It is those who believe and confuse not their belief with Zulm, for them there is security and they are the guided.) Allah said,\nوَتِلْكَ حُجَّتُنَا آتَيْنَاهَا إِبْرَاهِيمَ عَلَىٰ قَوْمِهِ نَرْفَعُ دَرَجَاتٍ مَّن نَّشَاءُ\n(And that was Our proof which We gave Ibrahim against his people. We raise in degrees whom We will.) And;\nإِنَّ رَبَّكَ حَكِيمٌ عَلِيمٌ\n(Certainly your Lord is All-Wise, All-Knowing.) He is All-Wise in His statements and actions, All-Knower of those whom He guides or misguides, and whether the proof was established against them or not. Allah also said,\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ حَقَّتْ عَلَيْهِمْ كَلِمَتُ رَبِّكَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ - وَلَوْ جَاءَتْهُمْ كُلُّ آيَةٍ حَتَّىٰ يَرَوُا الْعَذَابَ الْأَلِيمَ\n(Truly! Those, against whom the Word (wrath) of your Lord has been justified, will not believe. Even if every sign should come to them – until they see the painful torment.)[10:96-97] This is why Allah said here,\nإِنَّ رَبَّكَ حَكِيمٌ عَلِيمٌ\n(Certainly your Lord is All-Wise, All-Knowing.)","href":"/tafsir/6?verse=80","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:6:84","title":"Ibn Kathir · 6:84–90","text":"And We bestowed upon him Ishaq and Ya'qub, each of them We guided, and before him, We guided Nuh and among his progeny Dawud, Sulayman, Ayyub, Yusuf, Musa, and Harun. Thus do We reward the good-doers (84)And Zakariyya, and Yahya and 'Isa and Iliyas, each one of them was of the righteous (85)And Isma'il and Al-Yasa', and Yunus and Lut, and each one of them We preferred above the 'Alamin (mankind and Jinns, of their times)(86)And also some of their fathers and their progeny and their brethren, We chose them, and We guided them to a straight path (87)This is the guidance of Allah with which He guides whomsoever He wills of His servants. But if they had joined in worship others with Allah, all that they used to do would have been of no benefit to them (88)They are those whom We gave the Book, Al-Hukm, and prophethood. But if they disbelieve therein, then, indeed We have entrusted it to a people who are not disbelievers therein (89)They are those whom Allah had guided. So follow their guidance. Say: \"No reward I ask of you for this (the Qur'an). It is only a reminder for the 'Alamin (mankind and Jinns)(90)\n\n## Ibrahim Receives the News of Ishaq and Ya'qub During His Old Age\n\nAllah states that after Ibrahim became old and he, and his wife, Sarah, lost hope of having children, He gave them Ishaq. The angels came to Ibrahim on their way to the people of Prophet Lut (to destroy them) and they delivered the good news of a child to Ibrahim and his wife. Ibrahim's wife was amazed at the news,\nقَالَتْ يَا وَيْلَتَىٰ أَأَلِدُ وَأَنَا عَجُوزٌ وَهَٰذَا بَعْلِي شَيْخًا إِنَّ هَٰذَا لَشَيْءٌ عَجِيبٌ - قَالُوا أَتَعْجَبِينَ مِنْ أَمْرِ اللَّهِ رَحْمَتُ اللَّهِ وَبَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَيْكُمْ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ إِنَّهُ حَمِيدٌ مَّجِيدٌ\n(She said (in astonishment): \"Woe unto me! Shall I bear a child while I am an old woman, and here is my husband, an old man? Verily! This is a strange thing!\" They said: \"Do you wonder at the decree of Allah? The mercy of Allah and His blessings be on you, O the family [of Ibrahim]. Surely, He (Allah) is All-Praiseworthy, All-Glorious.\")[11:72-73]\nThe angels also gave them the good news that Ishaq will be a Prophet and that he will have offspring of his own. In another Ayah, Allah said;\nوَبَشَّرْنَاهُ بِإِسْحَاقَ نَبِيًّا مِّنَ الصَّالِحِينَ\n(And We gave him the good news of Ishaq a Prophet from the righteous.)[37:112], which perfects this good news and completes the favor. Allah said,\nبِإِسْحَاقَ وَمِن وَرَاءِ إِسْحَاقَ يَعْقُوبَ\n(of Ishaq, and after him, of Ya'qub...)[11:71], meaning, this child will have another child in your lifetime, so that your eyes are comforted by him, just as your eyes will be comforted by his father. Certainly, one becomes jubilant and joyous when he becomes a grandfather, because this means that his offspring will continue to exist. It was also expected that if an elderly couple had children, due to the child's weakness, he would have no offspring. This is why Allah delivered the good news of Ishaq and of his son Ya'qub, whose name literally means 'multiplying and having offspring'. This was a reward for Ibrahim who left his people and migrated from their land so that he could worship Allah alone. Allah compensated Ibrahim with better than his people and tribe when He gave him righteous children of his own, who would follow his religion, so that his eyes would be comforted by them. In another Ayah, Allah said;\nفَلَمَّا اعْتَزَلَهُمْ وَمَا يَعْبُدُونَ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ وَهَبْنَا لَهُ إِسْحَاقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ وَكُلًّا جَعَلْنَا نَبِيًّا\n(So when he turned away from them and from those whom they worshipped besides Allah, We gave him Ishaq and Ya'qub, and each one of them We made a Prophet.)[19:49] Allah said here,\nوَوَهَبْنَا لَهُ إِسْحَاقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ كُلًّا هَدَيْنَا\n(And We bestowed upon him Ishaq and Ya'qub, each of them We guided,) Allah said;\nوَنُوحًا هَدَيْنَا مِن قَبْلُ\n(and before him, We guided Nuh...) meaning, We guided Nuh before and gave him righteous offspring, just as We guided Ibrahim and gave him righteous children.\n\n## Qualities of Nuh and Ibrahim\n\nEach of these two Prophets had special qualities. When Allah caused the people of the earth to drown, except those who believed in Nuh and accompanied him in the ark, Allah made the offspring of Nuh the dwellers of the earth thereafter. Ever since that occurred, the people of the earth were and still are the descendants of Nuh. As for Ibrahim, Allah did not send a Prophet after him but from his descendants. Allah said in other Ayat,\nوَجَعَلْنَا فِي ذُرِّيَّتِهِ النُّبُوَّةَ وَالْكِتَابَ\n(And We ordained among his (Ibrahim's) offspring prophethood and the Book.)[29:27],\nوَلَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا نُوحًا وَإِبْرَاهِيمَ وَجَعَلْنَا فِي ذُرِّيَّتِهِمَا النُّبُوَّةَ وَالْكِتَابَ\n(And indeed, We sent Nuh and Ibrahim, and placed in their offspring Prophethood and the Book.)[57:26], and,\nأُولَٰئِكَ الَّذِينَ أَنْعَمَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِم مِّنَ النَّبِيِّينَ مِن ذُرِّيَّةِ آدَمَ وَمِمَّنْ حَمَلْنَا مَعَ نُوحٍ وَمِن ذُرِّيَّةِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَإِسْرَائِيلَ وَمِمَّنْ هَدَيْنَا وَاجْتَبَيْنَا إِذَا تُتْلَىٰ عَلَيْهِمْ آيَاتُ الرَّحْمَٰنِ خَرُّوا سُجَّدًا وَبُكِيًّا\n(Those were they unto whom Allah bestowed His grace from among the Prophets, of the offspring of Adam, and of those whom We carried (in the ship) with Nuh, and of the offspring of Ibrahim and Isra'il and from among those whom We guided and chose. When the verses of the Most Beneficent (Allah) were recited unto them, they fell down prostrating and weeping.)[19:58] Allah said in this honorable Ayah here,\nوَمِن ذُرِّيَّتِهِ\n(and among his progeny...) meaning, We guided from among his offspring,\nدَاوُودَ وَسُلَيْمَانَ\n(Dawud, Sulayman...) from the offspring of Nuh, according to Ibn Jarir. It is also possible that the Ayah refers to Ibrahim since it is about him that the blessings were originally mentioned here, although Lut is not from his offspring, for he was Ibrahim's nephew, the son of his brother Maran, the son of Azar. It is possible to say that Lut was mentioned in Ibrahim's offspring as a generalization. As Allah said,\nأَمْ كُنتُمْ شُهَدَاءَ إِذْ حَضَرَ يَعْقُوبَ الْمَوْتُ إِذْ قَالَ لِبَنِيهِ مَا تَعْبُدُونَ مِن بَعْدِي قَالُوا نَعْبُدُ إِلَٰهَكَ وَإِلَٰهَ آبَائِكَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَإِسْمَاعِيلَ وَإِسْحَاقَ إِلَٰهًا وَاحِدًا وَنَحْنُ لَهُ مُسْلِمُونَ\n(Or were you witnesses when death approached Ya'qub? When he said unto his sons, \"What will you worship after me?\" They said, \"We shall worship your God, and the God of your fathers, Ibrahim, Isma'il, Ishaq, One God, and to Him we submit.\")[2:133].\nHere, Isma'il was mentioned among the ascendants of Ya'qub, although he was Ya'qub's uncle. Similarly Allah said,\nفَسَجَدَ الْمَلَائِكَةُ كُلُّهُمْ أَجْمَعُونَ - إِلَّا إِبْلِيسَ أَبَىٰ أَن يَكُونَ مَعَ السَّاجِدِينَ\n(So the angels prostrated themselves, all of them together. Except Iblis – he refused to be among those to prostrate.)[15:30-31].\nAllah included Iblis in His order to the angels to prostrate, and chastised him for his opposition, all because he was similar to them in that (order), so he was considered among them in general, although he was a Jinn. Iblis was created from fire while the angels were created from light. Mentioning 'Isa in the offspring of Ibrahim, or Nuh as we stated above, is proof that the grandchildren from a man's daughter's side are included among his offspring. 'Isa is included among Ibrahim's progeny through his moth