ي السَّمَاءِ\n(and its branches (reach) to the sky.) with which the believer's works are ascended to heaven. Similar is said by Ad-Dahhak, Sa'id bin Jubayr, 'Ikrimah, Mujahid and several others. They stated that this parable describes the believer's deeds, good statements and good actions. The believer is just like the beneficial date tree, always having good actions ascending at all times, by day and by night.\nAl-Bukhari recorded that 'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, \"We were with the Messenger of Allah ﷺ when he asked,\nأَخْبِرُونِي عَنْ شَجَرَةٍ تُشْبِهُ - أَوْ - كَالرَّجُلِ الْمُسْلِمِ لَا يَتَحَاتُّ وَرَقُهَا صَيْفًا وَلَا شِتَاءً، وَتُؤْتِي أُكُلَهَا كُلَّ حِينٍ بِإِذْنِ رَبِّهَا\n(Tell me about a tree that resembles the Muslim, the leaves of which do not fall in summer or winter and gives its fruit at all times by the leave of its Lord.)\" Ibn 'Umar said, \"I thought of the date palm tree, but felt shy to answer when I saw that Abu Bakr and 'Umar did not talk. When they did not give an answer, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nهِيَ النَّخْلَةُ\n(It is the date palm tree.) When we departed, I said to 'Umar, 'My father, by Allah! I thought that it was the date tree.' He said, 'Why did you not speak then?' I said, 'I saw you were silent and I felt shy to say anything.' 'Umar said, 'Had you said it, it would have been more precious to me than such things (i.e., would have been very precious to me).'\" 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas said that,\nكَشَجَرَةٍ طَيِّبَةٍ\n(as a goodly tree), is a tree in Paradise. Allah said next,\nتُؤْتِي أُكُلَهَا كُلَّ حِينٍ\n(Giving its fruit at all times,) It is said that it means by day and by night. And they say that describes the believer as a tree that always has fruits during summer and winter, by night and by day. This is the parable of the believer whose good works ascend to heaven by day and by night and at all times,\nبِإِذْنِ رَبِّهَا\n(by the leave of its Lord,) thus earning perfection and becoming beneficial, plentiful, pure and blessed,\nوَيَضْرِبُ اللَّهُ الْأَمْثَالَ لِلنَّاسِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَذَكَّرُونَ\n(and Allah sets forth parables for mankind in order that they may remember.) Allah said next,\nوَمَثَلُ كَلِمَةٍ خَبِيثَةٍ كَشَجَرَةٍ خَبِيثَةٍ\n(And the parable of an evil word is that of an evil tree) describing the disbelief of the disbeliever, for it has no basis or stability. It is similar to the colocynth tree (a very bitter, unscented plant) which is also called, 'Ash-Shiryan'. Shu'bah narrated that Mu'awiyah bin Abi Qurrah narrated that Anas bin Malik said that it is the colocynth tree. Allah said,\nاجْتُثَّتْ\n(uprooted), meaning, was cutoff from the root,\nمِن فَوْقِ الْأَرْضِ مَا لَهَا مِن قَرَارٍ\n(from the surface of earth, having no stability.) therefore, existing without basis or stabililty, just like Kufr (disbelief), for it does not have a basis or roots. Surely, the works of the disbelievers will never ascend nor will any of them be accepted.","href":"/tafsir/14?verse=24","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:14:27","title":"Ibn Kathir · 14:27","text":"Allah will keep firm those who believe, with the word that stands firm in this world, and in the Hereafter. And Allah will cause the wrongdoers to go astray, and Allah does what He wills (27)\n\n## Allah keeps the Believers Firm in This Life and in the Hereafter with a Word that stands Firm\n\nAl-Bukhari recorded that Al-Bara bin 'Azib, may Allah be pleased with him, said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nالْمُسْلِمُ إِذَا سُئِلَ فِي الْقَبْرِ شَهِدَ أَنْ لَا إِلَهَ إِلَّا اللهُ، وَأَنَّ مُحَمَّدًا رَسُولُ اللهِ، فَذَلِكَ قَوْلُهُ:\nيُثَبِّتُ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا بِالْقَوْلِ الثَّابِتِ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَفِي الْآخِرَةِ\n(When the Muslim is questioned in the grave, he will testify that, 'La ilaha illallah', and that Muhammad is Allah's Messenger, hence Allah's statement, (Allah will keep firm those who believe, with word that stands firm in this world, and in the Hereafter.) Muslim and the rest of the Group recorded it. Imam Ahmad recorded that Al-Bara bin 'Azib said, \"We went with the Messenger of Allah ﷺ to attend a funeral procession of an Ansari man. We reached the grave site when it had not yet been completed. The Messenger of Allah ﷺ sat, and we sat all around him, as if there were birds hovering above our heads. The Prophet ﷺ was holding a piece of wood in his hand, poking the ground with it. He next raised his head and said twice or thrice,\nاسْتَعِيذُوا بِاللهِ مِنْ عَذَابِ الْقَبْرِ\n(Seek refuge with Allah from the punishment of the grave.) He said next,\nإِنَّ الْعَبْدَ الْمُؤْمِنَ إِذَا كَانَ فِي انْقِطَاعٍ مِنَ الدُّنْيَا وَإقْبَالٍ مِنَ الْآخِرَةِ، نَزَل إِلَيْهِ مَلَائِكَةٌ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ بِيضُ الْوُجُوهِ، كَأَنَّ وُجُوهَهُمُ الشَّمْسُ، مَعَهُمْ كَفَنٌ مِنَ أَكْفَانِ الْجَنَّةِ، وَحَنُوطٌ مِنْ حَنُوطِ الْجَنَّةِ، حَتَّى يَجْلِسُوا مِنْهُ مَدَّ الْبَصَرِ، ثُمَّ يَجِيءُ مَلَكُ الْمَوْتِ حَتَّى يَجْلِسَ عِنْدَ رَأْسِهِ، فَيَقُولُ: أَيَّتُهَا النَّفْسُ الطَّيِّبَةُ اخْرُجِي إِلَى مَغْفِرَةٍ مِنَ اللهِ وَرِضْوَانٍ - قَالَ -: فَتَخْرُجُ تَسِيلُ، كَمَا تَسِيلُ الْقَطْرَةُ مِنْ فِي السِّقَاءِ، فَيَأْخُذُهَا، فَإِذَا أَخَذَهَا لَمْ يَدَعُوهَا فِي يَدِهِ طَرْفَةَ عَيْنٍ حَتَّى يَأْخُذُوهَا فَيَجْعَلُوهَا فِي ذَلِكَ الْكَفَنِ وَفِي ذَلِكَ الْحَنُوطِ، وَيَخْرُجُ مِنْهَا كَأَطْيَبِ نَفْحَةِ مِسْكٍ وُجِدَتْ عَلَى وَجْهِ الْأَرْضِ، فَيَصْعَدُونَ بِهَا فَلَا يَمُرُّونَ بِهَا، يَعْنِي عَلَى مَلَأٍ مِنَ الْمَلَائِكَةِ، إِلَّا قَالُوا: مَا هَذِهِ الرُّوحُ الطَّيِّبَةُ؟ فَيَقُولُونَ: فُلَانُ بْنُ فُلَانٍ بِأَحْسَنِ أَسْمَائِهِ الَّتِي كَانُوا يُسَمُّونَهُ بِهَا فِي الدُّنْيَا حَتَّى يَنْتَهُوا بِهِ إِلَى السَّمَاءِ الدُّنْيَا فَيَسْتَفْتِحُونَ لَهُ، فَيُفْتَحُ لَهُ فَيُشَيِّعُهُ مِنْ كُلِّ سَمَاءٍ مُقَرَّبُوهَا إِلَى السَّمَاءِ الَّتِي تَلِيهَا، حَتَّى يُنْتَهَى بِهَا إِلَى السَّمَاءِ السَّابِعَةِ، فَيَقُولُ اللهُ: اكْتُبُوا كِتَابَ عَبْدِي فِي عِلِّيِّينَ وَأَعِيدُوهُ إِلَى الْأَرْضِ، فَإِنِّي مِنْهَا خَلَقْتُهُمْ وَفِيهَا أُعِيدُهُمْ، وَمِنْهَا أُخْرِجُهُمْ تَارَةً أُخْرَى، قَالَ: فَتُعَادُ رُوحُهُ فِي جَسَدِهِ، فَيَأْتِيهِ مَلَكَانِ فَيُجْلِسَانِهِ فَيَقُولَانِ لَهُ: مَنْ رَبُّكَ؟\nفَيَقُولُ: رَبِّي اللهُ، فَيَقُولَانِ لَهُ: مَا دِينُكَ؟ فَيَقُولُ: دِينِي الْإِسْلَامُ، فَيَقُولَانِ لَهُ: مَا هَذَا الرَّجُلُ الَّذِي بُعِثَ فِيكُمْ؟ فَيَقُولُ: هُوَ رَسُولُ اللهِ، فَيَقُولَانِ لَهُ: وَمَا عِلْمُكَ؟ فَيَقُولُ: قَرَأْتُ كِتَابَ اللهِ فَآمَنْتُ بِهِ وَصَدَّقْتُ، فَيُنَادِي مُنَادٍ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ: أَنْ صَدَقَ عَبْدِي فَأَفْرِشُوهُ مِنَ الْجَنَّةِ، وَأَلْبِسُوهُ مِنَ الْجَنَّةِ، وَافْتَحُوا لَهُ بَابًا إِلَى الْجَنَّةِ - قَالَ -: فَيَأْتِيهِ مِنْ رَوْحِهَا وَطِيبِهَا وَيُفْسَحُ لَهُ فِي قَبْرِهِ مَدَّ بَصَرِهِ وَيَأْتِيهِ رَجُلٌ حَسَنُ الْوَجْهِ، حَسَنُ الثِّيَابِ، طَيِّبُ الرِّيحِ، فَيَقُولُ: أَبْشِرْ بِالَّذِي يَسُرُّكَ، هَذَا يَوْمُكَ الَّذِي كُنْتَ تُوعَدُ، فَيَقُولُ لَهُ: مَنْ أَنْتَ فَوَجْهُكَ الْوَجْهُ الَّذِي يَأْتِي بِالْخَيْرِ؟ فَيَقُولُ: أَنَا عَمَلُكَ الصَّالِحُ، فَيَقُولُ: رَبِّ أَقِم السَّاعَةَ رَبِّ أَقِمِ السَّاعَةَ، حَتَّى أَرْجِعَ إِلَى أَهْلِي وَمَالِي.\n(When a believing slave is reaching the end of his term in the life of this world and the beginning of his term in the Hereafter, a group of angels, whose faces are white and as radiant as the sun, will descend onto him from heaven. They will carry with them white shroud from Paradise, and fragrance for enshrouding from Paradise. They will sit as far from him as the sight goes. Then, the angel of death, will come until he sits right next to his head, saying, \"O, good and pure soul! Depart (your body) to Allah's forgiveness and pleasure.\" So the soul flows (out of its body), just as the drop flows out from the tip of the jug, and the angel of death captures it. When he captures the soul, they (the group of angels) will not leave it with him for more than an instance, and they will seize it and wrap it in that shroud, and in that fragrance. A most pleasant musk scent ever found on the earth, will flow out of the soul, and the angels will ascend it (to heaven). They will not pass by, but they will say, \"Whose is this Tayyib (good) soul?\" They (the angels who are ascending the soul) will reply, \"Such person, the son of such and such person,\" – calling him by the best names that he used to be called in the world. They will reach the lower heaven and will ask that its door be opened for him, and it will be opened for them. The best residents of every heaven will then see him to the next heaven, until he is brought to the seventh heaven. Allah, the Exalted and Ever High, will say, \"List my servants record in 'Illiyyin and send him back to earth, for I have created them from it, and into it I shall return them, and from it I shall bring them out once again.\" The soul will be joined with its body, and two angels will come to him, sit him up and ask him, \"Who is your Lord?\" He will say, \"Allah is my Lord.\" They will ask him, \"What is your religion?\" He will say, \"My religion is Islam.\" They will say to him, \"What do you say about this man (Prophet Muhammad) who was sent to you?\" He will say, \"He is the Messenger of Allah.\" They will ask him, \"And what proof do you have about it?\" He will say, \"I read the Book of Allah (the Qur'an), and had faith and belief in him.\" Then, a caller (Allah) will herald from heaven, \"My servant has said the truth. Therefore, furnish him from Paradise, and let him wear from (the clothes of) Paradise, and open a door for him to Paradise.\" So he is given from Paradise's tranquillity and good scent, and his grave will be expanded for him as far as his sight can reach. Then, a man, with a handsome face and handsome clothes and whose scent is pleasant, will come to him, saying, \"Receive the glad tidings with that which pleases you. This is the Day which you were promised.\" He will ask him, \"Who are you; for yours is the face that carries the good news?\" He will reply, \"I am your good works.\" He will say, \"O Lord! Hurry up with the commencement of the Hour, hurry up with the commencement of the Hour, so I can return to my family and my wealth.\")\nقَالَ: وَإِنَّ الْعَبْدَ الْكَافِرَ إِذَا كَانَ فِي انْقِطَاعٍ مِنَ الدُّنْيَا وَإِقْبَالٍ مِنَ الْآخِرَةِ، نَزَلَ إِلَيْهِ مَلَائِكَةٌ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ سُودُ الْوُجُوهِ مَعَهُمُ الْمُسُوحُ، فَجَلَسُوا مِنْهُ مَدَّ الْبَصَرِ، ثُمَّ يَجِيءُ مَلَكُ الْمَوْتِ فَيَجْلِسَ عِنْدَ رَأْسِهِ، فَيَقُولُ: أَيَّتُهَا النَّفْسُ الْخَبِيثَةُ، اخْرُجِي إِلَى سَخَطٍ مِنَ اللهِ وَغَضَبٍ - قَالَ-: فَتَفَرَّقَ فِي جَسَدِهِ فَيَنْتَزِعُهَا كَمَا يُنْتَزَعُ السَّفُّودُ مِنَ الصُّوفِ الْمَبْلُولِ، فَيَأْخُذُهَا فَإِذَا أَخَذَهَا لَمْ يَدَعُوهَا فِي يَدِهِ طَرْفَةَ عَيْنٍ حَتَّى يَجْعَلُوهَا فِي تِلْكَ الْمُسُوحِ، فَيَخْرُجُ مِنْهَا كَأَنْتَنِ رِيحِ جِيفَةٍ وُجِدَتْ عَلَى وَجْهِ الْأَرْضِ، فَيَصْعَدُونَ بِهَا، فَلَا يَمُرُّونَ بِهَا عَلَى مَلَأٍ مِنَ الْمَلَائِكَةِ إِلَّا قَالُوا: مَا هَذِهِ الرُّوحُ الْخَبِيثَةُ؟\nفَيَقُولُونَ: فُلَانُ بْنُ فُلَانٍ بِأَقْبَحِ أَسْمَائِهِ الَّتِي كَانَ يُسَمَّى بِهَا فِي الدُّنْيَا، حَتَّى يُنْتَهَى بِهَا إِلَى السَّمَاءِ الدُّنْيَا، فَيُسْتَفْتَحُ لَهُ فَلَا يُفْتَحُ لَهُ - ثُمَّ قَرَأَ رَسُولُ اللهِ صلّى الله عليه وسلّم:\nلَا تُفَتَّحُ لَهُمْ أَبْوَابُ السَّمَاءِ وَلَا يَدْخُلُونَ الْجَنَّةَ حَتَّىٰ يَلِجَ الْجَمَلُ فِي سَمِّ الْخِيَاطِ\nفَيَقُولُ اللهُ: اكْتُبُوا كِتَابَهُ فِي سِجِّينٍ فِي الْأَرْضِ السُّفْلَى، فَتُطْرَحُ رُوحُهُ طَرْحًا - ثُمَّ قَرَأَ\nوَمَن يُشْرِكْ بِاللَّهِ فَكَأَنَّمَا خَرَّ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ فَتَخْطَفُهُ الطَّيْرُ أَوْ تَهْوِي بِهِ الرِّيحُ فِي مَكَانٍ سَحِيقٍ\nفَتُعَادُ رُوحُهُ فِي جَسَدِهِ، وَيَأْتِيهِ مَلَكَانِ فَيُجْلِسَانِهِ وَيَقُولَانِ لَهُ: مَنْ رَبُّكَ؟ فَيَقُولُ: هَاهْ هَاهْ لَا أَدْرِي، فَيَقُولَانِ لَهُ: مَا دِينُكَ؟ فَيَقُولُ: هَاهْ هَاهْ لَا أَدْرِي، فَيَقُولَانِ لَهُ: مَا هَذَا الرَّجُلُ الَّذِي بُعِثَ فِيكُمْ؟ فَيَقُولُ: هَاهْ هَاهْ لَا أَدْرِي، فَيُنَادِي مُنَادٍ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ: أَنْ كَذَبَ عَبْدِي فَأَفْرِشُوهُ مِنَ النَّارِ، وَافْتَحُوا لَهُ بَابًا إِلَى النَّارِ، فَيَأْتِيهِ مِنْ حَرِّهَا وَسَمُومِهَا، وَيَضِيقُ عَلَيْهِ قَبْرُهُ حَتَّى تَخْتَلِفَ فِيهِ أَضْلَاعُهُ، وَيَأْتِيهِ رَجُلٌ قَبِيحُ الْوَجْهِ، قَبِيحُ الثِّيَابِ، مُنْتِنُ الرِّيحِ، فَيَقُولُ: أَبْشِرْ بِالَّذِي يَسُوؤُكَ، هَذَا يَوْمُكَ الَّذِي كُنْتَ تُوعَدُ، فَيَقُولُ: وَمَنْ أَنْتَ، فَوَجْهُكَ الْوَجْهُ يَجِيءُ بِالشَّرِّ؟ فَيَقُولُ: أَنَا عَمَلُكَ الْخَبِيثُ، فَيَقُولُ: رَبِّ لَا تُقِمِ السَّاعَةَ\n(And when the disbelieving person is reaching the end of his term in the world and the beginning of his term in the Hereafter, there will descend onto him from heaven angels with dark faces. They will bring with them Musuh, and will sit as far from him as the sight reaches. Then the angel of death will come forward and sit right next to his head, saying, \"O impure, evil soul! Depart (your body) to the anger of Allah and a wrath from Him.\" The soul will scatter throughout his body, and the angel of death will seize it as when the thorny branch is removed from wet wool. The angel of death will seize the soul, and when he does, they (the group of angels) will not let it stay in his hand for more than an instance, and they will wrap it in the Musuh. The most putrid smell a dead corpse can ever have on earth will emit from the soul, and the angels will ascend with it. Whenever they pass by a group of angels, they will ask, \"Whose is this evil soul?\" The angels will respond, \"He is such person son of such person,\" – calling him by the worst names he was known by in the world. When they reach the lowest heaven, they will request that its door be opened for him, and their request will be denied. \"For them the gates of heaven will not be opened, and they will not enter Paradise until the camel goes through the eye of the needle.\" [7:40] Allah will declare, \"List his record in Sijjin in the lowest earth.\" The wicked soul will then be thrown [from heaven]. \"And whoever assigns partners to Allah, it is as if he had fallen from the sky, and the birds had snatched him, or the wind had thrown him to a far off place.\"[22:31] His soul will be returned to his body, and two angels will come to him, sit him up and ask him, \"Who is your Lord?\" He will say, \"Oh, oh! I do not know.\" They will ask him, \"What is your religion?\", and he will say, \"Oh, oh! I do not know.\" They will ask him, \"What do you say about this man (Prophet Muhammad) who was sent to you?\" He will say, \"Oh, oh, I do not know!\" A caller (Allah) will herald from heaven, \"My servant has lied, so furnish him with the Fire and open a door for him to the Fire.\" He will find its heat and fierce hot wind. And his grave will be reduced in size, until his bones crush each other. Then, a man with a dreadful face, wearing dreadful clothes and with a disgusting smell emitting from him will come to him, saying, \"Receive the glad tidings with that which will displease you! This is the Day that you have been promised.\" He will ask that man, \"And who are you, for yours is the face that brings about evil?\" He will say, \"I am your evil work.\" He will therefore cry, \"O, my Lord! Do not commence the Hour!\")\nAbu Dawud and Ibn Majah collected this Hadith.\nIn his Musnad, Imam 'Abd bin Humayd recorded that Anas bin Malik said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ الْعَبْدَ إِذَا وُضِعَ فِي قَبْرِهِ، وَتَوَلَّى عَنْهُ أَصْحَابُهُ، وَإِنَّهُ لَيَسْمَعُ قَرْعَ نِعَالِهِمْ، فَيَأْتِيهِ مَلَكَانِ فَيُقْعِدَانِهِ فَيَقُولَانِ لَهُ: مَا كُنْتَ تَقُولُ فِي هَذَا الرَّجُلِ؟ قَالَ: فَأَمَّا الْمُؤْمِنُ فَيَقُولُ: أَشْهَدُ أَنَّهُ عَبْدُ اللهِ وَرَسُولُهُ، قَالَ: فَيُقَالُ لَهُ: انْظُرْ إِلَى مَقْعَدِكَ مِنَ النَّارِ قَدْ أَبْدَلَكَ اللهُ بِهِ مَقْعَدًا مِنَ الْجَنَّةِ\n(Verily, when the servant is placed in his grave and his friends (or family) depart, as he hears the sound of their shoes, two angels will come to him. They will sit him up and ask him, 'What do you say about this man (Muhammad)?' As for the believer, he will say, 'I bear witness that He is Allah's servant and Messenger.' He will be told, 'Look at your seat in the Fire, Allah has replaced it for you with a seat in Paradise.') The Prophet ﷺ said next,\nفَيَرَاهُمَا جَمِيعًا\n(So he will see both seats.)\nQatadah added, \"We were told that his grave will be enlarged up to seventy forearms length and will be filled with greenery for him until the Day of Judgement.\" Muslim collected this Hadith also from 'Abd bin Humayd, while An-Nasa'i collected it from Yunus bin Muhammad bin Al-Mu'addah.\nAl-Hafiz Abu 'Isa At-Tirmidhi, may Allah grant him mercy, recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nإِذَا قُبِرَ الْمَيِّتُ - أَوْ قَالَ: أَحَدُكُمْ - أَتَاهُ مَلَكَانِ أَسْوَدَانِ أَزْرَقَانِ، يُقَالُ لِأَحَدِهِمَا مُنْكَرٌ وَالْآخَرِ نَكِيرٌ، فَيَقُولَانِ: مَا كُنْتَ تَقُولُ فِي هَذَا الرَّجُلِ؟ فَيَقُولُ: مَا كَانَ يَقُولُ هُوَ عَبْدُاللهِ وَرَسُولُهُ، أَشْهَدُ أَنْ لَا إِلَهَ إِلَّا اللهُ وَأَشْهَدُ أَنَّ مُحَمَّدًا عَبْدُهُ وَرَسُولُهُ، فَيَقُولَانِ: قَدْ كُنَّا نَعْلَمُ أَنَّكَ تَقُولُ هَذَا، ثُمَّ يُفْسَحُ لَهُ فِي قَبْرِهِ سَبْعُونَ ذِرَاعًا فِي سَبْعِينَ، وَيُنَوَّرُ لَهُ فِيهِ، ثُمَّ يُقَالُ لَهُ: نَمْ، فَيَقُولُ: أَرْجِعُ إِلَى أَهْلِي فَأُخْبِرُهُمْ، فَيَقُولَانِ: نَمْ نَوْمَةَ الْعَرُوسِ الَّذِي لَا يُوقِظُهُ إِلَّا أَحَبُّ أَهْلِهِ إِلَيْهِ حَتَّى يَبْعَثَهُ اللهُ مِنْ مَضْجَعِهِ ذَلِكَ، وَإِنْ كَانَ مُنَافِقًا قَالَ: سَمِعْتُ النَّاسَ يَقُولُونَ: فَقُلْتُ مِثْلَهُمْ لَا أَدْرِي، فَيَقُولَانِ: قَدْ كُنَّا نَعْلَمُ أَنَّكَ تَقُولُ هَذَا، فَيُقَالُ لِلْأَرْضِ: الْتَئِمِي عَلَيْهِ فَتَلْتَئِمُ عَلَيْهِ حَتَّى تَخْتَلِفَ أَضْلَاعُهُ، فَلَا يَزَالُ فِيهَا مُعَذَّبًا حَتَّى يَبْعَثَهُ اللهُ مِنْ مَضْجَعِهِ ذَلِكَ\n(When the dead - or one of you - is buried, two dark and blue angels will come to him; one is called 'Munkir' and the other is called 'Nakir'. They will ask him, 'What did you say about this man (Muhammad)?' He will reply, 'What he used to say, that he is Allah's servant and Messenger. I bear witness that there is no true deity except Allah and that Muhammad is His servant and Messenger.' They will say, 'We know that you used to say that,' and his grave will be made larger for him to seventy forearms length by seventy forearms length and will be filled with light for him. He will be told, 'Sleep,' but he will reply, 'Let me go back to my family in order that I tell them.' They will say, 'Sleep, just like the bridegroom who is awakened by the dearest of his family, until Allah resurrects him from that sleep.' If he was a hypocrite, his answer will be, 'I do not know! I heard people say something, so I used to repeat what they were saying.' They will say, 'We know that you used to say that.' The earth will be commanded, 'Come closer all around him,' and it will come closer to him until his ribs cross each other. He will remain in this torment, until Allah resurrects him from his sleep.)\nAt-Tirmidhi said, \"This Hadith is Hasan, Gharib.\"\nAbu Hurayrah narrated that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nيُثَبِّتُ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا بِالْقَوْلِ الثَّابِتِ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَفِي الْآخِرَةِ\n(Allah will keep firm those who believe, with the word that stands firm in this world, and in the Hereafter.)\nذَلِكَ إِذَا قِيلَ لَهُ فِي الْقَبْرِ مَنْ رَبُّكَ، وَمَا دِينُكَ، وَمَنْ نَبِيُّكَ؟ فَيَقُولُ: رَبِّيَ اللهُ، وَدِينِي الْإِسْلَامُ، وَنَبِيِّي مُحَمَّدٌ جَاءَنَا بِالبَيِّنَاتِ مِنْ عِنْدِ اللهِ، فَآمَنْتُ بِهِ وَصَدَّقْتُ، فَيُقَالُ لَهُ: صَدَقْتَ، عَلَى هَذَا عِشْتَ، وَعَلَيْهِ مِتَّ، وَعَلَيْهِ تُبْعَثُ\n(When he will be asked in the grave, 'Who is your Lord? What is your religion? Who is your Prophet?' He will reply, 'Allah is my Lord, Islam is my religion and Muhammad is my Prophet who brought the clear proofs from Allah. I believed in him and had faith in him.' He will be told, 'You have said the truth; you have lived on this, died on it and will be resurrected on it.')\nIbn Jarir At-Tabari recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nوَالَّذِي نَفْسِي بِيَدِهِ، إِنَّ الْمَيِّتَ لَيَسْمَعُ خَفْقَ نِعَالِكُمْ حِينَ تُوَلُّونَ عَنْهُ مُدْبِرِينَ، فَإِنْ كَانَ مُؤْمِنًا كَانَتِ الصَّلَاةُ عِنْدَ رَأْسِهِ وَالزَّكَاةُ عَنْ يَمِينِهِ وَالصَّوْمُ عَنْ يَسَارِهِ وَكَانَ فِعْلُ الْخَيْرَاتِ مِنَ الصَّدَقَةِ وَالصِّلَةِ وَالْمَعْرُوفِ وَالْإِحْسَانِ إِلَى النَّاسِ عِنْدَ رِجْلَيْهِ، فَيُؤْتَى مِنْ قِبَلِ رَأْسِهِ، فَتَقُولُ الصَّلَاةُ: مَا قِبَلِي مَدْخَلٌ، فَيُؤْتَى عَنْ يَمِينِهِ فَتَقُولُ الزَّكَاةُ: مَا قِبَلِي مَدْخَلٌ، فَيُؤْتَى عَنْ يَسَارِهِ فَيَقُولُ الصِّيَامُ: مَا قِبَلِي مَدْخَلٌ، فَيُؤْتَى عِنْدَ رِجْلَيْهِ فَيَقُولُ فِعْلُ الْخَيْرَاتِ: مَا قِبَلِي مَدْخَلٌ، فَيُقَالُ لَهُ: اجْلِسْ، فَيَجْلِسُ قَدْ مَثُلَتْ لَهُ الشَّمْسُ قَدْ دَنَتْ لِلْغُرُوبِ، فَيُقَالُ لَهُ: أَخْبِرْنَا عَمَّا نَسْأَلُكَ، فَيَقُولُ: دَعْنِي حَتَّى أُصَلِّيَ، فَيُقَالُ لَهُ: إِنَّكَ سَتَفْعَلُ، فَأَخْبِرْنَا عَمَّا نَسْأَلُكَ، فَيَقُولُ: وَعَمَّ تَسْأَلُونِي؟ فَيُقَالُ: أَرَأَيْتَ هَذَا الرَّجُلَ الَّذِي كَانَ فِيكُمْ مَاذَا تَقُولُ بِهِ، وَمَاذَا تَشْهَدُ بِهِ عَلَيْهِ؟ فَيَقُولُ: أَمُحَمَّدٌ؟ فَيُقَالُ لَهُ: نَعَمْ، فَيَقُولُ: أَشْهَدُ أَنَّهُ رَسُولُ اللهِ، وَأَنَّه جَاءَنَا بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ مِنْ عِنْدِ اللهِ فَصَدَّقْنَاهُ، فَيُقَالُ لَهُ: عَلَى ذَلِكَ حَيِيتَ وَعَلَى ذَلِكَ مِتَّ، وَعَلَيْهِ تُبْعَثُ إِنْ شَاءَ اللهُ، ثُمَّ يُفْسَحُ لَهُ فِي قَبْرِهِ سَبْعُونَ ذِرَاعًا وَيُنَوَّرُ لَهُ فِيهِ، وَيُفْتَحُ لَهُ بَابٌ إِلَى الْجَنَّةِ فَيُقَالُ لَهُ: انْظُرْ إِلَى مَا أَعَدَّ اللهُ لَكَ فِيهَا، فَيَزْدَادُ غِبْطَةً وَسُرُورًا، ثُمَّ تُجْعَلُ نَسَمَتُهُ فِي النَّسَمِ الطَّيِّبِ، وَهِيَ طَيْرٌ خُضْرٌ تَعْلُقُ بِشَجَرِ الْجَنَّةِ، وَيُعَادُ الْجَسَدُ إِلَى مَا بُدِىءَ مِنَ التُّرَابِ\n(By He Who owns my life! The dead person hears the sound of your slippers (or shoes) when you depart and leave him. If he is a believer, the prayer will stand by his head, Zakah to his right and the fast by his left; the righteous deeds, such as charity, keeping relations with kith and kin and acts of kindness to people will stand by his feet. He will be approached from his head, and the prayer will declare, 'No entrance from my side.' He will be approached from his right, and Zakah will declare, 'There is no entrance from my side.' He will be approached from his left, and the fast will declare, 'There is no entrance from my side.' He will be approached from his feet, and the acts of righteousness will declare, 'There is no entrance from our side.' He will be commanded to sit up, and he will sit up while the sun appears to him just like when it is about to set. He will be told, 'Tell us about what we are going to ask you.' He will say, 'Leave me until I pray.' He will be told, 'You will pray, but first tell us what we want to know.' He will ask, 'What are your questions?' He will be told, 'This man who was sent among you, what do you say about him and what is your testimony about him?' He will ask, 'Muhammad?' He will be answered in the positive and he will reply, 'I bear witness that he is the Messenger of Allah and that he has brought us the proofs from our Lord. We believed in him.' He will be told, 'This is the way you lived and died and Allah willing, you will be resurrected on it.' His grave will be made wider for him seventy forearms length, and it will be filled with light. A door will also be opened for him to Paradise. He will be told, 'Look at what Allah has prepared for you in it.' He will increase in joy and delight and then his soul will be placed with the pure souls, inside green birds eating from the trees of Paradise. The body will be returned to its origin, dust. So Allah said,\nيُثَبِّتُ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا بِالْقَوْلِ الثَّابِتِ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَفِي الْآخِرَةِ\n(Allah will keep firm those who believe, with the word that stands firm in this world, and in the Hereafter.)) Ibn Hibban collected this Hadith, and his narration added the disbeliever's answer and his torment. 'Abdur-Razzaq recorded that Tawus said,\nيُثَبِّتُ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا بِالْقَوْلِ الثَّابِتِ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا\n(Allah will keep firm those who believe, with the word that stands firm in this world,) is in reference to La ilaha ilallah, while,\nوَفِي الْآخِرَةِ\n(and in the Hereafter) is in reference to the questioning in the grave. Qatadah commented, \"As for this life, Allah will make them firm on the way of righteousness and good deeds,\nوَفِي الْآخِرَةِ\n(and in the Hereafter.) in the grave.\" Several others among the Salaf said the same.","href":"/tafsir/14?verse=27","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:14:28","title":"Ibn Kathir · 14:28–30","text":"Have you not seen those who have changed the blessings of Allah into disbelief (by denying Prophet Muhammad ﷺ and his Message of Islam), and caused their people to dwell in the house of destruction (28)Hell, in which they will burn, - and what an evil place to settle in (29)And they set up rivals to Allah, to mislead (men) from His path! Say: \"Enjoy (your brief life)! But certainly, your destination is the (Hell) Fire! (30)\n\n## The Recompense of Those Who have changed the Blessings of Allah into Disbelief\n\nAl-Bukhari said, \"Allah's statement,\nأَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ بَدَّلُوا نِعْمَتَ اللَّهِ كُفْرًا\n(Have you not seen those who have changed the blessings of Allah into disbelief…), means, do you have knowledge in. Allah said in other Ayat,\nأَلَمْ تَرَ كَيْفَ\n(Saw you not how.) and,\nأَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ خَرَجُوا\n(Did you not think of those who went forth.)\nقَوْمًا بُورًا\n(A lost people)[25:18] Ali bin 'Abdullah narrated that Sufyan said that 'Amr said that 'Ata said that he heard Ibn 'Abbas saying that,\nأَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ بَدَّلُوا نِعْمَتَ اللَّهِ كُفْرًا\n\"(Have you not seen those who have changed the blessings of Allah into disbelief), is in reference to the people of Makkah.\"\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that Abu At-Tufayl said that Ibn Al-Kawwa' asked 'Ali about Allah's statement,\nالَّذِينَ بَدَّلُوا نِعْمَتَ اللَّهِ كُفْرًا وَأَحَلُّوا قَوْمَهُمْ دَارَ الْبَوَارِ\n(those who have changed the blessings of Allah into disbelief, and caused their people to dwell in the house of destruction) and 'Ali said that it refers to the disbelievers of Quraysh on the day of Badr.\nHe also said that the blessing of Allah was faith that came to the polytheists of Quraysh, and they changed this blessing into disbelief and led their people to utter destruction. This includes all disbelievers, for Allah sent Muhammad as a mercy and a blessing to all mankind. Those who accepted this blessing and were thankful for it, will enter Paradise, while those who denied it and disbelieved in it, will enter the Fire.\nAllah said next,\nوَجَعَلُوا لِلَّهِ أَندَادًا لِّيُضِلُّوا عَن سَبِيلِهِ\n(And they set up rivals to Allah, to mislead from His path!) meaning, they set up partners to Allah whom they worship besides Him and called the people to worship them. Allah threatened them and warned them by the words of His Prophet ﷺ,\nقُلْ تَمَتَّعُوا فَإِنَّ مَصِيرَكُمْ إِلَى النَّارِ\n(Say: \"Enjoy (your brief life)! But certainly, your destination is the (Hell) Fire!\") 'Whatever you are able to do in this life, then do it, for no matter what will happen,\nفَإِنَّ مَصِيرَكُمْ إِلَى النَّارِ\n(But certainly, your destination is the (Hell) Fire!) for to Us will be your destination and end.' Allah said in other Ayat,\nنُمَتِّعُهُمْ قَلِيلًا ثُمَّ نَضْطَرُّهُمْ إِلَىٰ عَذَابٍ غَلِيظٍ\n(We let them enjoy for a little while, then in the end We shall force them to (enter) a great torment.)[31:24] and,\nمَتَاعٌ فِي الدُّنْيَا ثُمَّ إِلَيْنَا مَرْجِعُهُمْ ثُمَّ نُذِيقُهُمُ الْعَذَابَ الشَّدِيدَ بِمَا كَانُوا يَكْفُرُونَ\n((A brief) enjoyment in this world! And then unto Us will be their return, then We shall make them taste the severest torment because they used to disbelieve.)[10:70]","href":"/tafsir/14?verse=28","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:14:31","title":"Ibn Kathir · 14:31","text":"Say to My servants who have believed, that they should perform the Salah, and spend (in charity) out of the sustenance We have given them, secretly and openly, before the coming of a Day on which there will be neither mutual bargaining nor befriending (31)\n\n## The Command for Prayer and Charity\n\nAllah orders His servants to obey Him, fulfill His rights and be kind to His creatures. He ordained the prayer, which affirms the worship of Allah alone, without partners, and to spend from the provisions that He has granted them, by paying the due Zakah, spending on relatives and being kind to all others. Establishing the prayer requires performing it on time, perfectly, preserving its act of bowing having humility during it, and preserving its prostrations. Allah has ordained spending from what He granted, in secret and public, so that the people save themselves,\nمِّن قَبْلِ أَن يَأْتِيَ يَوْمٌ\n(before the coming of a Day), the Day of Resurrection,\nلَّا بَيْعٌ فِيهِ وَلَا خِلَالٌ\n(on which there will be neither mutual bargaining nor befriending.) on which no ransom will be accepted from anyone, if he seeks to buy himself. Allah said in another Ayah,\nفَالْيَوْمَ لَا يُؤْخَذُ مِنكُمْ فِدْيَةٌ وَلَا مِنَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا\n(So this Day no ransom shall be taken from you, nor of those who disbelieved.)[57:15] Allah said here,\nوَلَا خِلَالٌ\n(nor befriending.) Ibn Jarir commented, \"Allah says that on that Day, there will be no friendship between friends that might save those deserving punishment from it. Rather, on that Day, there will be fairness and justice.\"\nQatadah said, \"Allah knows that in this life, there is mutual bargaining and there are friendships which people benefit from. A man chooses his friends and the reasons behind befriending them; if it was for Allah's sake, their friendship should be maintained, but if it was for other than Allah, their friendship is bound to be cutoff.\" I say that the meaning of this, is that Allah the Exalted is declaring that on that Day, no mutual bargaining or ransom will avail anyone, even if he ransoms himself with the earth's fill of gold if he could find that amount! No friendship or intercession shall avail one if he meets Allah while a disbeliever. Allah the Exalted said,\nوَاتَّقُوا يَوْمًا لَّا تَجْزِي نَفْسٌ عَن نَّفْسٍ شَيْئًا وَلَا يُقْبَلُ مِنْهَا عَدْلٌ وَلَا تَنفَعُهَا شَفَاعَةٌ وَلَا هُمْ يُنصَرُونَ\n(And fear the Day when no person shall avail another, nor shall compensation be accepted from him, nor shall intercession be of use to him, nor shall they be helped.)[2:123] and,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَنفِقُوا مِمَّا رَزَقْنَاكُم مِّن قَبْلِ أَن يَأْتِيَ يَوْمٌ لَّا بَيْعٌ فِيهِ وَلَا خُلَّةٌ وَلَا شَفَاعَةٌ ۗ وَالْكَافِرُونَ هُمُ الظَّالِمُونَ\n(O you believe! Spend of that with which We have provided for you, before a Day comes when there will be no bargaining, nor friendship, nor intercession. And it is the disbelievers who are the wrongdoers.)[2:254]","href":"/tafsir/14?verse=31","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:14:32","title":"Ibn Kathir · 14:32–34","text":"Allah is He Who has created the heavens and the earth and sends down water (rain) from the sky, and thereby brought forth fruits as provision for you; and He has made the ships to be of service to you, that they may sail through the sea by His command; and He has made rivers (also) to be of service to you (32)And He has made the sun and the moon, both constantly pursuing their courses, to be of service to you; and He has made the night and the day to be of service to you (33)And He gave you of all that you asked for, and if you [try to] count the blessings of Allah, never will you be able to count them. Verily, man is indeed an extreme wrongdoer, ungrateful (34)\n\n## Describing Some of Allah's Tremendous Favors\n\nAllah mentions some of the favors He has done for His creatures, such as creating the heavens as a protective ceiling and the earth as a bed. He also sends down rain from the sky and, in its aftermath brings forth a variety of vegetation, fruits and plants of different colors, shapes, tastes, scents and uses. Allah also made the ships sail on the surface of the water by His command and He made the sea able to carry these ships in order that travelers can transfer from one area to another to transport goods. Allah also created the rivers that flow through the earth from one area to another as provision for the servants which they use to drink and irrigate, and for other benefits,\nوَسَخَّرَ لَكُمُ الشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ دَائِبَيْنِ\n(And He has made the sun and the moon, both constantly pursuing their courses), rotating by night and by day,\nلَا الشَّمْسُ يَنبَغِي لَهَا أَن تُدْرِكَ الْقَمَرَ وَلَا اللَّيْلُ سَابِقُ النَّهَارِ ۚ وَكُلٌّ فِي فَلَكٍ يَسْبَحُونَ\n(It is not for the sun to overtake the moon, nor does the night outstrip the day. They all float, each in an orbit.)[36:40] and,\nيُغْشِي اللَّيْلَ النَّهَارَ يَطْلُبُهُ حَثِيثًا وَالشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ وَالنُّجُومَ مُسَخَّرَاتٍ بِأَمْرِهِ ۗ أَلَا لَهُ الْخَلْقُ وَالْأَمْرُ ۗ تَبَارَكَ اللَّهُ رَبُّ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(He brings the night as a cover over the day, seeking it rapidly, and (He created) the sun, the moon, the stars subjected to His command. His is the creation and commandment. Blessed is Allah, the Lord of all that exists!)[7:54] The sun and the moon rotate in succession, and the night and the day are opposites, each taking from the length of the other or giving up some of its length,\nيُولِجُ اللَّيْلَ فِي النَّهَارِ وَيُولِجُ النَّهَارَ فِي اللَّيْلِ\n((Allah ) merges the night into day, and merges the day into night.)[35:13] and,\nوَسَخَّرَ الشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ ۖ كُلٌّ يَجْرِي لِأَجَلٍ مُّسَمًّى ۗ أَلَا هُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الْغَفَّارُ\n(And He has subjected the sun and the moon. Each running (on a fixed course) for an appointed term. Verily, He is the Almighty, the Oft-Forgiving.)[39:5] Allah said next,\nوَآتَاكُم مِّن كُلِّ مَا سَأَلْتُمُوهُ\n(And He gave you of all that you asked for), He has prepared for you all that you need in all conditions, and what you ask Him to provide for you,\nوَإِن تَعُدُّوا نِعْمَتَ اللَّهِ لَا تُحْصُوهَا\n(and if you [try to] count the blessings of Allah, never will you be able to count them.) Allah states that the servants are never able to count His blessings, let alone thank Him duly for them. In Sahih Al-Bukhari it is recorded that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to supplicate;\nاللَّهُمَّ لَكَ الْحَمْدُ غَيْرَ مَكْفِيٍّ وَلَا مُوَدَّعٍ وَلَا مُسْتَغْنًى عَنْهُ رَبَّنَا\n(O Allah! All praise is due to You, without being able to sufficiently thank You, nor ever wish to be cutoff from You, nor ever feeling rich from relying on You; our Lord!)\nIt was reported that Prophet Dawud, peace be upon him, used to say in his supplication, \"O Lord! How can I ever duly thank You, when my thanking You is also a favor from You to me?\" Allah the Exalted answered him, \"Now, you have thanked Me sufficiently, O Dawud,\" meaning, 'when you admitted that you will never be able to duly thank Me.'","href":"/tafsir/14?verse=32","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:14:35","title":"Ibn Kathir · 14:35–36","text":"And (remember) when Ibrahim said: \"O my Lord! Make this city (Makkah) one of peace and security, and keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols (35)\"O my Lord! They have indeed led astray many among mankind. But whoso follows me, he verily, is of me. And whoso disobeys me, still You are indeed Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful (36)\n\n## Ibrahim's Supplication to Allah when He brought Isma'il to Makkah\n\nAllah mentions here, while bringing forth more evidences against Arab polytheists, that the Sacred House in Makkah was established on the worship of Allah alone, without partners. He also states that Ibrahim, who establsihed the city, has disowned those who worship others besides Allah, and that he begged Allah to make Makkah peaceful and secure,\nرَبِّ اجْعَلْ هَٰذَا الْبَلَدَ آمِنًا\n(O my Lord! Make this city (Makkah) of peace and security,) and Allah accepted his supplication. Allah said in other Ayat,\nأَوَلَمْ يَرَوْا أَنَّا جَعَلْنَا حَرَمًا آمِنًا\n(Have they not seen that We have made (Makkah) a secure sanctuary.)[29:67] and,\nإِنَّ أَوَّلَ بَيْتٍ وُضِعَ لِلنَّاسِ لَلَّذِي بِبَكَّةَ مُبَارَكًا وَهُدًى لِّلْعَالَمِينَ - فِيهِ آيَاتٌ بَيِّنَاتٌ مَّقَامُ إِبْرَاهِيمَ ۖ وَمَن دَخَلَهُ كَانَ آمِنًا\n(Verily, the first House (of worship) appointed for mankind was that at Bakkah (Makkah), full of blessing, and a guidance for Al-'Alamin. In it are manifest signs, the Maqam of Ibrahim; whosoever enters it, he attains security.)[3:96-97] Allah said here that Ibrahim supplicated,\nرَبِّ اجْعَلْ هَٰذَا الْبَلَدَ آمِنًا\n(O my Lord! Make this city (Makkah) a of peace and security,) saying, \"this city\", after he established it, and this is why he said afterwards,\nالْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي وَهَبَ لِي عَلَى الْكِبَرِ إِسْمَاعِيلَ وَإِسْحَاقَ\n(All praise is due to Allah, Who has given me in old age Isma'il and Ishaq.)[14:39] It is well-known that Isma'il was thirteen years older than Ishaq. When Ibrahim took Isma'il and his mother to Makkah, while Isma'il was still young enough to nurse, he supplicated to Allah,\nرَبِّ اجْعَلْ هَٰذَا الْبَلَدَ آمِنًا\n(O my Lord! Make this city (Makkah) a place of peace and security.)[2:126] as we in explained in Surat Al-Baqarah. Ibrahim then said,\nوَاجْنُبْنِي وَبَنِيَّ أَن نَّعْبُدَ الْأَصْنَامَ\n(and keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols.) It is proper for whoever supplicates to Allah to also ask for the benefit of his parents and offspring, as well as himself. Ibrahim next mentioned that many among mankind were led astray because of idols, and he disowned those who worship them and referred their matter to Allah; if Allah wills, He will punish them, and if He wills, He will forgive them. 'Isa, peace be upon him, said similar words,\nإِن تُعَذِّبْهُمْ فَإِنَّهُمْ عِبَادُكَ ۖ وَإِن تَغْفِرْ لَهُمْ فَإِنَّكَ أَنتَ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ\n(If You punish them, they are Your servants, and if You forgive them, verily, You, only You are the Almighty, the All-Wise.)[5:118] This supplication refers this and all matters to Allah, not that it is actually going to happen. 'Abdullah bin 'Amr narrated that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ recited Ibrahim's supplication,\nرَبِّ إِنَّهُنَّ أَضْلَلْنَ كَثِيرًا مِّنَ النَّاسِ\n(O my Lord! They have indeed led astray many among mankind.), and the supplication of 'Isa,\nإِن تُعَذِّبْهُمْ فَإِنَّهُمْ عِبَادُكَ\n(If You punish them, they are Your servants.)[5:118] then raised his hands and said,\nاللَّهُمَّ أُمَّتِي، اللَّهُمَّ أُمَّتِي، اللَّهُمَّ أُمَّتِي\n(O Allah, Save my Ummah! O, Allah, Save my Ummah! O, Allah, Save my Ummah!) and cried. Allah said to the angel Jibril, \"O Jibril, go to Muhammad, and Your Lord has more knowledge, and ask him what makes him cry.\" Jibril came to the Prophet ﷺ and asked him, and he repeated to him what he said (in his supplication). Allah said, \"Go to Muhammad and tell him this; 'We will make you pleased with your Ummah, O Muhammad, and will not treat them in a way you dislike.'\"","href":"/tafsir/14?verse=35","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:14:37","title":"Ibn Kathir · 14:37","text":"\"O our Lord! I have made some of my offspring dwell in an uncultivable valley by Your Sacred House in order, O our Lord, that they may perform Salah. So fill some hearts among men with love towards them, and (O Allah) provide them with fruits so that they may give thanks (37)\nThis Ayah indicates that this was different supplication than the first one that Ibrahim said when he left Hajar and her son Isma'il in Makkah, before the Sacred House was built. This prayer, it appears, was said after the House was built, begging Allah and seeking His favor, and He is the Exalted and Most Honored. Ibrahim said here,\nعِندَ بَيْتِكَ الْمُحَرَّمِ\n(by Your Sacred House...) then he,\nرَبَّنَا لِيُقِيمُوا الصَّلَاةَ\n(O our Lord, that they may perform Salah.) Ibn Jarir At-Tabari commented that this, \"Refers to his earlier statement,\nالْمُحَرَّمِ\n(the Sacred...),\" meaning, 'You have made this House Sacred so that people establish the prayer next to it,'\nفَاجْعَلْ أَفْئِدَةً مِّنَ النَّاسِ تَهْوِي إِلَيْهِمْ\n(So fill some hearts among men with love towards them,) Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid and Sa'id bin Jubayr said, \"Had Ibrahim said, 'The hearts of mankind', Persians, Romans, the Jews, the Christians and all other people would have gathered around it.\" However, Ibrahim said,\nمِّنَ النَّاسِ\n(among men), thus making it exclusive to Muslims only. He said next,\nوَارْزُقْهُم مِّنَ الثَّمَرَاتِ\n(and (O Allah) provide them with fruits) in order that they may be helped in obeying You, and because this is a barren valley; bring to them fruits that they might eat. Allah accepted Ibrahim's supplication,\nأَوَلَمْ نُمَكِّن لَّهُمْ حَرَمًا آمِنًا يُجْبَىٰ إِلَيْهِ ثَمَرَاتُ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ رِّزْقًا مِّن لَّدُنَّا\n(Have We not established for them a secure sanctuary (Makkah), to which are brought fruits of all kinds, a provision from Ourselves.)[28:57] This only indicates Allah's compassion, kindness, mercy and blessing, in that there are no fruit producing trees in the Sacred City, Makkah, yet all kinds of fruits are being brought to it from all around; this is how Allah accepted the supplication of the Khalil - Allah's intimate friend, Prophet Ibrahim, peace be upon him.","href":"/tafsir/14?verse=37","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:14:38","title":"Ibn Kathir · 14:38–41","text":"\"O our Lord! Certainly, You know what we conceal and what we reveal. Nothing on the earth or in the heaven is hidden from Allah. (38)\"All praise is due to Allah, Who has given me in old age Isma'il and Ishaq. Verily, my Lord is indeed the All-Hearer of invocations. (39)\"O my Lord! Make me one who performs Salah, and (also) from my offspring, our Lord! And accept my invocation. (40)\"Our Lord! Forgive me and my parents, and (all) the believers on the Day when the reckoning will be established.\") Ibn Jarir At-Tabari said, \"Allah said that Ibrahim, His Khalil, sai (41)\nرَبَّنَا إِنَّكَ تَعْلَمُ مَا نُخْفِي وَمَا نُعْلِنُ\n(O our Lord! Certainly, You know what we conceal and what we reveal.) meaning, 'You know the intention behind my supplication for the people of this town, seeking Your pleasure in sincerity to You. You know all things, apparent and hidden, and nothing escapes Your knowledge on the earth or in heaven.'\" He next praised and thanked his Lord the Exalted and Most Honored for granting him offspring after he became old,\nالْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي وَهَبَ لِي عَلَى الْكِبَرِ إِسْمَاعِيلَ وَإِسْحَاقَ ۚ إِنَّ رَبِّي لَسَمِيعُ الدُّعَاءِ\n(All praise is due to Allah, Who has given me in old age Isma'il (Ishmael) and Ishaq (Isaac). Verily, my Lord is indeed the All-Hearer of invocations.) 'He accepts the supplication of those who invoke Him, and has accepted my invocation when I asked Him to grant me offspring. ' Ibrahim said next,\nرَبِّ اجْعَلْنِي مُقِيمَ الصَّلَاةِ\n(O my Lord! Make me one who performs Salah,), preserving its obligations and limits,\nوَمِن ذُرِّيَّتِي\n(and (also) from my offspring,), make them among those who establish the prayer, as well,\nرَبَّنَا وَتَقَبَّلْ دُعَاءِ\n(our Lord! And accept my invocation.), all of my invocation which I invoked You with herein,\nرَبَّنَا اغْفِرْ لِي وَلِوَالِدَيَّ\n(Our Lord! Forgive me and my parents,) Ibrahim said this before he declared himself innocent from his father, after he became sure that he was an enemy of Allah,\nوَلِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ\n(and the believers), all of them,\nيَوْمَ يَقُومُ الْحِسَابُ\n(on the Day when the reckoning will be established.) on the Day when You will reckon Your servants and recompense or reward them for their deeds - good for good and evil for evil.","href":"/tafsir/14?verse=38","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:14:42","title":"Ibn Kathir · 14:42–43","text":"Consider not that Allah is unaware of that which the wrongdoers do, but He gives them respite up to a Day when the eyes will stare in horror (42)(They will be) hastening forward with necks outstretched, their heads raised up (towards the sky), their gaze returning not towards them and their hearts empty (43)\n\n## Allah gives Respite to the Disbelievers and is never unaware of what They do\n\nAllah says, 'O Muhammad, do not think that Allah is unaware of what the unjust disbelievers do. Do not think because Allah gave them respite and delayed their punishment that He is unaware or ignoring punishing them for what they do. Rather, Allah keeps full account of this for them and keeps it on record against them,\nإِنَّمَا يُؤَخِّرُهُمْ لِيَوْمٍ تَشْخَصُ فِيهِ الْأَبْصَارُ\n(but He gives them respite up to a Day when the eyes will stare in horror.) from the horror of the Day of Resurrection.' Allah next mentions how they will all be raised up from their graves and hurriedly gathered for the Day of Gathering,\nمُهْطِعِينَ\n(hastening forward), in a hurry. Allah said in other Ayat,\nمُّهْطِعِينَ إِلَى الدَّاعِ\n(Hastening towards the caller.)[54:8]\nيَوْمَئِذٍ يَتَّبِعُونَ الدَّاعِيَ لَا عِوَجَ لَهُ\n(On that Day mankind will follow strictly Allah's caller, no crookedness will they show him.)[20:108] until,\nوَعَنَتِ الْوُجُوهُ لِلْحَيِّ الْقَيُّومِ\n(And (all) faces shall be humbled before the Ever Living, the Sustainer.)[20:111] Allah said: another Ayah,\nيَوْمَ يَخْرُجُونَ مِنَ الْأَجْدَاثِ سِرَاعًا\n(The Day when they will come out of the graves quickly.)[70:43] Allah said next,\nمُقْنِعِي رُءُوسِهِمْ\n(with necks outstretched) meaning, raising their heads up, according to Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid and several others. Allah said next,\nلَا يَرْتَدُّ إِلَيْهِمْ طَرْفُهُمْ\n(their gaze returning not towards them) meaning, their eyes are staring in confusion, trying not to blink because of the horror and tremendous insights they are experiencing, and fear of what is going to strike them, we seek refuge with Allah from this end. This is why Allah said,\nوَأَفْئِدَتُهُمْ هَوَاءٌ\n(and their hearts empty.) meaning, their hearts are empty due to extreme fear and fright. Qatadah and several others said that the places of their hearts are empty then, because the hearts will ascend to the throats due to extreme fear. Allah said next to His Messenger ,","href":"/tafsir/14?verse=42","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:14:44","title":"Ibn Kathir · 14:44–46","text":"And warn mankind of the Day when the torment will come unto them; then the wrongdoers will say: \"Our Lord! Respite us for a little while, we will answer Your call and follow the Messengers!\" (It will be said:) \"Had you not sworn aforetime that you would not leave (the world for the Hereafter). (44)\"And you dwelt in the dwellings of men who wronged themselves, and it was clear to you how We dealt with them. And We put forth (many) parables for you. (45)Indeed, they planned their plot, and their plot was with Allah, though their plot was not such as to remove the mountains from their places (46)\n\n## There will be no Respite after the Coming of the Torment\n\nAllah mentions what those who committed injustice against themselves will say when they witness the torment,\nرَبَّنَا أَخِّرْنَا إِلَىٰ أَجَلٍ قَرِيبٍ نُّجِبْ دَعْوَتَكَ وَنَتَّبِعِ الرُّسُلَ\n(Our Lord! Respite us for a little while, we will answer Your call and follow the Messengers!) Allah said in other Ayat,\nحَتَّىٰ إِذَا جَاءَ أَحَدَهُمُ الْمَوْتُ قَالَ رَبِّ ارْجِعُونِ\n(Until, when death comes to one of them, he says: \"My Lord! Send me back.\")[23:99] and,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تُلْهِكُمْ أَمْوَالُكُمْ\n(O you who believe! Let not your properties divert you.)[63:9-10] Allah described the condition of the wrongdoers on the Day of Gathering, when He said,\nوَلَوْ تَرَىٰ إِذِ الْمُجْرِمُونَ نَاكِسُو رُءُوسِهِمْ\n(And if you only could see when the criminals shall hang their heads.)[32:12],\nوَلَوْ تَرَىٰ إِذْ وُقِفُوا عَلَى النَّارِ فَقَالُوا يَا لَيْتَنَا نُرَدُّ وَلَا نُكَذِّبَ بِآيَاتِ رَبِّنَا\n(If you could but see when they will be held over the Fire! They will say: \"Would that we were but sent back (to the world)! Then we would not deny the Ayat of Our Lord...\"!)[6:27] and,\nوَهُمْ يَصْطَرِخُونَ فِيهَا\n(Therein they will cry.)[35:37] Allah refuted their statement here,\nأَوَلَمْ تَكُونُوا أَقْسَمْتُم مِّن قَبْلُ مَا لَكُم مِّن زَوَالٍ\n(Had you not sworn aforetime that you would not leave.) Allah says, 'Had you not vowed before, that your previous state will not change, that there will be no Resurrection or Reckoning? Therefore, taste this torment because of what you vowed before.' Mujahid commented that,\nمَا لَكُم مِّن زَوَالٍ\n(that you would not leave.) refers to leaving this worldly life to the Hereafter. Allah also said,\nوَأَقْسَمُوا بِاللَّهِ جَهْدَ أَيْمَانِهِمْ ۙ لَا يَبْعَثُ اللَّهُ مَن يَمُوتُ\n(And they swear by Allah with their strongest oaths, that Allah will not raise up him who dies.)[16:38] Allah said next,\nوَسَكَنتُمْ فِي مَسَاكِنِ الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا أَنفُسَهُمْ وَتَبَيَّنَ لَكُمْ كَيْفَ فَعَلْنَا بِهِمْ وَضَرَبْنَا لَكُمُ الْأَمْثَالَ\n(And you dwelt in the dwellings of men who wronged themselves, and it was clear to you how We had dealt with them. And We put forth (many) parables for you.) Allah says, 'you have witnessed or heard of the news of what happened to the earlier disbelieving nations, but you did not draw a lesson from their end, nor did what We punished them with provide an example for you,'\nحِكْمَةٌ بَالِغَةٌ ۖ فَمَا تُغْنِ النُّذُرُ\n(Perfect wisdom but the warners benefit then not.)[54:5] Shu'bah narrated that Abu Ishaq said that 'Abdur-Rahman bin Dabil said that 'Ali bin Abi Talib commented on Allah's statement,\nوَإِن كَانَ مَكْرُهُمْ لِتَزُولَ مِنْهُ الْجِبَالُ\n(though their plot was not such as to remove the mountains from their places.) \"He who disputed with Ibrahim about his Lord, took two eaglets and raised them until they became adult eagels. Then he tied each eagel's leg to a wooden box with ropes and left them go hungry. He and another man sat inside the wooden box and raised a staff with a piece of meat on its tip. So, the two eagles started flying. The king asked his companion to tell him what he was seeing, and he described the scenes to him, until he said that he saw the earth as a fly. So, the king brought the staff closer to the eagels and they started landing slowly. This is why Allah said,\n(وَإِنْ كَادَ مَكْرُهُمْ لِتَزُولَ مِنْهُ الْجِبَالُ)\nthough their plot was hardly one to remove the mountains from their places.'\" Mujahid also mentioned that this story was about Nebuchadnezzar, and that when the king's sight was far away from earth and its people, he was called, 'O tyrant one! Where are you headed to?' He became afraid and brought the staff closer to the eagels, which flew faster with such haste that the mountains almost shook from the noise they made. The mountains were almost moved from their places, so Allah said,\nوَإِن كَانَ مَكْرُهُمْ لِتَزُولَ مِنْهُ الْجِبَالُ\n(though their plot was not such as to remove the mountains from their places.)\" Ibn Jurayj narrated that Mujahid recited this Ayah in a way that means, \"though their plot was such as to remove the mountains from their places.\" However, Al-'Awfi reported that Ibn 'Abbas said that,\nوَإِن كَانَ مَكْرُهُمْ لِتَزُولَ مِنْهُ الْجِبَالُ\n(though their plot was not such as to remove the mountains from their places.) indicates that their plot was not such as to remove the mountains from their places. Similar was said by Al-Hasan Al-Basri. Ibn Jarir reasoned that, \"Associating others with Allah and disbelieving in Him, which they brought upon themselves, did not bother the mountains nor other creatures. Rather, the harm of their actions came to haunt them.\" I (Ibn Kathir) said, this meaning is similar to Allah's statement,\nوَلَا تَمْشِ فِي الْأَرْضِ مَرَحًا ۖ إِنَّكَ لَن تَخْرِقَ الْأَرْضَ وَلَن تَبْلُغَ الْجِبَالَ طُولًا\n(And walk not on the earth with conceit and arrogance. Verily, you can neither rend nor penetrate the earth, nor can you attain a stature like the mountains in height.)[17:37] There is another way of explaining this Ayah; 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas said that,\nوَإِن كَانَ مَكْرُهُمْ لِتَزُولَ مِنْهُ الْجِبَالُ\n(though their plot was not such as to remove the mountains from their places.) refers to their Shirk, for Allah said in another Ayah,\nتَكَادُ السَّمَاوَاتُ يَتَفَطَّرْنَ مِنْهُ\n(Whereby the heavens are almost torn.)[19:90] Ad-Dahhak and Qatadah said similarly.","href":"/tafsir/14?verse=44","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:14:47","title":"Ibn Kathir · 14:47–48","text":"So think not that Allah will fail to keep His promise to His Messengers. Certainly, Allah is All-Mighty, All-Able of Retribution (47)On the Day when the earth will be changed to another earth and so will be the heavens, and they (all creatures) will appear before Allah, the One, the Irresistible (48)\n\n## Allah never breaks a Promise\n\nAllah affirms His promise,\nفَلَا تَحْسَبَنَّ اللَّهَ مُخْلِفَ وَعْدِهِ رُسُلَهُ\n(So think not that Allah will fail to keep His promise to His Messengers.) His promise to grant them victory in this life and on the Day when the Witnesses shall come forth. Allah affirms that He is All-Able and that nothing He wills escapes His power and none can resist Him. Allah affirms that He is Able to exact retribution from those who disbelieve in Him and deny Him,\nوَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِّلْمُكَذِّبِينَ\n(Woe that Day to the deniers!)[77:15] Allah said here,\nيَوْمَ تُبَدَّلُ الْأَرْضُ غَيْرَ الْأَرْضِ وَالسَّمَاوَاتُ\n(On the Day when the earth will be changed to another earth and so will be the heavens,) meaning, His promise shall come to pass on the Day when the earth will be changed to an earth other than this earth that we know and recognize. It is recorded in the Two Sahihs that Sahl bin Sa'd said that the Messenger of Allah said,\nيُحْشَرُ النَّاسُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ عَلَى أَرْضٍ بَيْضَاءَ عَفْرَاءَ كَقُرْصَةِ النَّقِيِّ لَيْسَ فِيهَا مَعْلَمٌ لِأَحَدٍ\n(On the Day of Resurrection, the people will be gathered on a white (barren), flat earth just like the wheat bread, it has no recognizable features for anyone.)\nImam Ahmad recorded that 'A'ishah said, \"I was the first among all people who asked the Messenger of Allah ﷺ about this Ayah,\nيَوْمَ تُبَدَّلُ الْأَرْضُ غَيْرَ الْأَرْضِ وَالسَّمَاوَاتُ\n(On the Day when the earth will be changed to another earth and so will be the heavens,) saying, 'O Allah's Messenger! Where will the people be then?' He said,\nعَلَى الصِّرَاطِ\n(On the Sirat.)\" Muslim, but not Al-Bukhari, collected this Hadith. At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah also recorded it, and At-Tirmidhi said \"Hasan Sahih\".\nImam Muslim bin Al-Hajjaj recorded in his Sahih that Thawban the servant of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said, \"I was standing next to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ when a Jewish rabbi came to him and said, 'Peace be to you, O Muhammad.' I pushed him with such a force that almost caused him to fall down and he asked me why I did that. I said, 'Why did you not say, 'O Messenger of Allah?' The Jew said, 'We call him by the name which his family gave him.' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ اسْمِي مُحَمَّدٌ الَّذِي سَمَّانِي بِهِ أهْلِي\n(Muhammad is indeed the name which my family gave me.) The Jew said, 'I came to ask you about something.' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ replied,\nأَيَنْفَعُكَ شَيْئًا إِنْ حَدَّثْتُكَ؟\n(Would it benefit you if I replied to your question?) He said, 'I will hear it with my ear.' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ poked the ground with a staff he had and said,\nسَل\n(Ask.) The Jew said, 'Where will the people be when the earth will be changed to another earth and so will the heavens?' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nهُمْ فِي الظُّلْمَةِ دُونَ الْجَسْرِ\nقال: فمن أول الناس إجازة؟ فقال:\nفُقَرَاءُ الْمُهَاجِرِينَ\nفقال اليهودي: فما تحفتهم حين يدخلون الجنة؟ قال:\nزِيَادَةُ كَبِدِ النُّونِ\nقال: فما غذاؤهم في إثرها؟ قال:\nيُنْحَرُ لَهُمْ ثَوْرُ الْجَنَّةِ الَّذِي كَانَ يَأْكُلُ مِنْ أَطْرَافِهَا\nقال: فما شرابهم عليه؟ قال:\nمِنْ عَيْنٍ فِيهَا تُسَمَّى سَلْسَبِيلًا\nقال: صدقت، قال: وجئت أسألك عن شيء لا يعلمه أحد من أهل الأرض إلا نبي أو رجل أو رجلان. قال:\nأَيَنْفَعُكَ إِنْ حَدَّثْتُكَ؟\nقال: أسمع بأذني. قال: جئت أسألك عن الولد، قال:\nمَاءُ الرُّجُلِ أَبْيَضُ، وَمَاءُ الْمَرْأَةِ أَصْفَرُ، فَإِذَا اجْتَمَعَا فَعَلَا مَنِيُّ الرُّجُلِ مَنِيَّ الْمَرْأَةِ، أَذْكَرَا بِإِذْنِ اللهِ تَعَالَى، وَإِذَا عَلَا مَنِيُّ الْمَرْأَةِ مَنِيَّ الرَّجُلِ، أَنَّثَا بِإِذْنِ اللهِ\nقال اليهودي: لقد صدقت وإنك لنبي ثم انصرف، فقال رسول الله صلّى الله عليه وسلّم:\nلَقَدْ سَأَلَنِي هَذَا عَنِ الَّذِي سَأَلَنِي عَنْهُ، وَمَا لِي عِلْمٌ بِشَيْءٍ مِنْهُ حَتَّى أَتَانِي اللهُ بِهِ\n(In the darkness before the Bridge (Jasr).) He asked, 'Who will be the first to pass it?' He said, (The poor emigrants (Muhajirin).) He asked, 'What will their (refreshment) be when they enter Paradise?' He said, (The caul of fish liver.) He asked, 'What will they have after that?' He said, (A bull of Paradise which grazed through its pathways will be slaughtered for them.) He asked, 'From what will they drink' He said, (From a fountain whose name is Salsabil.) He said, 'You have said the truth. I have come to ask you something about which none of the inhabitants of the earth knows, with the exception of a Prophet or one or two other men.' He said, (Would you benefit by me informing you about it?) He replied, 'I would listen. I have come to ask you about the child.' He ﷺ said, (The fluid of the man is white, and the woman's is yellow. When they meet, if the discharge of the man is greater than that of the woman, then it becomes a male, by Allah's permission. When the womans discharge is greater than the man's, it becomes a female by Allah's permission.) The Jew said, 'You have told the truth and are indeed a Prophet.' Then he left. So Allah's Messenger ﷺ said; (He asked me such things that I had no knowledge of it until Allah gave it to me.)\nAllah said next,\nوَبَرَزُوا لِلَّهِ\n(and they will appear before Allah), describing when the creatures will be resurrected before Allah from their graves,\nالْوَاحِدِ الْقَهَّارِ\n(the One, the Irresistible.) Who has full power and control over all things and to Whom the necks and minds are subservient.","href":"/tafsir/14?verse=47","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:14:49","title":"Ibn Kathir · 14:49–51","text":"And you will see the criminals that Day, Muqarranun (bound together) in fetters (49)Their garments will be of Qatiran (tar), and fire will cover their faces (50)That Allah may requite each person according to what he has earned. Truly, Allah is swift at reckoning (51)\n\n## The Condition of the criminals on the Day of Resurrection\n\nAllah said,\nيَوْمَ تُبَدَّلُ الْأَرْضُ غَيْرَ الْأَرْضِ وَالسَّمَاوَاتُ\n(On the Day when the earth will be changed to another earth and so will be the heavens) 'and the creations will be brought before their Lord, and you, O Muhammad, will witness the criminals who committed the crimes of Kufr and mischief,'\nمُّقَرَّنِينَ\n(Muqarranin) bound together, each with his or her like, just as Allah said,\nاحْشُرُوا الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا وَأَزْوَاجَهُمْ\n(Assemble those who did wrong, together with their companions.)[37:22]\nوَإِذَا النُّفُوسُ زُوِّجَتْ\n(And when the souls are joined with their bodies.)[81:7],\nوَإِذَا أُلْقُوا مِنْهَا مَكَانًا ضَيِّقًا مُّقَرَّنِينَ دَعَوْا هُنَالِكَ ثُبُورًا\n(And when they shall be thrown into a narrow place thereof, chained together, they will exclaim therein for destruction.)[25:13] and,\nوَالشَّيَاطِينَ كُلَّ بَنَّاءٍ وَغَوَّاصٍ - وَآخَرِينَ مُقَرَّنِينَ فِي الْأَصْفَادِ\n(And also the Shayatin from the Jinn (including) every kind of builder and diver, and also others bound in fetters.)[38:37-38] Allah said next,\nسَرَابِيلُهُم مِّن قَطِرَانٍ\n(Their garments will be of Qatiran (pitch),) that is used to coat camels. Qatadah commented that Qatiran (tar) is one of the fastest objects to catch fire. Ibn 'Abbas used to say that the Qatiran, mentioned in the Ayah, is dissolved lead.\nAllah said next,\nوَتَغْشَىٰ وُجُوهَهُمُ النَّارُ\n(and fire will cover their faces), which is similar to His other statement,\nتَلْفَحُ وُجُوهَهُمُ النَّارُ وَهُمْ فِيهَا كَالِحُونَ\n(The Fire will burn their faces, and therein they will grin, with displaced lips.)[23:104] Imam Ahmad recorded that Yahya bin Abi Ishaq said that Aban bin Yazid said that Yahya bin Abi Kathir said that Zayd bin Abi Salam said that Abu Malik Al-Ash'ari said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nأَرْبَعٌ فِي أُمَّتِي مِنْ أَمْرِ الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ لَا يَتْرُكُونَهُنَّ: الْفَخْرُ بِالْأَحْسَابِ، وَالطَّعْنُ فِي الْأَنْسَابِ، وَالْاسْتِسْقَاءُ بِالنُّجُومِ، وَالنِّيَاحَةُ عَلَى الْمَيِّتِ، وَالنَّائِحَةُ إِذَا لَمْ تَتُبْ قَبْلَ مَوْتِهَا، تُقَامُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ وَعَلَيْهَا سِرْبَالٌ مِنْ قَطِرَانٍ وَدِرْعٌ مِنْ جَرَبٍ\n(Four characteristics from the time of Jahiliyyah will remain in my Ummah, since they will not abandon them: boasting about their family lineage, discrediting family ties, seeking rain through the stars, and wailing for their dead. Verily, if she who wails, dies before she repents from her behavior, she will be resurrected on the Day of Resurrection while wearing a dress of Qatiran and a cloak of mange.) Muslim collected this Hadith. Allah said next,\nلِيَجْزِيَ اللَّهُ كُلَّ نَفْسٍ مَّا كَسَبَتْ\n(That Allah may requite each person according to what he has earned.) meaning, on the Day of Resurrection. Allah said in another Ayah,\nلِيَجْزِيَ الَّذِينَ أَسَاءُوا بِمَا عَمِلُوا\n(That He may requite those who do evil with that which they have done.)[53:31] Allah said here,\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ سَرِيعُ الْحِسَابِ\n(Truly, Allah is swift at reckoning.) when He wills to reckon a servants of His, for He knows everything and nothing ever escapes His observation. Verily, His power over all of His creation is the same as His power over one creature,\nمَّا خَلْقُكُمْ وَلَا بَعْثُكُمْ إِلَّا كَنَفْسٍ وَاحِدَةٍ\n(The creation of you all and the resurrection of you all are only as a single person.)[31:28] And this is why Mujahid said,\nسَرِيعُ الْحِسَابِ\n(swift at reckoning), means \"keeping count.\"","href":"/tafsir/14?verse=49","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:14:52","title":"Ibn Kathir · 14:52","text":"This (Qur'an) is a Message for mankind (and a clear proof against them), in order that they may be warned thereby, and that they may know that He is the only One God and that men of understanding may take heed (52)\n\n## Allah states that this Qur'an is a Message for mankind,\n\nلِأُنذِرَكُم بِهِ وَمَن بَلَغَ\n((So) that I may therewith warn you and whomsoever it may reach.)[6:19] This Qur'an is for all mankind and the Jinns, just as Allah said in the beginning of this Surah,\nالر ۚ كِتَابٌ أَنزَلْنَاهُ إِلَيْكَ لِتُخْرِجَ النَّاسَ مِنَ الظُّلُمَاتِ إِلَى النُّورِ\n(Alif-Lam-Ra. (This is) a Book which We have revealed unto you in order that you might lead mankind out of darkness into light.)[14:1] Allah said next,\nوَلِيُنذَرُوا بِهِ\n(in order that they may be warned thereby), or to receive and draw lessons from it,\nوَلِيَعْلَمُوا أَنَّمَا هُوَ إِلَٰهٌ وَاحِدٌ\n(and that they may know that He is the only One God) using its proofs and evidences that testify that there is no true deity except Allah,\nوَلِيَذَّكَّرَ أُولُو الْأَلْبَابِ\n(and that men of understanding may take heed.) meaning those who have good minds.\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surah Ibrahim, and all praise is due to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/14?verse=52","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:15:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 15:1–3","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nالر ۚ تِلْكَ آيَاتُ الْكِتَابِ وَقُرْآنٍ مُّبِينٍ - رُّبَمَا يَوَدُّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَوْ كَانُوا مُسْلِمِينَ - ذَرْهُمْ يَأْكُلُوا وَيَتَمَتَّعُوا وَيُلْهِهِمُ الْأَمَلُ ۖ فَسَوْفَ يَعْلَمُونَ\n(1. Alif-Lam-Ra. These are Ayat of the Book and a plain Qur'an.)(2. How much would those who disbelieved wish that they had been Muslims.)(3. Leave them to eat and enjoy, and let them be preoccupied with (false) hope. They will come to know!)\n\n## The Disbelievers will someday wish that They had been Muslims\n\nWe have already discussed the letters which appear at the beginning of some Surahs. Allah said:\nرُّبَمَا يَوَدُّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا\n(How much would those who disbelieved wish) Here Allah tells us that they will regret having lived in disbelief, and will wish that they had been Muslims in this world. Regarding Allah's saying,\nرُّبَمَا يَوَدُّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَوْ كَانُوا مُسْلِمِينَ\n(How much would those who disbelieved wish that they had been Muslims.) Sufyan Ath-Thawri reported from Salamah bin Kuhayl, who reported from Abi Az-Za'ra', from 'Abdullah, who said: \"This is about the Jahannamiyyun (the sinners among the believers who will stay in Hell for some time), when they [the disbelievers] see them being brought out of Hell.\"\nرُّبَمَا يَوَدُّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَوْ كَانُوا مُسْلِمِينَ\n(How much would those who disbelieved wish that they had been Muslims.) Ibn Jarir reported that Ibn 'Abbas and Anas bin Malik explained that this Ayah refers to the Day when Allah will detain the sinful Muslims in Hell along with the idolators. He said: \"The idolators will say to them, 'What you used to worship on earth has not helped you.' Then by virtue of His mercy, Allah will be angry for their sake, and He will remove them [from it]. That is when\nرُّبَمَا يَوَدُّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَوْ كَانُوا مُسْلِمِينَ\n(How much would those who disbelieved wish that they had been Muslims).\"\nذَرْهُمْ يَأْكُلُوا وَيَتَمَتَّعُوا\n(Leave them to eat and enjoy) this is a stern and definitive threat for them, like His saying,\nقُلْ تَمَتَّعُواْ فَإِنَّ مَصِيرَكُمْ إِلَى النَّارِ\n(Say: \"Enjoy your brief life! But certainly, your destination is the Fire!\")[14:30]\nكُلُوا وَتَمَتَّعُوا قَلِيلًا إِنَّكُم مُّجْرِمُونَ\n((O disbelievers!) Eat and enjoy yourselves (in this worldly life) for a little while. Verily, you are the guilty.)[77:46] Allah says:\nوَيُلْهِهِمُ الْأَمَلُ\n(let them be preoccupied with false hope.) i.e., distracted from repentance and turning to Allah, for\nفَسَوْفَ يَعْلَمُونَ\n(They will soon come to know!) that is, their punishment.","href":"/tafsir/15?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:15:4","title":"Ibn Kathir · 15:4–5","text":"And never did We destroy a township but there was a known decree for it (4)No nation can advance its term, nor delay it (5)\n\n## Every Township has its allotted Time\n\nAllah is informing us that He never destroys a township until He has established evidences for it and its allotted time has ended. When the time for a nation's destruction has come, He never delays it, and He never moves its appointed time forward. This was a message and a warning to the people of Makkah, telling them to give up their Shirk, their stubbornness and disbelief for which they deserved to be destroyed.","href":"/tafsir/15?verse=4","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:15:6","title":"Ibn Kathir · 15:6–9","text":"And they say: \"O you (Muhammad) to whom the Dhikr (the Qur'an) has been revealed! Verily, you are a madman (6)\"Why do you not bring angels to us if you are of the truthful? (7)We do not send the angels down except with the truth, and in that case, they (the disbelievers) would have no respite (8)Verily, We, it is We Who revealed the Dhikr (i.e. the Qur'an) and surely We will guard it (from corruption)(9)\n\n## The Accusation that the Prophet (ﷺ) was a Madman and Demands for Him to bring down Angels\n\nAllah tells us about the disbelief, arrogance and stubbornness of the disbelievers as reflected in their words:\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِي نُزِّلَ عَلَيْهِ الذِّكْرُ\n(O you (Muhammad) to whom the Dhikr (the Qur'an) has been revealed!) i.e., the one who claims to receive it.\nإِنَّكَ لَمَجْنُونٌ\n(Verily, you are a mad man!) i.e., by your invitation to us to follow you and leave the way of our forefathers.\nلَّوْ مَا تَأْتِينَا بِالْمَلَائِكَةِ\n(Why do you not bring angels to us) i.e., to bear witness to the accuracy of what you have brought to us is true, if you are really telling the truth? This is similar to what Pharaoh said:\nفَلَوْلَا أُلْقِيَ عَلَيْهِ أَسْوِرَةٌ مِّن ذَهَبٍ أَوْ جَاءَ مَعَهُ الْمَلَائِكَةُ مُقْتَرِنِينَ\n(Why then are not golden bracelets bestowed on him, or angels sent along with him?)(43:53). And Allah said:\nوَقَالَ الَّذِينَ لَا يَرْجُونَ لِقَاءَنَا لَوْلَا أُنزِلَ عَلَيْنَا الْمَلَائِكَةُ أَوْ نَرَىٰ رَبَّنَا ۗ لَقَدِ اسْتَكْبَرُوا فِي أَنفُسِهِمْ وَعَتَوْا عُتُوًّا كَبِيرًا - يَوْمَ يَرَوْنَ الْمَلَائِكَةَ لَا بُشْرَىٰ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِّلْمُجْرِمِينَ وَيَقُولُونَ حِجْرًا مَّحْجُورًا\n(And those who do not expect a meeting with Us (i. e., those who deny the Day of Resurrection and the life of the Hereafter), say: \"Why are not the angels sent down to us, or why do we not see our Lord?\" Indeed they think too highly of themselves, and are scornful with great pride. On the Day that they do see the angels - there will be no good news given on that day to the guilty. And they (angels) will say: \"All kinds of glad tidings are forbidden for you.\")(25:21-22) For this reason Allah said:\nمَا نُنَزِّلُ الْمَلَائِكَةَ إِلَّا بِالْحَقِّ وَمَا كَانُوا إِذًا مُّنظَرِينَ\n(We do not send the angels down except with the truth, and in that case, they (the disbelievers) would have no respite!) Mujahid said in this Ayah:\nمَا نُنَزِّلُ الْمَلَائِكَةَ إِلَّا بِالْحَقِّ\n(We do not send the angels down except with the truth) \"[i.e.,] with the Message and the punishment.\" Then Allah, may He be exalted, stated that He is the One Who revealed the Dhikr to him, which is the Qur'an, and He is protecting it from being changed or altered.","href":"/tafsir/15?verse=6","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:15:10","title":"Ibn Kathir · 15:10–13","text":"Indeed, We sent (Messengers) before you (O Muhammad) amongst the earlier communities (10)And there never came a Messenger to them but that they mocked him (11)Thus We allow it to enter the hearts of the guilty (12)They would not believe in it (the Qur'an); and already the example of the ancients has gone forth (13)\n\n## The Idolators of Every Nation made a Mockery of their Messengers\n\nConsoling His Messenger ﷺ for the rejection of the disbelieving Quraysh, Allah says that He has sent Messengers before him to the nations of the past, and no Messenger came to a nation but they rejected him and mocked him. Then He tells him that He lets disbelief enter the hearts of those sinners who are too stubborn and too arrogant to follow His guidance.\nكَذَٰلِكَ نَسْلُكُهُ فِي قُلُوبِ الْمُجْرِمِينَ\n(Thus We allow it to enter the hearts of the guilty.) Anas and Al-Hasan Al-Basri said that this referred to Shirk.\nوَقَدْ خَلَتْ سُنَّةُ الْأَوَّلِينَ\n(and already the example of the ancients has gone forth.) meaning the destruction wrought by Allah on those who rejected His Messengers, and how He saved His Prophets and their followers in this world and in the Hereafter, is well known.","href":"/tafsir/15?verse=10","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:15:14","title":"Ibn Kathir · 15:14–15","text":"And even if We opened to them a gate to the heavens and they were to continue ascending through it (all day long)(14)They would surely say (in the evening): \"Our eyes have been (as if) dazzled (we have not seen any angel or heaven). Nay, we are a people bewitched. (15)\n\n## The Stubborn Disbelievers will never believe, no matter what Signs and Wonders They see\n\nAllah explains the extent of their disbelief and stubborn resistance to the truth by stating that even if a door to heaven were to be opened for them, and they were to be taken up through it, they would still not believe. Rather, they would say:\nإِنَّمَا سُكِّرَتْ أَبْصَارُنَا\n(Our eyes have been (as if) dazzled.) Mujahid, Ibn Kathir and Ad-Dahhak said, \"[this means] our vision has been blocked.\" Qatadah narrated that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"[this means] our eyesight has been taken away.\" Al-'Awfi reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"[this means] we were confused and put under a spell.\"\nسُكِّرَتْ أَبْصَارُنَا\n(Our eyes have been (as if) dazzled.) Ibn Zayd said: \"The one who is dazzled [lit. intoxicated] is the one who cannot reason.\"","href":"/tafsir/15?verse=14","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:15:16","title":"Ibn Kathir · 15:16–20","text":"And indeed, We have put the big stars in the heaven and We beautified it for the beholders (16)And We have guarded it (near heaven) from every outcast Shaytan (devil)(17)Except him (devil) who steals the hearing, then he is pursued by a clear flaming fire (18)And We have spread out the earth, and have placed firm mountains in it, and caused all kinds of things to grow in it, in due proportion (19)And in it We have provided means of living, for you and for those whom you provide not (20)\n\n## The Power of Allah and His Signs in the Heavens and on Earth\n\nTo those who ponder, and look repeatedly at the dazzling signs and wonders that are to be seen in the creation, Allah mentions His creation of the heavens, with their immense height, and both the fixed and moving heavenly bodies with which He has adorned it. Here, Mujahid and Qatadah said that Buruj [big stars] refers to the heavenly bodies. (I say): This is like the Ayah :\nتَبَارَكَ الَّذِي جَعَلَ فِي السَّمَاءِ بُرُوجًا\n(Blessed be He Who has placed the big stars in the heavens.)[25:61] 'Atiyah Al-'Awfi said: \"Buruj here refers to sentinel fortresses.\" He made the \"shooting stars\" to guard it against the evil devils who try to listen to information conveyed at the highest heights. If any devil breaches it and advances hoping to listen, a clear \"shooting star\" comes to him and destroys him. He may already have passed on whatever he heard before the fire hit him, to another devil below him; the latter will then take it to his friends [among humans], as is stated in the Sahih.\nExplaining this Ayah, Al-Bukhari reported from Abu Hurayrah that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nإِذَا قَضَى اللهُ الْأَمْرَ فِي السَّمَاءِ ضَرَبَتِ الْمَلَائِكَةُ بِأَجْنِحَتِهَا خُضْعَانًا لِقَوْلِهِ كَأَنَّهُ سِلْسِلَةٌ عَلَى صَفْوَانٍ\n(When Allah decrees any matter in heaven, the angels beat their wings in submission to His Word, [with a sound like] a chain [beating] on a smooth rock.\")\n('Ali and other subnarrators said, \"The sound reaches them.\") \"When the fright leaves their (angels') hearts, they (angels) are asked: 'What did your Lord say?' They respond: \"The truth. And He is the Most High, the Most Great.' So those who hope to hear something listen, and they are standing one above the other.\" Sufyan [the narrator] described them with a gesture, spreading the fingers of his right hand and holding it in such a way that the fingers were above one another. \"Sometimes the flaming fire hits one of these listeners before he is able to convey what he has heard to the one who is beneath him, and he is burned up, or sometimes the fire does not hit him until he has pit on to the one beneath him, so he brings it to the earth.\" Perhaps Sufyan said: \"...until it reaches the earth and he puts it into the mouth of the sorcerer or fortune-teller, so that after telling a hundred lies he gets something right, and the people say, 'Did he not tell us that on such and such a day such and such would happen, and we found it to be the truth among the statements which were heard from heaven.'\" Then Allah mentions His creation of the earth and how He spread it out, and the firm mountains, valleys, lands and sands that he has placed in it, and the plants and fruits that He causes to grow in their appropriate locations.\nمِن كُلِّ شَيْءٍ مَّوْزُونٍ\n(all kinds of things in due proportion.) Ibn 'Abbas said that this means with their predetermined proportions. This was also the opinion of Sa'id bin Jubayr, 'Ikrimah, Abu Malik, Mujahid, Al-Hakim bin 'Utaybah, Al-Hasan bin Muhammad, Abu Salih and Qatadah.\nوَجَعَلْنَا لَكُمْ فِيهَا مَعَايِشَ\n(And We have provided therein means of living, for you) Here Allah mentions that He created the earth with different means of provisions and livelihood of all kinds.\nوَمَن لَّسْتُمْ لَهُ بِرَازِقِينَ\n(and for those whom you provide not.) Mujahid said, \"This refers to the riding animals and the cattle.\" Ibn Jarir said, \"They are slaves, men and women, as well as the animals and the cattle. The meaning is that Allah, may He be exalted, is reminding them of the ways of earning provision that He has made easy for them, and of the animals that He has subjugated for them to ride and to eat, and the slaves from whom they benefit, but the provision of all of these comes from Allah alone.\"","href":"/tafsir/15?verse=16","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:15:21","title":"Ibn Kathir · 15:21–25","text":"And there is not a thing, but the supplies for it are with Us, and We do not send it down but in a known measure (21)And We send the winds fertilizing, then We cause the water to descend from the sky, and We give it to you to drink, and it is not you who are the owners of its supply (22)And certainly We! It is We Who give life, and cause death, and We are the Inheritors (23)And indeed, We know the first generations of you who have passed away, and indeed, We know the present generations of you (mankind), and also those who will come afterwards (24)And verily, your Lord will gather them together. Truly, He is Most Wise, (and) Knowing (25)\n\n## The Supplies for All Things are with Allah\n\nAllah tells us that He is the Owner of all things, and that everything is easy for Him. He has the supplies for all things with Him.\nوَمَا نُنَزِّلُهُ إِلَّا بِقَدَرٍ مَّعْلُومٍ\n(and We do not send it down but in a known measure.) meaning, as He wills and as He wants. Doing so out of His great wisdom and mercy towards His servants, in a way that He is under no obligation to do. But He has decreed mercy for Himself. Yazid bin Abi Ziyad reported from Abu Juhayfah that 'Abdullah said: \"No year has more rain than another, but Allah divides the rain between them as He wills, it rains here a year and there a year. Then he recited:\nوَإِن مِّن شَيْءٍ إِلَّا عِندَنَا خَزَائِنُهُ\n(And there is not a thing, but the supplies for it are with Us...) Reported by Ibn Jarir.\n\n## Benefits of the Winds\n\nوَأَرْسَلْنَا الرِّيَاحَ لَوَاقِحَ\n(And We send the winds fertilizing.) i.e., fertilizing the clouds so that they give rain, and fertilizing the trees so that they open their leaves and blossoms. These winds are mentioned here in the plural form because they give results, unlike the barren wind (Ar-Rih Al-'Aqim, see Adh-Dhariyat 51:41), which is mentioned in the singular and described as barren since it does not produce anything; because results can only be produced when there are two or more things.\nوَأَرْسَلْنَا الرِّيَاحَ لَوَاقِحَ\n(And We sent the winds fertilizing.) 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud said, \"The wind is sent bearing water from the sky, then it fertilizes the clouds until rain begins to generously fall, just as the milk of the pregnant camel flows generously.\" This was also the opinion of Ibn 'Abbas, Ibrahim An-Nakha'i and Qatadah. Ad-Dahhak said: \"Allah sends it to the clouds and it gets fertilized and becomes full of water.\" 'Ubayd bin 'Umayr Al-Laythi said: \"Allah sends the wind which stirs up the earth, then Allah sends the wind which raises clouds, then Allah sends the wind which forms clouds, then Allah sends the fertilizing wind which pollinates the trees. Then he recited,\nوَأَرْسَلْنَا الرِّيَاحَ لَوَاقِحَ\n(And We sent the winds fertilizing,)\n\n## Fresh Water is a Blessing from Allah\n\nفَأَسْقَيْنَاكُمُوهُ\n(and We give it to you to drink,) This means, \"and We send it down to you fresh and sweet, so that you can drink it; if We had wished, We could have made it salty (and undrinkable)\", as Allah points out in another Ayah in Surat Al-Waqi'ah, where He says:\nأَفَرَأَيْتُمُ الْمَاءَ الَّذِي تَشْرَبُونَ - أَأَنتُمْ أَنزَلْتُمُوهُ مِنَ الْمُزْنِ أَمْ نَحْنُ الْمُنزِلُونَ - لَوْ نَشَاءُ جَعَلْنَاهُ أُجَاجًا فَلَوْلَا تَشْكُرُونَ\n(Tell Me! The water that you drink, is it you who cause it to come down from the rain clouds, or are We the cause of it coming down? If We willed, We verily could make it salty (and undrinkable), why then do you not give thanks (to Allah)?)(56:68-70). And Allah says:\nهُوَ الَّذِي أَنزَلَ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مَاءً ۖ لَّكُم مِّنْهُ شَرَابٌ وَمِنْهُ شَجَرٌ فِيهِ تُسِيمُونَ\n(He it is Who sends water down from the sky; from it you drink and from it (grows) the vegetation on which you send your cattle to pasture.)(16:10)\nوَمَا أَنتُمْ لَهُ بِخَازِنِينَ\n(and it is not you who are the owners of its supply.) The meaning is, \"You are not taking care of it; rather We send it down and take care of it for you, making springs and wells flourish on the earth. \" If Allah so willed, He could make it disappear, but by His mercy He sends it down and makes it fresh and sweet, maintaining the springs, wells, rivers and so on, so that they may drink from it all year long, water their livestock and irrigate their crops.\n\n## The Power of Allah to initiate and renew Creation\n\nوَإِنَّا لَنَحْنُ نُحْيِي وَنُمِيتُ\n(And certainly We! We it is Who give life, and cause death,) Here Allah tells us of His power to initiate creation and renew it. He is the One Who brings life to creatures out of nothingness, then He causes them to die, then He will resurrect all of them on the Day when He will gather them together. He also tells us that He will inherit the earth and everyone on it, and then it is to Him that they will return. Then He tells us about His perfect knowledge of them, the first and the last of them. He says\nوَلَقَدْ عَلِمْنَا الْمُسْتَقْدِمِينَ مِنكُمْ\n(And indeed, We know the first generations of you who had passed away...).\nIbn 'Abbas said, \"The first generations are all those who have passed away since the time of Adam. The present generations and those who will come afterward refer to those who are alive now and who are yet to come, until the Day of Resurrection.\"\nSomething similar was narrated from 'Ikrimah, Mujahid, Ad-Dahhak, Qatadah, Muhammad bin Ka'b, Ash-Sha'bi and others.\nIbn Jarir reported from Muhammad bin Abi Ma'shar, from his father, that he heard 'Awn bin 'Abdullah discussing the following Ayah with Muhammad bin Ka'b:\nوَلَقَدْ عَلِمْنَا الْمُسْتَقْدِمِينَ مِنكُمْ وَلَقَدْ عَلِمْنَا الْمُسْتَأْخِرِينَ\n(And indeed, We know the first generations of you who had passed away, and indeed, We know the present generations of you (mankind), and also those who will come afterwards), and it was stated that it refers to the rows for prayer. Muhammad bin Ka'b said, \"This is not the case.\nوَلَقَدْ عَلِمْنَا الْمُسْتَقْدِمِينَ مِنكُمْ\n(And indeed, We know the first generations of you who had passed away) it refers to those who are dead or have been killed, and;\nالْمُسْتَأْخِرِينَ\n(and also those who will come afterwards) meaning those who have yet to be created.\nوَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ هُوَ يَحْشُرُهُمْ ۚ إِنَّهُ حَكِيمٌ عَلِيمٌ\n(And verily your Lord will gather them together. Truly, He is Most Wise, (and) Knowing).\" 'Awn bin 'Abdullah said, \"May Allah help you and reward you with good.\"","href":"/tafsir/15?verse=21","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:15:26","title":"Ibn Kathir · 15:26–27","text":"And indeed, We created man from dried (sounding) clay of altered mud (26)And the Jinn, We created earlier from the smokeless flame of fire (27)\n\n## The Substances from which Mankind and Jinns were created\n\nIbn 'Abbas, Mujahid and Qatadah said that Salsal means dry mud. The apparent meaning is similar to the Ayah:\nخَلَقَ الْإِنسَانَ مِن صَلْصَالٍ كَالْفَخَّارِ - وَخَلَقَ الْجَانَّ مِن مَّارِجٍ مِّن نَّارٍ\n(He created man (Adam) from sounding clay like the potter's clay, And He created the Jinns from a smokeless flame of fire.)(55:14-15) It was also reported from Mujahid that,\nصَلْصَالٍ\n(dried (sounding) clay) means \"putrid\", but it is more appropriate to interpret an Ayah with another Ayah.\nمِّنْ حَمَإٍ مَّسْنُونٍ\n(of altered mud) means the dried clay that comes from mud, which is soil. \"Altered\" here means smooth.\nوَالْجَانَّ خَلَقْنَاهُ مِن قَبْلُ\n(And the Jinn, We created earlier) means before creating humans.\nمِن نَّارِ السَّمُومِ\n(from the smokeless flame of fire.) Ibn 'Abbas said, \"It is the smokeless flame that kills.\" Abu Dawud At-Tayalisi said that Shu'bah narrated to them from Abu Ishaq, who said: \"I visited 'Umar Al-Asamm when he was sick, and he said: 'Shall I not tell you a Hadith that I heard from 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud? He said: 'This smokeless flame is one of the seventy parts of the smokeless fire from which the Jinn where created. Then he recited,\nوَالْجَانَّ خَلَقْنَاهُ مِن قَبْلُ مِن نَّارِ السَّمُومِ\n(And the Jinn, We created earlier from the smokeless flame of fire).'\" The following is found in the Sahih,\nخُلِقَتِ الْمَلَائِكَةُ مِنْ نُورٍ، وَخُلِقَتِ الْجَانُّ مِنْ مَارِجٍ مِنْ نَارٍ، وَخُلِقَ آدَمُ مِمَّا وُصِفَ لَكُم\n(The angels were created from light, the Jinn were created from a smokeless flame of fire, and Adam was created from that which has been described to you.) The Ayah is intended to point out the noble nature, good essence and pure origin of Adam.","href":"/tafsir/15?verse=26","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:15:28","title":"Ibn Kathir · 15:28–33","text":"And (remember) when your Lord said to the angels: \"I am going to create a man (Adam) from dried (sounding) clay of altered mud. (28)\"So, when I have fashioned him completely and breathed into him (Adam) of My spirit (the soul which I created for him,) then fall down, prostrating yourselves before him. (29)So the angels prostrated themselves, all of them together (30)Except Iblis (Shaytan) - he refused to be among the prostrate (31)(Allah) said: \"O Iblis! What is your reason for not being among the prostrate? (32)[Iblis] said: \"I am not one to prostrate myself to a human, whom You created from dried (sounding) clay of altered mud. (33)\n\n## The creation of Adam, the Command to the Angels to prostrate to Him, and the Rebellion of Iblis\n\nAllah informs us of how He mentioned Adam to His angels before He created him, and how He honored him by commanding the angels to prostrate to him. He mentions how His enemy Iblis, amidst all the angels, refused to prostrate to him out of envy, disbelief, stubbornness, arrogance, and false pride. This is why Iblis said:\nلَمْ أَكُن لِّأَسْجُدَ لِبَشَرٍ خَلَقْتَهُ مِن صَلْصَالٍ مِّنْ حَمَإٍ مَّسْنُونٍ\n(I am not one to prostrate myself to a human, whom You created from dried (sounding) clay of altered mud.) this is like when he said,\nقَالَ أَنَا خَيْرٌ مِّنْهُ خَلَقْتَنِي مِن نَّارٍ وَخَلَقْتَهُ مِن طِينٍ\n(I am better than him (Adam), You created me from Fire and him You created from clay.)(7:12) and\nأَرَأَيْتَكَ هَٰذَا الَّذِي كَرَّمْتَ عَلَيَّ\n(\"Do you see this one whom You have honored above me...\")[17:62]","href":"/tafsir/15?verse=28","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:15:34","title":"Ibn Kathir · 15:34–38","text":"(Allah) said: \"Then leave, for verily, you are an outcast. (34)\"And verily, the curse shall be upon you until the Day of Recompense. (35)[Iblis] said: \"O my Lord! Then give me respite until the Day they (the dead) will be resurrected. (36)Allah said: \"Then verily, you are of those reprieved, (37)\"Until the Day of the time appointed. (38)\n\n## The Expulsion of Iblis from Jannah, and His Reprieve until the Day of Resurrection\n\nAllah tells us how He issued an unconditional command to Iblis to leave the position he held among the highest of heights. He told him that he was an outcast, i.e., cursed, and that he would be followed by a curse that would hound him until the Day of Resurrection. It was reported that Sa'id bin Jubayr said: \"When Allah cursed Iblis, his image into something different from that of the angels, and he made a sound like a bell. Every bell that rings on this earth until the Day of Resurrection is part of that. This was reported by Ibn Abi Hatim.","href":"/tafsir/15?verse=34","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:15:39","title":"Ibn Kathir · 15:39–44","text":"[Iblis] said: \"O my Lord! Because You misled me, I shall indeed adorn the path of error for them (mankind) on the earth, and I shall mislead them all. (39)\"Except Your chosen (guided) servants among them. (40)(Allah) said: \"This is the way which will lead straight to Me. (41)\"Certainly, you shall have no authority over My servants, except those of the astray who follow you. (42)And surely, Hell is the place promised for them all (43)It has seven gates, for each of those gates is a class assigned (44)\n\n## The Threat of Iblis to tempt Mankind, and Allah's Promise of Hell for him\n\nAllah informed about the rebellion and arrogance of Iblis, in that he said to the Lord:\nبِمَا أَغْوَيْتَنِي\n(Because You misled me,) i.e., because You misled me and misguided me.\nلَأُزَيِّنَنَّ لَهُمْ\n(I shall indeed adorn the path of error for them) meaning, for the progeny of Adam.\nفِي الْأَرْضِ\n(on the earth,) meaning - I will make sin dear to them, and will encourage, provoke and harass them to commit sin.\nوَلَأُغْوِيَنَّهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ\n(and I shall mislead them all.) meaning - just as You have misled me and have ordained that for me.\nإِلَّا عِبَادَكَ مِنْهُمُ الْمُخْلَصِينَ\n(Except Your chosen, (guided) servants among them.) This is like the Ayah:\nأَرَأَيْتَكَ هَٰذَا الَّذِي كَرَّمْتَ عَلَيَّ لَئِنْ أَخَّرْتَنِ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ لَأَحْتَنِكَنَّ ذُرِّيَّتَهُ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا\n(\"Do you see this one whom You have honored above me, if You give me respite until the Day of Resurrection, I will surely seize and mislead his offspring, all but a few!\")(17:62).\nقَالَ\n((Allah) said), i.e., threatening and warning Iblis.\nهَٰذَا صِرَاطٌ عَلَيَّ مُسْتَقِيمٌ\n(This is the way which will lead straight to Me.) means, 'all of you will return to Me, and I will reward or punish you according to your deeds: if they are good then I will reward you, and if they are bad then I will punish you.' This is like the Ayah:\nإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَبِالْمِرْصَادِ\n(Verily, your Lord is ever watchful.)(89:14) and\nوَعَلَى اللَّهِ قَصْدُ السَّبِيلِ\n(And it is up to Allah to show the right way.)(16:9)\nإِنَّ عِبَادِي لَيْسَ لَكَ عَلَيْهِمْ سُلْطَانٌ\n(Certainly, you shall have no authority over My servants) meaning, 'you will have no way to reach those for whom I have decreed guidance.'\nإِلَّا مَنِ اتَّبَعَكَ مِنَ الْغَاوِينَ\n(except those of the astray who follow you.) Ibn Jarir mentioned that Yazid bin Qusayt said: \"The Prophets used to have Masjids outside their cities, and if a Prophet wanted to consult with his Lord about something, he would go out to his place of worship and pray as Allah decreed. Then he would ask Him about whatever was concerning him. Once while a Prophet was in his place of worship, the enemy of Allah - meaning Iblis - came and sat between him and the Qiblah (direction of prayer). The Prophet said, 'I seek refuge with Allah from the accursed Shaytan.' [The enemy of Allah said, 'Do you know who you are seeking refuge from? Here he is!' The Prophet said, 'I seek refuge with Allah from the accursed Shaytan'], and he repeated that three times. Then the enemy of Allah said, 'Tell me about anything in which you will be saved from me.' The Prophet twice said, 'No, you tell me about something in which you can overpower the son of Adam?' Each of them was insisting that the other answer first, then the Prophet said, Allah says,\nإِنَّ عِبَادِي لَيْسَ لَكَ عَلَيْهِمْ سُلْطَانٌ إِلَّا مَنِ اتَّبَعَكَ مِنَ الْغَاوِينَ\n(Certainly, you shall have no authority over My servants, except those of the astray who follow you.) The enemy of Allah said, 'I heard this before you were even born.' The Prophet said, 'And Allah says,\nوَإِمَّا يَنزَغَنَّكَ مِنَ الشَّيْطَانِ نَزْغٌ فَاسْتَعِذْ بِاللَّهِ ۚ إِنَّهُ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ\n(And if an evil whisper comes to you from Shaytan then seek refuge with Allah. Verily, He is All-Hearing, All-Knowing)(7:200). By Allah, I never sense that you are near but I seek refuge with Allah from you.' The enemy of Allah said, 'You have spoken the truth. In this way you will be saved from me.' The Prophet said, 'Tell me in what ways you overpower the son of Adam.' He said, 'I seize him at times of anger and times of desire.'\nوَإِنَّ جَهَنَّمَ لَمَوْعِدُهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ\n(And surely, Hell is the place promised for them all.) meaning, Hell is the abode designated for all those who follow Iblis, as Allah says in the Qur'an:\nوَمَن يَكْفُرْ بِهِ مِنَ الْأَحْزَابِ فَالنَّارُ مَوْعِدُهُ\n(but those of the sects (Jews, Christians and all the other non-Muslim nations) that reject it (the Qur'an), the Fire will be their promised meeting place.)(11:17)\n\n## The Gates of Hell are Seven\n\nThen Allah tells us that Hell has seven gates:\nلِّكُلِّ بَابٍ مِّنْهُمْ جُزْءٌ مَّقْسُومٌ\n(for each of those gates is a (special) class (of sinners) assigned.) means, for each gate a portion of the followers of Iblis have been decreed, and they will have no choice in the matter. May Allah save us from that. Each one will enter a gate according to his deeds, and will settle in a level of Hell according to his deeds. Ibn Abi Hatim recorded that Samurah bin Jundub reported from the Prophet ﷺ about,\nلِّكُلِّ بَابٍ مِّنْهُمْ جُزْءٌ مَّقْسُومٌ\n(for each of those gates is a class assigned.) He said,\nإِنَّ مِنْ أَهْلِ النَّارِ مَنْ تَأْخُذُهُ النَّارُ إِلَى كَعْبَيْهِ، وَإِنَّ مِنْهُمْ مَنْ تَأْخُذُهُ النَّارُ إِلَى حُجْزَتِهِ، وَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ تَأْخُذُهُ النَّارُ إِلَى تَرَاقِيهِ\n(Among the people of Hell are those whom the Fire will swallow up to the ankles, and those whom it will swallow up to the waist, and those whom it will swallow up to the collarbone.) The degree of which will depend upon their deeds. This is like the Ayah;\nلِّكُلِّ بَابٍ مِّنْهُمْ جُزْءٌ مَّقْسُومٌ\n(for each of those gates is a class assigned.)","href":"/tafsir/15?verse=39","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:15:45","title":"Ibn Kathir · 15:45–50","text":"Truly, those who have Taqwa, will dwell in Gardens and water springs (45)(It will be said to them): \"Enter it in peace and security. (46)And We shall remove any deep feeling of bitterness from their breasts. (So they will be like) brothers facing each other on thrones (47)No sense of fatigue shall touch them, nor shall they be asked to leave i (48)Declare to My servants that I am truly the Forgiving, the Most Merciful (49)And that My torment is indeed the most painful torment (50)\n\n## Description of the People of Paradise\n\nSince Allah mentioned the condition of the people of Hell, He followed that by mentioning the people of Paradise. He tells us that they will dwell in Gardens and water springs.\nادْخُلُوهَا بِسَلَامٍ\n(Enter it in peace) meaning free of all problems.\nآمِنِينَ\n(and security.) meaning free from all fear and concern. They will not have any fear of expulsion, nor will they fear that their condition will be disrupted or end.\nوَنَزَعْنَا مَا فِي صُدُورِهِم مِّنْ غِلٍّ إِخْوَانًا عَلَىٰ سُرُرٍ مُّتَقَابِلِينَ\n(And We shall remove any deep feeling of bitterness from their breasts. (So they will be like) brothers facing each other on thrones.) Al-Qasim narrated that Abu Umamah said: \"The people of Paradise will enter Paradise with whatever enmity is left in their hearts from this world. Then, when they come together, Allah will remove whatever hatred the world has left in their hearts.\" Then he recited:\nوَنَزَعْنَا مَا فِي صُدُورِهِم مِّنْ غِلٍّ\n(And We shall remove any deep feeling of bitterness from their breasts.) This is how it was narrated in this report, but Al-Qasim bin 'Abdur-Rahman is weak in his reports from Abu Umamah. However, this is in accord with the report in the Sahih where Qatadah says, \"Abu Al-Mutawakkil An-Naji told us that Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri told them that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nيَخْلُصُ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ مِنَ النَّارِ، فَيُحْبَسُونَ عَلَى قَنْطَرَةٍ بَيْنَ الْجَنَّةِ وَالنَّارِ. فَيُقْتَصُّ لِبَعْضِهِمْ مِنْ بَعْضٍ مَظَالِمُ كَانَتْ بَيْنَهُمْ فِي الدُّنْيَا حَتَّى إِذَا هُذِّبُوا وَنُقُّوا، أُذِنَ لَهُمْ فِي دُخُولِ الْجَنَّةِ\n(The believers will be removed from the Fire, and they will be detained on a bridge between Paradise and Hell. Then judgment will be passed between them concerning any wrong they have committed in this world against one another, until they are cleansed and purified. Then permission will be given to them to enter Paradise.)\"\nلَا يَمَسُّهُمْ فِيهَا نَصَبٌ\n(No sense of fatigue shall touch them) meaning no harm or hardship, as was reported in the Sahihs:\nأَنَّ اللهَ أَمَرَنِي أَنْ أُبَشِّرَ خَدِيجَةَ بِبَيْتٍ فِي الْجَنَّةِ مِنْ قَصَبٍ لَا صَخَبَ فِيهِ وَلَا نَصَبَ\n(Allah commanded me to tell Khadijah the good news of a jeweled palace in Paradise in which there will be no toil and no fatigue.)\nوَمَا هُم مِّنْهَا بِمُخْرَجِينَ\n(nor shall they (ever) be asked to leave it.) As was reported in the Hadith:\nيُقَالُ: يَا أَهْلَ الْجَنَّةِ! إِنَّ لَكُمْ أَنْ تَصِحُّوا فَلَا تَمْرَضُوا أَبَدًا، وَإِنَّ لَكُمْ أَنْ تَعِيشُوا فَلَا تَمُوتُوا أَبَدًا، وَإِنَّ لَكُمْ أَنْ تَشِبُّوا فَلَا تَهْرَمُوا أَبَدًا، وَإِنَّ لَكُمْ أَنْ تُقِيمُوا فَلَا تَظْعُنُوا أَبَدًا\n(It will be said, O dwellers of Paradise! You will be healthy and never fall sick; you will live and never die; you will be young and never grow old; you will stay here and never leave.) Allah says:\nخَالِدِينَ فِيهَا لَا يَبْغُونَ عَنْهَا حِوَلًا\n(Wherein they shall dwell (forever). They will have no desire to be removed from it.)(18:108)\nنَبِّئْ عِبَادِي أَنِّي أَنَا الْغَفُورُ الرَّحِيمُ - وَأَنَّ عَذَابِي هُوَ الْعَذَابُ الْأَلِيمُ\n(Declare to My servants, that I am truly the Oft-Forgiving, the Most Merciful. And that My torment is indeed the most painful torment.) meaning, 'O Muhammad, tell My servants that I am the source of mercy and I am the source of punishment.' Similar Ayat to this have already been quoted above, which indicate that we must always be in a state between hope (for Allah's mercy) and fear (of His punishment).","href":"/tafsir/15?verse=45","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:15:51","title":"Ibn Kathir · 15:51–56","text":"And tell them about the guests (i. e., the angels) of Ibrahim (51)When they entered upon him, and said: \"Salaman (peace!).\" He said: \"Indeed we are frightened of you. (52)They said: \"Do not be afraid! We bring you the good news of a boy possessing much knowledge and wisdom. (53)He said: \"Do you give me this good news while old age has overtaken me? Of what then is your news about? (54)They said: \"We give you good news in truth. So do not be of those who despair. (55)He said: \"And who despairs of the mercy of his Lord except those who are astray? (56)\n\n## The Guests of Ibrahim and their Good News of a Son for Him\n\nAllah is saying: 'Tell them, O Muhammad, about the story of\nضَيْفِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ\n(the guests of Ibrahim.)'\nدَخَلُوا عَلَيْهِ فَقَالُوا سَلَامًا قَالَ إِنَّا مِنكُمْ وَجِلُونَ\n(they entered upon him, and said: \"Salaman (peace!).\" He said: \"Indeed we are frightened of you.\") meaning that they were scared. The reason for their fear has been mentioned previously, which is that they noticed that these guests did not eat of the food that was offered, which was a fattened calf.\nقَالُوا لَا تَوْجَلْ\n(They said: \"Do not be afraid!...\") meaning, do not be scared.\nوَبَشَّرُوهُ بِغُلَامٍ عَلِيمٍ\n(We bring you the good news of a boy possessing much knowledge and wisdom.) this refers to Ishaq, as was previously mentioned in Surat Hud. Then\nقَالَ\n(He said) meaning he spoke with wonder and astonishment, asking for confirmation, because he was old and his wife was old:\nأَبَشَّرْتُمُونِي عَلَىٰ أَن مَّسَّنِيَ الْكِبَرُ فَبِمَ تُبَشِّرُونَ\n(Do you give me this good news while old age has overtaken me? Of what then is your news about?) They responded by confirming the good news they had brought, good news after good news:\nقَالُوا بَشَّرْنَاكَ بِالْحَقِّ فَلَا تَكُن مِّنَ الْقَانِطِينَ\n(They said: \"We give you good news in truth. So do not be of those who despair.\")","href":"/tafsir/15?verse=51","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:15:57","title":"Ibn Kathir · 15:57–60","text":"He said: \"What then is the business for which you have come, O messengers? (57)They said: \"We have been sent to a guilty people. (58)\"(All) except the family of Lut, all of whom we are to save (from the destruction). (59)\"Except for his wife, of whom We have decreed that she shall be of those who remain behind. (60)\n\n## The Reason why the Angels came\n\nAllah tells us that after Ibrahim had calmed down from the excitement of this good news, he started to ask them why they had come to him. They said,\nإِنَّا أُرْسِلْنَا إِلَىٰ قَوْمٍ مُّجْرِمِينَ\n(We have been sent to a guilty people.) meaning the people of Lut. They told him that they were going to save the family of Lut from among those people, except for his wife, because she was one of those who were doomed. Thus it was said,\nإِلَّا امْرَأَتَهُ قَدَّرْنَا ۙ إِنَّهَا لَمِنَ الْغَابِرِينَ\n(Except for his wife, of whom We have decreed that she shall be of those who remain behind.) i.e., she was one of those who would be left behind and will be destroyed.","href":"/tafsir/15?verse=57","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:15:61","title":"Ibn Kathir · 15:61–64","text":"Then when the messengers (the angels) came to the family of Lu (61)He (Lut) said: \"Verily, you are people unknown to me. (62)They said: \"Nay, we have come to you with that (torment) which they have been doubting. (63)\"And we have brought you the truth and certainly we tell the truth. (64)\n\n## The Angels coming to Lut\n\nAllah tells us about when the angels came to Lut in the form of young men with handsome faces. When they entered his home, he said:\nإِنَّكُمْ قَوْمٌ مُّنكَرُونَ - قَالُوا بَلْ جِئْنَاكَ بِمَا كَانُوا فِيهِ يَمْتَرُونَ\n(\"Verily, you are people unknown to me.\" They said: \"Nay, we have come to you with that (torment) which they have been doubting.\") meaning that they were bringing the punishment and destruction that the people doubted they would ever suffer from.\nوَأَتَيْنَاكَ بِالْحَقِّ\n(And we have brought you the truth) is like the Ayah,\nمَا نُنَزِّلُ الْمَلَائِكَةَ إِلَّا بِالْحَقِّ\n(We do not send the angels down except with the truth)[15:8] and\nوَإِنَّا لَصَادِقُونَ\n(and certainly, we tell the truth.) They said this in affirmation of the news that they brought him, that he would be saved and his people would be destroyed.","href":"/tafsir/15?verse=61","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:15:65","title":"Ibn Kathir · 15:65–66","text":"\"Then travel for a portion of the night with your family, and you go behind them in the rear, and let no one amongst you look back, but go on to where you are ordered. (65)And We made this decree known to him that those (sinners) would be rooted out in the early morning (66)\n\n## Lut is ordered to leave with His Family during the Night\n\nAllah tells us that His angels ordered Lut to set out after part of the night had passed. They told him to walk behind them, to protect them. Similarly, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ would walk in the rear of the army on military campaigns, in order to help the weak and carry those who had no means of transport.\nوَلَا يَلْتَفِتْ مِنكُمْ أَحَدٌ\n(and let no one amongst you look back,) meaning - when you hear the people screaming from their torment, do not turn around to look at them; leave them to face whatever punishment and vengeance is coming to them.\nوَامْضُوا حَيْثُ تُؤْمَرُونَ\n(but go on to where you are ordered.) - it is as if they had a guide with them to show them the way.\nوَقَضَيْنَا إِلَيْهِ ذَٰلِكَ الْأَمْرَ\n(And We made this decree known to him) meaning - We already told him about that.\nأَنَّ دَابِرَ هَٰؤُلَاءِ مَقْطُوعٌ مُّصْبِحِينَ\n(that those (sinners) would be rooted out in the early morning.) meaning in the morning, as in another Ayah:\nإِنَّ مَوْعِدَهُمُ الصُّبْحُ ۚ أَلَيْسَ الصُّبْحُ بِقَرِيبٍ\n(Indeed, morning is their appointed time. Is not the morning near?)[11:81]","href":"/tafsir/15?verse=65","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:15:67","title":"Ibn Kathir · 15:67–72","text":"And the inhabitants of the city came rejoicing (67)[Lut] said: \"Verily, these are my guests, so do not shame me. (68)\"And have Taqwa of Allah, and do not disgrace me. (69)They said: \"Did we not forbid you from entertaining any of the 'Alamin? (70)Lut ]said: \"These are my daughters, if you must act (so)(71)Verily, by your life, in their wild intoxication, they were wandering blindly (72)\n\n## The People of the City arrive upon the Angels, thinking that they are Men\n\nAllah tells us about how Lut's people came to him when they found out about his handsome guests, and they came happily rejoicing about them.\nقَالَ إِنَّ هَٰؤُلَاءِ ضَيْفِي فَلَا تَفْضَحُونِ - وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَلَا تُخْزُونِ\n([Lut] said: \"Verily, these are my guests, so do not shame me. And have Taqwa of Allah, and do not disgrace me.\") This is what Lut said to them before he knew that his guests were messengers from Allah, as mentioned in Surat Hud, but here (in this Surah), we have already been told that they are messengers from Allah, and this is followed by an account of Lut's people coming and his exchange with them. However, here the conjunction (wa, meaning \"and\") does not imply the sequence of events, especially since there is something to indicate that this is not the case. They said answering him,\nأَوَلَمْ نَنْهَكَ عَنِ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(Did we not forbid you from entertaining (or protecting) any of the 'Alamin) meaning, 'did we not tell you that you should not have anyone as a guest?' He reminded them about their womenfolk and what their Lord had created for them in the women of permissible sexual relationships. This issue has already been explained and is no need to repeat the discussion here. All of this happened while they were still unaware of the inevitable calamity and punishment that was about to befall them the following morning. Hence Allah, may He be exalted, said to Muhammad ﷺ,\nلَعَمْرُكَ إِنَّهُمْ لَفِي سَكْرَتِهِمْ يَعْمَهُونَ\n(Verily, by your life, in their wild intoxication, they were wandering blindly.) Allah swore by the life of His Prophet ﷺ, which is an immense honor reflecting his high rank and noble status. 'Amr bin Malik An-Nakari reported from Abu Al-Jawza' that Ibn 'Abbas said: \"Allah has never created or made or formed any soul that is dearer to him than Muhammad ﷺ. I never heard that Allah swore by the life of anyone else. Allah says,\nلَعَمْرُكَ إِنَّهُمْ لَفِي سَكْرَتِهِمْ يَعْمَهُونَ\n(Verily, by your life, in their wild intoxication, they were wandering blindly.) meaning, by your life and the length of your stay in this world,\nإِنَّهُمْ لَفِي سَكْرَتِهِمْ يَعْمَهُونَ\n(in their wild intoxication, they were wandering blindly.) This was reported by Ibn Jarir. Qatadah said:\nلَفِي سَكْرَتِهِمْ\n(in their wild intoxication) \"It means - in their misguided state;\nيَعْمَهُونَ\n(they were wandering blindly) means - they were playing. \" 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas said:\nلَعَمْرُكَ\n(Verily, by your life) means by your life, and\nإِنَّهُمْ لَفِي سَكْرَتِهِمْ يَعْمَهُونَ\n(in their wild intoxication, they were wandering blindly.) means that they were confused.\"","href":"/tafsir/15?verse=67","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:15:73","title":"Ibn Kathir · 15:73–77","text":"So the Sayhah overtook them at the time of sunrise (73)And We turned them upside down and rained stones of baked clay upon them (74)Surely, in this are signs for those who see (75)And verily, they were right on the highroad (76)Surely, there is indeed a sign in that for the believers (77)\n\n## The Destruction of the People of Lut\n\nAllah said;\nفَأَخَذَتْهُمُ الصَّيْحَةُ\n(So the Sayhah overtook them) This is the piercing sound that came to them when the sun rose, which was accompanied by the city being flipped upside down, and stones of baked clay (As-Sijjil) raining down upon them. The discussion of As-Sijjil in Surah Hud is a sufficient explanation. Allah said:\nإِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِّلْمُتَوَسِّمِينَ\n(Surely, in this are signs for those who see.) meaning that the traces of the destruction of that city are easily visible to any one who ponder about it, whether they look at it with physical eyesight or mental and spiritual insight, as Mujahid said concerning the phrase,\nلِّلْمُتَوَسِّمِينَ\n(those who see) he said, \"those who have insight and discernment.\" It was reported from Ibn 'Abbas and Ad-Dahhak that it referred to those who look. Qatadah said: \"those who learn lessons\".\n\n## The City of Sodom on the Highroad\n\nوَإِنَّهَا لَبِسَبِيلٍ مُّقِيمٍ\n(And verily, they were right on the highroad.) meaning that the city of Sodom, which was physically and spiritually turned upside down, and pelted with stones until it became a foul smelling lake (the Dead Sea), is on a route that is easily accessible until the present day. This is like the Ayah,\nوَإِنَّكُمْ لَتَمُرُّونَ عَلَيْهِم مُّصْبِحِينَ - وَبِاللَّيْلِ ۗ أَفَلَا تَعْقِلُونَ\n(Verily, you pass by them in the morning, and at night. Will you not then reflect?)(37:137-138).\nإِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً لِّلْمُؤْمِنِينَ\n(Surely, there is indeed a sign in that for the believers.) meaning, 'All that We did to the people of Lut, from the destruction and the vengeance, to how We saved Lut and his family, these are clear signs to those who believe in Allah and His Messengers.'","href":"/tafsir/15?verse=73","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:15:78","title":"Ibn Kathir · 15:78–79","text":"And the Dwellers of Al-Aykah, were also wrongdoers (78)So, We took vengeance on them. They are both on an open route, plain to see (79)\n\n## The Destruction of the Dwellers of Al-Aykah, the People of Shu'ayb\n\nThe Dwellers of Al-Aykah, were the people of Shu'ayb. Ad-Dahhak, Qatadah and others said that Al-Aykah refers to intertwined trees. Their evildoing included associating partners with Allah (Shirk), banditry and cheating in weights and measures. Allah punished them with the Sayhah (the awful cry or torment), the earthquake, and the torment of the Day of Shadow. They lived near the people of Lut, but at a later time, and the people of Lut were known to them, which is why Allah says,\nوَإِنَّهُمَا لَبِإِمَامٍ مُّبِينٍ\n(They are both on an open route, plain to see.) Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, Ad-Dahhak and others said, \"a visible route.\" This is why, when Shu'ayb warned his people, he said to them,\nوَمَا قَوْمُ لُوطٍ مِّنكُم بِبَعِيدٍ\n(And the people of Lut are not far off from you!)[11:89]","href":"/tafsir/15?verse=78","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:15:80","title":"Ibn Kathir · 15:80–84","text":"And verily, the Dwellers of Al-Hijr denied the Messengers (80)And We gave them Our signs, but they were averse to them (81)And they used to hew out dwellings from the mountains, (feeling) secure (82)But the Sayhah (torment - awful cry) overtook them in the early morning (83)And all that they used to earn availed them not (84)\n\n## The Destruction of the Dwellers of Al-Hijr, Who are the People called Thamud\n\nThe Dwellers of the Al Hijr were the people of Thamud who rejected their Prophet, Salih. Whoever denies even one Messenger, then he has disbelieved in all of the Messengers, thus they are described as rejecting \"the Messengers\". Allah tells us that he (Salih) brought them signs to prove that what he was telling them was true, such as the she-camel which Allah created for them out of a solid rock in response to the supplication of Salih. This she-camel was grazing on their lands, and the people and the camel took water on alternate days that were well-known. When they rebelled and killed it, he said to them,\nتَمَتَّعُوا فِي دَارِكُمْ ثَلَاثَةَ أَيَّامٍ ۖ ذَٰلِكَ وَعْدٌ غَيْرُ مَكْذُوبٍ\n(\"Enjoy yourselves in your homes for three days. This is a promise which will not be belied.\")[11:65] Allah said:\nوَأَمَّا ثَمُودُ فَهَدَيْنَاهُمْ فَاسْتَحَبُّوا الْعَمَىٰ عَلَى الْهُدَىٰ\n(And as for Thamud, We showed them and made the path of truth clear but they preferred blindness to guidance.)[41:17] Allah tells us that,\nوَكَانُوا يَنْحِتُونَ مِنَ الْجِبَالِ بُيُوتًا آمِنِينَ\n(And they used to hew out dwellings from the mountains, (feeling) secure.) meaning, they were without fear and they had no real need for those houses; it was merely a form of extravagance and work without a purpose. This could be seen from their work in the houses in the Al-Hijr through which the Messenger of Allah ﷺ passed on his way to Tabuk. He covered his head and urged his camel to go faster, saying to his Companions:\nلَا تَدْخُلُوا بُيُوتَ الْقَوْمِ الْمُعَذَّبِينَ إِلَّا أَنْ تَكُونُوا بَاكِينَ، فَإِنَّ لَمْ تَبْكُوا فَتَبَاكُوا خَشْيَةَ أَنْ يُصِيبَكُمْ مَا أَصَابَهُم\n(Do not enter the dwellings of those who were punished unless you are weeping, and if you do not weep then make yourself weep out of fear that perhaps what struck them may also strike you.)\nفَأَخَذَتْهُمُ الصَّيْحَةُ مُصْبِحِينَ\n(But the Sayhah (torment - awful cry) overtook them in the early morning.) meaning in the morning of the fourth day.\nفَمَا أَغْنَىٰ عَنْهُم مَّا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ\n(And all that they used to earn availed them not.) meaning all of the benefits that they used to gain from their crops and fruits, and the water which they did not want to share with the she-camel that they killed so that it would not reduce their share of the water - all of that wealth would not protect them or help them when the command of their Lord came to pass.","href":"/tafsir/15?verse=80","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:15:85","title":"Ibn Kathir · 15:85–86","text":"And We did not create the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with the truth, and the Hour is surely coming, so overlook their faults with gracious forgiveness (85)Verily, your Lord is the Knowing Creator (86)\n\n## The World has been created for some Purpose, then the Hour will come\n\nAllah says,\nوَمَا خَلَقْنَا السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا إِلَّا بِالْحَقِّ ۗ وَإِنَّ السَّاعَةَ لَآتِيَةٌ\n(And We did not create the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with the truth, and the Hour is surely coming), i.e., with justice to -\nلِيَجْزِيَ الَّذِينَ أَسَاءُوا بِمَا عَمِلُوا\n(requite those who do evil with that which they have done)[53:31] Allah says,\nوَمَا خَلَقْنَا السَّمَاءَ وَالْأَرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا بَاطِلًا ۚ ذَٰلِكَ ظَنُّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا ۚ فَوَيْلٌ لِّلَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنَ النَّارِ\n(And We did not create the heaven and the earth, and all that is between them without purpose! That is what those who disbelieve think! Then let those who disbelieve be warned of the Fire!)(38:27)\nأَفَحَسِبْتُمْ أَنَّمَا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ عَبَثًا وَأَنَّكُمْ إِلَيْنَا لَا تُرْجَعُونَ - فَتَعَالَى اللَّهُ الْمَلِكُ الْحَقُّ ۖ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ رَبُّ الْعَرْشِ الْكَرِيمِ\n(\"Did you think that We created you in play, and that you would not be brought back to Us?\" So exalted be Allah, the Truth, the King, none has the right to be worshipped but He, the Lord of the Honored Throne!)(23:115-116). Then Allah informed His Prophet ﷺ about the Hour, and that it will be the faults of the idolators when they insult him and reject the Message that he brings to them. This is like the Ayah,\nفَاصْفَحْ عَنْهُمْ وَقُلْ سَلَامٌ ۚ فَسَوْفَ يَعْلَمُونَ\n(So turn away from them, and say: \"Salam (Peace!).\" But they will come to know)(43:89). Mujahid, Qatadah and others said: \"This was before fighting was prescribed\". It is as they said, because this Surah was revealed in Makkah and fighting was prescribed after the Hijrah.\nإِنَّ رَبَّكَ هُوَ الْخَلَّاقُ الْعَلِيمُ\n(Verily, your Lord is the Knowing Creator)(15:86). This is a confirmation of the Day of Resurrection and that Allah, may He be exalted, is able to bring the Hour to pass. He is the Creator and nothing is beyond Him. He is the Knowing, Who knows what has been dispersed from people's bodies and scattered throughout the regions of the earth, as He says:\nأَوَلَيْسَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ بِقَادِرٍ عَلَىٰ أَن يَخْلُقَ مِثْلَهُم ۚ بَلَىٰ وَهُوَ الْخَلَّاقُ الْعَلِيمُ - إِنَّمَا أَمْرُهُ إِذَا أَرَادَ شَيْئًا أَن يَقُولَ لَهُ كُن فَيَكُونُ - فَسُبْحَانَ الَّذِي بِيَدِهِ مَلَكُوتُ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ وَإِلَيْهِ تُرْجَعُونَ\n(Is not He, Who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them Yes, indeed! He is the Knowing, Creator. Verily, His command, when He intends a thing, is only that He says to it, \"Be!\" - and it is! So glorified and exalted is He above all that they associate with Him, and in whose Hands is the dominion of all things, and to Him you shall return.)(36:81-83).","href":"/tafsir/15?verse=85","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:15:87","title":"Ibn Kathir · 15:87–88","text":"And indeed, We have bestowed upon you seven of the Mathani, and the Grand Qur'an (87)Look not with your eyes ambitiously at what We have given to certain classes of them, nor grieve over them. And lower your wings to the believers (88)\n\n## A Reminder of the Blessing of the Qur'an and the Command to focus on its Message\n\nAllah is saying to His Prophet ﷺ: Since We have given you the Grand Qur'an, then do not look at this world and its attractions, or the transient delights that we have given to its people in order to test them. Do not envy what they have in this world, and do not upset yourself with regret for their rejection of you and their opposition to your religion.\nوَاخْفِضْ جَنَاحَكَ لِمَنِ اتَّبَعَكَ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ\n(And lower your wings to the believers who follow you)(26:215) meaning - be gentle with them, like the Ayah,\nلَقَدْ جَاءَكُمْ رَسُولٌ مِّنْ أَنفُسِكُمْ عَزِيزٌ عَلَيْهِ مَا عَنِتُّمْ حَرِيصٌ عَلَيْكُم بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ رَءُوفٌ رَّحِيمٌ\n(Verily, there has come unto you a Messenger from among yourselves. It grieves him that you should receive any injury or difficulty. He is anxious for you, for the believers - he is full of pity, kind and merciful)(9:128).\nThere were some differences among the scholars over the meaning of \"seven of the Mathani\". Ibn Mas'ud, Ibn 'Umar, Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Ad-Dahhak and others said that they are the seven long (Surahs), meaning Al-Baqarah, Āl-'Imrān, An-Nisa', Al-Ma'idah, Al-An'am, Al-A'raf and Yunus. There are texts to this effect reported from Ibn 'Abbas and Sa'id bin Jubayr. Sa'id said: \"In them, Allah explains the obligations, the Hudud (legal limits), stories and rulings.\" Ibn 'Abbas said, \"He explains the parables, stories and lessons.\" The second opinion is that they (the seven of the Mathani) are Al-Fatihah, which is composed of seven Ayat. This was reported from 'Ali, 'Umar, Ibn Mas'ud and Ibn 'Abbas. Ibn 'Abbas said: \"The Bismillah, is completing seven Ayah, which Allah has given exclusively to you (Muslims).\" This is also the opinion of Ibrahim An-Nakha'i, 'Abdullah bin 'Umayr, Ibn Abi Mulaykah, Shahr bin Hawshab, Al-Hasan Al-Basri and Mujahid.\nAl-Bukhari, may Allah have mercy on him, recorded two Hadiths on this topic. (The first) was recorded from Abu Sa'id bin Al-Mu'alla, who said: \"The Prophet ﷺ passed by me while I was praying. He called out for me but I did not come until I finished my prayer. Then I came to him, and He asked,\nمَا مَنَعَكَ أَنْ تَأْتِيَنِي؟\n(What stopped you from coming to me?) I said, 'I was praying'. He said,\nأَلَمْ يَقُلِ اللهُ\n('Did not Allah say\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اسْتَجِيبُوا لِلَّهِ وَلِلرَّسُولِ إِذَا دَعَاكُمْ\n(O you who believe! Answer Allah (by obeying Him) and (His) Messenger when he calls you…?)[8:24]\nأَلَا أُعَلِّمُكَ أَعْظَمَ سُورَةٍ فِي الْقُرْآنِ قَبْلَ أَنْ أَخْرُجَ مِنَ الْمَسْجِدِ\n(Shall I not teach you the most magnificent Surah before I leave the Masjid?) Then the Prophet ﷺ went to leave the Masjid, and I reminded him, so he said,\nالْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(\"Al-Hamdu Lillahi Rabbil-'Alamin [All praises and thanks be to Allah, the Lord of all that exists])(1:2).\nهِيَ السَّبْعُ الْمَثَانِي وَالْقُرْآنُ الَّذِي أُوتِيتُهُ\n(This is the seven of the Mathani and the Qur'an which I have been given.)\" (The second Hadith) was reported from Abu Hurayrah who said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nأُمُّ الْقُرْآنِ هِيَ السَّبْعُ الْمَثَانِي وَالْقُرْآنُ الْعَظِيمُ\n(Umm Al-Qur'an (the Mother or the Essence of the Qur'an,) is the seven Mathani, and the Grand Qur'an.) This means that Al-Fatihah is the seven Mathani and the Grand Qur'an, but this does not contradict the statement that the seven Mathani are the seven long Surahs, because they also share these attributes, as does the whole Qur'an. As Allah says,\nاللَّهُ نَزَّلَ أَحْسَنَ الْحَدِيثِ كِتَابًا مُّتَشَابِهًا مَّثَانِيَ\n(Allah has sent down the best statement, a Book (this Qur'an), its parts resembling each other in goodness and truth, oft-recited)(39:23). So it is oft-recited in one way, and its parts resemble one another in another way, and this is also the Grand Qur'an.\nلاَ تَمُدَّنَّ عَيْنَيْكَ إِلَى مَا مَتَّعْنَا بِهِ أَزْوَاجًا مِّنْهُمْ\n(Look not with your eyes ambitiously at what We have given to certain classes of them)[20:131] meaning, be content with the Grand Qur'an that Allah has given to you, and do not long for the luxuries and transient delights that they have.\nلَا تَمُدَّنَّ عَيْنَيْكَ\n(Look not with your eyes ambitiously) Al-'Awfi reported that Ibn 'Abbas said: \"He [in this Ayah] forbade a man to wish for what his companion has.\"\nإِلَىٰ مَا مَتَّعْنَا بِهِ أَزْوَاجًا مِّنْهُمْ\n(at what We have given to certain classes of them,) Mujahid said: \"This refers to the rich.\"","href":"/tafsir/15?verse=87","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:15:89","title":"Ibn Kathir · 15:89–93","text":"And say (O Muhammad): \"I am indeed a plain warner. (89)As We have sent down on the Muqtasimin (conspiring confederates)(90)Who have made the Qur'an into parts (91)So, by your Lord, We shall certainly call all of them to account (92)For all that they used to do (93)\n\n## The Messenger (ﷺ) is a Plain Warner\n\nAllah commanded His Prophet ﷺ to tell the people:\nإِنِّي أَنَا النَّذِيرُ الْمُبِينُ\n(I am indeed a plain warner) coming to warn the people of a severe punishment that they will suffer if they reject him, as happened to those nations before them who disbelieved in their Messengers, upon whom Allah sent His punishment and vengeance. In the two Sahihs it is reported from Abu Musa that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nإِنَّمَا مَثَلِي وَمَثَلُ مَا بَعَثَنِي اللهُ بِهِ كَمَثَلِ رَجُلٍ أَتَى قَوْمَهَ فَقَالَ: يَا قَوْمِ! إِنِّي رَأَيْتُ الْجَيْشَ بِعَيْنَيَّ، وَإِنِّي أَنَا النَّذِيرُ الْعُرْيَانُ فَالنَّجَاءَ النَّجَاءَ، فَأَطَاعَهُ طَائِفَةٌ مِنْ قَوْمِهِ فَأَدْلَجُوا وَانْطَلَقُوا عَلَى مُهْلِهِمْ فَنَجَوْا، وَكَذَّبَهُ طَائِفَةٌ مِنْهُمْ فَأَصْبَحُوا مَكَانَهُمْ، فَصَبَّحَهُمُ الْجَيْشُ فَأَهْلَكَهُمْ وَاجْتَاحَهُمْ، فَذَلِكَ مَثَلُ مَنْ أَطَاعَنِي وَاتَّبَعَ مَا جِئْتُ بِهِ وَمَثَلُ مَنْ عَصَانِي وَكَذَّبَ مَا جِئْتُ بِهِ مِنَ الْحَقِّ\n(The parable of myself and that with which Allah has sent me is that of a man who came to his people and said, 'O people! I have seen the [invading] army with my own eyes, and I am a naked warner, so escape, escape!' Some of his people obeyed him and set out at nightfall, setting off at a slow pace and managing to escape. Others did not believe him and stayed where they were until the next morning when the [invading] army overtook them and destroyed them, wiping them out. This is the parable of the one who obeys me and follows what I have brought, and the example of the one who disobeys me and rejects the truth that I have brought.)\n\n## Explanation of \"Al-Muqtasimin\"\n\nالْمُقْتَسِمِينَ\n(the Muqtasimin) refers to those who had made a pact to oppose, deny, and insult the Prophets. Similarly, Allah tells us about the people of Salih:\nقَالُوا تَقَاسَمُوا بِاللَّهِ لَنُبَيِّتَنَّهُ وَأَهْلَهُ\n(They said, \"Swear to one another [Taqasamu] by Allah that we shall make a secret night attack on him and his household\")[27:49] i.e., they plotted to kill him at night. Mujahid said \"Taqasamu means they swore an oath.\"\nوَأَقْسَمُوا بِاللَّهِ جَهْدَ أَيْمَانِهِمْ ۙ لَا يَبْعَثُ اللَّهُ مَن يَمُوتُ\n(And they swear by Allah with their strongest oaths, that Allah will not raise up one who dies)(16:38).\nأَوَلَمْ تَكُونُوا أَقْسَمْتُم مِّن قَبْلُ\n((It will be said): \"Did you not before swear that you would not leave (the world for the Hereafter))(14:44)\nأَهَٰؤُلَاءِ الَّذِينَ أَقْسَمْتُمْ لَا يَنَالُهُمُ اللَّهُ بِرَحْمَةٍ\n(Are they those, of whom you swore that Allah would never show them mercy)[7:49] It is as if they took an oath for every single thing that they denied in this world, so they are called the Muqtasimin.\nالَّذِينَ جَعَلُوا الْقُرْآنَ عِضِينَ\n(Who have made the Qur'an into parts.) meaning, they have split up the Books that were revealed to them, believing in parts of them and rejecting parts of them. Al-Bukhari reported that Ibn 'Abbas said,\nجَعَلُوا الْقُرْآنَ عِضِينَ\n(Who have made the Qur'an into parts.) \"They are the People of the Book, who divided the Book into parts, believing in some of it, and rejecting some of it.\" Some have said that Al-Mutaqasimin refers to the Quraysh, that the Qur'an means this Qur'an [as opposed to the Scriptures of the People of the Book], and that \"made it into parts\" referred to what 'Ata' said that some of them said that he (the Prophet ﷺ) was a sorcerer, some said he was crazy, or a soothsayer. These various allegations were the parts. This opinion was also reported from Ad-Dahhak and others.\nMuhammad bin Ishaq reported from Ibn 'Abbas that Al-Walid bin Al-Mughirah - holding a noble position among the people - rallied a group of Quraysh behind him when Al-Mawsim (the time for pilgrims to meet in Makkah for Hajj) had come. He said to them, \"O people of Quraysh! The time of Al-Mawsim has come, and delegations of Arabs will come to you during this time. They will have heard some things about this companion of yours (meaning the Prophet ﷺ), so agree on one opinion, let there be no contradicting or denials of each other's sayings\". They said, \"And you, O Abu 'Abd Shams, give us an opinion and we will say that.\" He said, \"No, you make the suggestions and I will listen.\" They said, \"We say he is a soothsayer.\" He said, \"He is not a soothsayer.\" They said, \"We say he is crazy.\" He said, \"He is not crazy.\" They said, \"We say he is a poet.\" He said, He is not a poet.\" They said, \"We say he is a sorcerer.\" He said, \"He is not a sorcerer.\" They said, \"So what should we say?\" He said, \"By Allah, what he says is as palatable [to the average person] as something sweet, so you cannot say anything against it without it being obviously false. Therefore the most appropriate thing you can say is that he is a sorcerer.\" So they left having agreed upon that, and Allah revealed concerning them:\nالَّذِينَ جَعَلُوا الْقُرْآنَ عِضِينَ\n(Who have made the Qur'an into parts.) meaning, of different types, and\nفَوَرَبِّكَ لَنَسْأَلَنَّهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ - عَمَّا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ\n(So, by your Lord, We shall certainly call all of them to account. For all that they used to do) Those were the group who said that about the Messenger of Allah ﷺ.\"\nفَوَرَبِّكَ لَنَسْأَلَنَّهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ - عَمَّا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ\n(So, by your Lord, We shall certainly call all of them to account. For all that they used to do.) Abu Ja'far reported from Ar-Rabi' that Abu Al-'Aliyah said, \"All the people will be asked about two things on the Day of Resurrection: what they used to worship, and what their response was to the Messengers.\" 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas said,\nفَوَرَبِّكَ لَنَسْأَلَنَّهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ - عَمَّا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ\n(So, by your Lord, We shall certainly call all of them to account. For all that they used to do.) then he said:\nفَيَوْمَئِذٍ لَّا يُسْأَلُ عَن ذَنبِهِ إِنسٌ وَلَا جَانٌّ\n(So on that Day no question will be asked of man or Jinn as to his sin)(55:39). He said, \"They will not be asked, 'Did you do such and such?' Because Allah knows better than they do about that. But He will say, 'Why did you do such and such?'\"","href":"/tafsir/15?verse=89","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:15:94","title":"Ibn Kathir · 15:94–99","text":"Therefore openly proclaim what you have been commanded, and turn away from the idolators (94)Truly, We will suffice you against the mockers (95)Who make another god along with Allah; but they will come to know (96)Indeed, We know that your breast becomes tight because of what they say (97)So glorify the praises of your Lord and be of those who prostrate themselves (to Him)(98)And worship your Lord until the certainty (i.e. death) comes to you (99)\n\n## The Command to proclaim the Truth openly\n\nAllah commanded His Messenger ﷺ to convey what He sent him with, to proclaim and spread the Message, which means confronting the idolators with it. Ibn 'Abbas said that the Ayah,\nفَاصْدَعْ بِمَا تُؤْمَرُ\n(Therefore openly proclaim that what you have been commanded,) means, \"Go ahead with it.\" According to another report it means,\n(افْعَلْ مَا تُؤْمَرُ)\nTherefore proclaim that which you commanded.\" Mujahid said, It is reciting the Qur'an aloud during prayer.\" Abu 'Ubaydah reported that 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud said, \"The Prophet ﷺ was still practicing and preaching Islam secretly until this Ayah was revealed:\nفَاصْدَعْ بِمَا تُؤْمَرُ\n(Therefore openly proclaim that which you are commanded) then he and his Companions came out into the open.\"\n\n## The Command to turn away from the Idolators, and the Guarantee of Protection against the Mockers\n\nAllah's statement,\nوَأَعْرِضْ عَنِ الْمُشْرِكِينَ - إِنَّا كَفَيْنَاكَ الْمُسْتَهْزِئِينَ\n(and turn away from idolators. Truly, We will suffice you against the mockers.) meaning - convey that which has been revealed to you by your Lord, and do not pay attention to the idolators who want to turn you away from the signs of Allah.\nوَدُّوا لَوْ تُدْهِنُ فَيُدْهِنُونَ\n(They wish that you should compromise for them, so that they would compromise for you)(68:9). Do not fear them because Allah will suffice you against them, and He will protect you from them. This is like the Ayah:\nيَا أَيُّهَا الرَّسُولُ بَلِّغْ مَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْكَ مِن رَّبِّكَ ۖ وَإِن لَّمْ تَفْعَلْ فَمَا بَلَّغْتَ رِسَالَتَهُ ۚ وَاللَّهُ يَعْصِمُكَ مِنَ النَّاسِ\n(O Messenger! Proclaim that which has been revealed to you from your Lord. And if you do not do it, then you have not conveyed His Message. Allah will protect you from mankind.)[5:67]\nMuhammad bin Ishaq said: \"The great ones of the mockers were five people, who were elders and noblemen among their people. From Bani Asad bin 'Abd Al-'Uzza bin Qusayy there was Al-Aswad bin Al-Muttalib Abu Zam'ah. According to what I heard, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ had supplicated against him because of the pain and mockery he had suffered at his hands. He ﷺ had said,\nاللَّهُمَّ أَعِمْ بَصَرَهُ، وَأَثْكِلْهُ وَلَدَهُ\n(O Allah, make him blind and take (the life of) his son.) From Bani Zahrah there was Al-Aswad bin 'Abd Yaghuth bin Wahb bin 'Abd Manaf bin Zahrah. From Bani Makhzum there was Al-Walid bin Al-Mughirah bin 'Abdullah bin 'Umar bin Makhzum. From Bani Sahm bin 'Amr bin Husays bin Ka'b bin Lu'ayy there was Al-'As bin Wa'il bin Hisham bin Sa'id bin Sa'd. From Khuza'ah there was Al-Harith bin At-Talatilah bin 'Amr bin Al-Harith bin 'Abd 'Amr bin Malkan. When their evil went to extremes and their mockery of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ went too far, Allah revealed:\nفَاصْدَعْ بِمَا تُؤْمَرُ وَأَعْرِضْ عَنِ الْمُشْرِكِينَ - إِنَّا كَفَيْنَـكَ الْمُسْتَهْزِءِينَ - الَّذِينَ يَجْعَلُونَ مَعَ اللَّهِ إِلـهًا ءَاخَرَ فَسَوْفَ يَعْمَلُونَ\n(Therefore openly proclaim that which you are commanded, and turn away from the idolators. Truly, We will suffice you against the mockers, who make another god along with Allah; but they will come to know.)\nIbn Ishaq said: Yazid bin Ruman told me that 'Urwah bin Az-Zubayr or one of the other scholars said that Jibril came to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ when he was performing Tawaf around the House (the Ka'bah). He stood and the Messenger of Allah ﷺ stood next to him. Al-Aswad Ibn Al-Mutalib passed by, and he threw a green leaf in his face, and he became blind. Al-Aswad bin 'Abd Yaghuth passed by, and he pointed to his stomach, which swelled up and he died (of dropsy). Al-Walid bin Al-Mughirah passed by, and he pointed at a wound on lower of his ankle, which he got two years earlier when He once was trailing his garment and he passed by a man who was feathering his arrows. One of the arrows got caught in his garment and scratched his foot. It was an insignificant wound, but now it opened again and he died of it. Al-'As bin Wa'il passed by, and he pointed to the instep of his foot. He (Al-'As) set off on his donkey, heading for At-Ta'if. He rested by a thorny tree, a thorn pierced his foot and he died from it. Al-Harith bin At-Talatilah passed by and he pointed at his head. It filled with pus and killed him.\"\nالَّذِينَ يَجْعَلُونَ مَعَ اللَّهِ إِلَٰهًا آخَرَ ۚ فَسَوْفَ يَعْلَمُونَ\n(Who make another god along with Allah; but they will come to know.) This is a strong warning and grave threat against those who have other deities along with Allah.\n\n## Encouragement to bear Difficulties, and the Command to glorify and worship Allah until Death\n\nAllah said,\nوَلَقَدْ نَعْلَمُ أَنَّكَ يَضِيقُ صَدْرُكَ بِمَا يَقُولُونَ - فَسَبِّحْ بِحَمْدِ رَبِّكَ وَكُن مِّنَ السَّاجِدِينَ\n(Indeed, We know that your breast becomes tight because of what they say. So glorify the praises of your Lord and be of those who prostrate themselves (to Him).) meaning 'We know, O Muhammad, that you are distressed by their insults towards you, but do not let that weaken your resolve or cause you to give up conveying the Message of Allah. Put your trust in Him, for He will suffice you and will support you against them. Keep yourself busy with remembering Allah, praising Him, glorifying Him, and worshipping Him (which means Salah, or prayer)' Hence Allah says:\nفَسَبِّحْ بِحَمْدِ رَبِّكَ وَكُن مِّنَ السَّاجِدِينَ\n(So glorify the praises of your Lord and be of those who prostrate themselves (to Him)) Imam Ahmad reported from Nu'aym bin Hammar that he heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ say:\nقَالَ اللهُ تَعَالَى يَا ابْنَ آدَمَ! لَا تَعْجَزْ عَنْ أَرْبَعِ رَكَعَاتٍ مِنْ أَوَّلِ النَّهَارِ أَكْفِكَ آخِرَهُ\n(Allah said, \"O son of Adam! It is not too difficult for you to perform four Rak'at at the beginning of the day, (and if you do them,) I will take care of you until the end of it.\")\nوَاعْبُدْ رَبَّكَ حَتَّىٰ يَأْتِيَكَ الْيَقِينُ\n(And worship your Lord until the certainty comes to you)(15:99). Al-Bukhari said: \"Salim said, '(This means) death.'\" This Salim is Salim bin 'Abdullah bin 'Umar. Ibn Jarir also recorded from Salim bin 'Abdullah,\nوَاعْبُدْ رَبَّكَ حَتَّىٰ يَأْتِيَكَ الْيَقِينُ\n(And worship your Lord until the Yaqin comes to you.) He said, \"Death.\" It is reported in the Sahih from Umm Al-'Ala'- one of the women of the Ansar - that when the Messenger of Allah entered upon 'Uthman bin Maz'un after he had died, Umm Al-'Ala' said, \"May the mercy of Allah be upon you, Abu As-Sa'ib. My testimony over you is that Allah has honored you.\" The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nوَمَا يُدْرِيكَ أَنَّ اللهَ أَكْرَمَهُ؟\n(How do you know that Allah has honored him?) I said, \"May my father and mother be sacrificed for you, O Messenger of Allah! If not him, then who else?\" He said,\nأَمَّا هُوَ فَقَدْ جَاءَهُ الْيَقِينُ، وَإِنِّي لَأَرْجُو لَهُ الْخَيْرَ\n(As far as he is concerned, the death has come to him, and I hope for good for him.) This is evidence that the meaning of this Ayah,\nوَاعْبُدْ رَبَّكَ حَتَّىٰ يَأْتِيَكَ الْيَقِينُ\n(And worship your Lord until the certainty comes to you.) is that acts of worship, such as prayer and the like, are obligatory on man so long as his mind is sound, so he should pray according to his best ability. It was reported in Sahih Al-Bukhari from 'Imran bin Husayn that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nصَلِّ قَائِمًا، فَإِنْ لَمْ تَسْتَطِعْ فَقَاعِدًا، فَإِنْ لَمْ تَسْتَطِعْ فَعَلَى جَنْبٍ\n(Pray standing, and if you cannot, then sitting, and if you cannot, then on your side.)\nFrom this we may understand that it is a mistake to interpret Yaqin (the certainty) as Ma'rifah (\"spiritual knowing\") as some of the Sufis do. According to them, when one of them attains the level of Ma'rifah, they consider him to be free of these obligations. This is disbelief, misguidance and ignorance. The Prophets - peace be upon them - and their companions, were the most knowledgeable of people about Allah, about His rights, His attributes, and the glorification that He deserves. But at the same time, they were the people who worshipped Him the most, continuing in good deeds until the time they died. Therefore, what is meant by Yaqin here is death, as we have stated above.\nTo Allah be praise and thanks. Praise be to Allah for His guidance. It is to Him that we turn for help and it is in Him that we put our trust. He is the One Whom we ask to help us to reach the best of circumstances, for He is the Most Generous and Kind.\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Al-Hijr. Praise be to Allah, the Lord of all that exists.","href":"/tafsir/15?verse=94","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:1","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nأَتَىٰ أَمْرُ اللَّهِ فَلَا تَسْتَعْجِلُوهُ ۚ سُبْحَانَهُ وَتَعَالَىٰ عَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ\n(1. The Event ordained by Allah has indeed come, so do not seek to hasten it. Glorified and Exalted be He above all that they associate as partners with Him.)\n\n## Warning about the approach of the Hour\n\nAllah is informing about the approach of the Hour in the past tense [in Arabic] in order to confirm that it will undoubtedly come to pass. This is like the following Ayat, in which the verbs appear in the past tense in Arabic:\nاقْتَرَبَ لِلنَّاسِ حِسَابُهُمْ وَهُمْ فِي غَفْلَةٍ مُّعْرِضُونَ\n(Mankind's reckoning has drawn near them, while they turn away in heedlessness.)[21:1]\nاقْتَرَبَتِ السَّاعَةُ وَانشَقَّ الْقَمَرُ\n(The Hour has drawn near, and the moon has been cleft.)[54:1]\nفَلَا تَسْتَعْجِلُوهُ\n(so do not seek to hasten it.) means, what was far is now near, so do not try to rush it. As Allah said,\nوَيَسْتَعْجِلُونَكَ بِالْعَذَابِ ۚ وَلَوْلَا أَجَلٌ مُّسَمًّى لَّجَاءَهُمُ الْعَذَابُ وَلَيَأْتِيَنَّهُم بَغْتَةً وَهُمْ لَا يَشْعُرُونَ - يَسْتَعْجِلُونَكَ بِالْعَذَابِ وَإِنَّ جَهَنَّمَ لَمُحِيطَةٌ بِالْكَافِرِينَ\n(And they ask you to hasten the torment (for them), and had it not been for a term appointed, the torment would certainly have come to them. And surely, it will come upon them suddenly while they are unaware! They ask you to hasten on the torment. And verily! Hell, of a surety, will encompass the disbelievers)(29:53-54).\nIbn Abi Hatim reported from 'Uqbah bin 'Amir that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nتَطْلُعُ عَلَيْكُمْ عِنْدَ السَّاعَةِ سَحَابَةٌ سَوْدَاءُ مِنَ الْمَغْرِبِ مِثْلَ التُّرْسِ، فَمَا تَزَالُ تَرْتَفِعُ فِي السَّمَاءِ ثُمَّ يُنَادِي مُنَادٍ فِيهَا: يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ! فَيُقْبِلُ النَّاسُ بَعْضُهُمْ عَلَى بَعْضٍ: هَلْ سَمِعْتُمْ، فَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ يَقُولُ: نَعَمْ، وَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ يَشُكُّ، ثُمَّ يُنَادِي الثَّانِيَةَ: يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ! فَيَقُولُ النَّاسُ بَعْضُهُمْ لِبَعْضٍ: هَلْ سَمِعْتُمْ، فَيَقُولُونَ: نَعَمْ، ثُمَّ يُنَادِي الثَّالِثَةَ: يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ! أَتَى أَمْرُ اللهِ فَلَا تَسْتَعْجِلُوهُ\n(When the Hour approaches, a black cloud resembling a shield will emerge upon from the west. It will continue rising in the sky, then a voice will call out, 'O mankind!' The people will say to one another, 'Did you hear that?' Some will say, 'yes', but others will doubt it. Then a second call will come, 'O mankind!' The people will say to one another, 'Did you hear that?' And they will say, 'Yes.' Then a third call will come, 'O mankind!' The Event ordained by Allah has indeed come, so do not seek to hasten it.')\nThe Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nفَوَ الَّذِي نَفْسِي بِيَدِهِ، إِنَّ الرَّجُلَيْنِ لَيَنْشُرَانِ الثَّوبَ فَمَا يَطْوِيَانِهِ أَبَدًا، وَإِنَّ الرَّجُلَ لَيَمُدَّنَّ حَوْضَهُ فَمَا يَسْقِي فِيهِ شَيْئًا أَبَدًا، وَإِنَّ الرَّجُلَ لَيَحْلُبُ نَاقَتَهُ فَمَا يَشْرِبُهُ أَبَدًا - قَالَ - وَيَشْتَغِلُ النَّاسُ\n(By the One in Whose Hand is my soul, two men will spread out a cloth, but will never refold it; a man will prepare his trough, but will never water his animals from it; and a man will milk his camel, but will never drink the milk.\" Then he said, \"The people will be distracted.\")\nThen Allah tells us that He is free from their allegations of partners to their worship of idols, and making equals for Him. Glorified and exalted be He far above that. These are the people who deny the Hour, so He says:\nسُبْحَانَهُ وَتَعَالَىٰ عَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ\n(Glorified and Exalted be He above all that they associate as partners with Him.)","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:2","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:2","text":"He sends down the angels with the Ruh (revelation) of His command to those servants of His whom He wills (saying): \"Warn mankind that none has the right to be worshipped but I, so have Taqwa of Me. (2)\n\n## Allah sends Whomever He wills with the Message of Tawhid\n\nيُنَزِّلُ الْمَلَائِكَةَ بِالرُّوحِ\n(He sends down the angels with the Ruh) refers to the revelation. This is like the Ayat:\nوَكَذَٰلِكَ أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْكَ رُوحًا مِّنْ أَمْرِنَا ۚ مَا كُنتَ تَدْرِي مَا الْكِتَابُ وَلَا الْإِيمَانُ وَلَٰكِن جَعَلْنَاهُ نُورًا نَّهْدِي بِهِ مَن نَّشَاءُ مِنْ عِبَادِنَا\n(And thus We have sent to you a Ruh (revelation) by Our command. You knew not what is the Book, nor what is the faith. But We have made it a light by which We guide whomever We will among Our servants.)[42:52]\nعَلَىٰ مَن يَشَاءُ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ\n(to those servants of His whom He wills) meaning the Prophets, as Allah says:\nاللَّهُ أَعْلَمُ حَيْثُ يَجْعَلُ رِسَالَتَهُ\n(Allah best knows where to place His Message.)[6:124]\nاللَّهُ يَصْطَفِي مِنَ الْمَلَائِكَةِ رُسُلًا وَمِنَ النَّاسِ\n(Allah chooses Messengers from angels and from men.)[22:75]\nيُلْقِي الرُّوحَ مِنْ أَمْرِهِ عَلَىٰ مَن يَشَاءُ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ لِيُنذِرَ يَوْمَ التَّلَاقِ - يَوْمَ هُم بَارِزُونَ ۖ لَا يَخْفَىٰ عَلَى اللَّهِ مِنْهُمْ شَيْءٌ ۚ لِّمَنِ الْمُلْكُ الْيَوْمَ ۖ لِلَّهِ الْوَاحِدِ الْقَهَّارِ\n(He sends the Ruh (revelation) by His command to whoever among His servants He wills to, that he may warn of the Day of Meeting. The Day when they will (all) come out, nothing about them will be hidden from Allah. Whose is the kingdom this Day? It is Allah's, the One, the Irresistible!)(40:15-16)\nأَنْ أَنذِرُوا\n((saying): \"Warn...\") meaning that they should alert them.\nأَنَّهُ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا أَنَا فَاتَّقُونِ\n(that none has the right to be worshipped but I, so have Taqwa of Me.) means, 'fear My punishment, if you go against My commands and worship anything other than Me.'","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=2","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:3","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:3–4","text":"He has created the heavens and the earth with truth. High is He, Exalted above all that they associate as partners with Him (3)He has created man from a Nutfah, then behold, this same (man) becomes an open opponent (4)\n\n## Allah is the One Who has created the Heavens, the Earth, and Man\n\nAllah tells us about His creation of the upper realm, which is the heavens, and the lower realm, which is the earth, and everything in them. They have been created for a true purpose, not in vain, so that\nلِيَجْزِيَ الَّذِينَ أَسَاءُوا بِمَا عَمِلُوا وَيَجْزِيَ الَّذِينَ أَحْسَنُوا بِالْحُسْنَى\n(He may requite those who do evil with that which they have done (i.e. punish them in Hell), and reward those who do good, with what is best (i.e. Paradise).)[53:31]\nThen He declares Himself to be above the Shirk of those who worship others besides Him. He is independent of His creation, alone with no partner or associate. For this reason He deserves to be worshipped Alone, without partners. Then He mentions how man has been created from a Nutfah, i.e., something that is insignificant, weak and has no value - but when man becomes independent and is able to fend for himself - then he begins to dispute with his Lord, may He be exalted, and disbelieves in Him and fights His Messengers. But man was created to be a servant, not an opponent, as Allah says:\nوَهُوَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ مِنَ الْمَاءِ بَشَرًا فَجَعَلَهُ نَسَبًا وَصِهْرًا ۗ وَكَانَ رَبُّكَ قَدِيرًا - وَيَعْبُدُونَ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ مَا لَا يَنفَعُهُمْ وَلَا يَضُرُّهُمْ ۗ وَكَانَ الْكَافِرُ عَلَىٰ رَبِّهِ ظَهِيرًا\n(And it is He Who has created man from water, and gave him descendants, and made Him kindred by marriage, and your Lord is capable (of all things). And they worship besides Allah, that which can neither profit them nor harm them; and the disbeliever is ever a helper (of Shaytan) against his Lord)(25:54-55). And;\nأَوَلَمْ يَرَ الْإِنسَانُ أَنَّا خَلَقْنَاهُ مِن نُّطْفَةٍ فَإِذَا هُوَ خَصِيمٌ مُّبِينٌ - وَضَرَبَ لَنَا مَثَلًا وَنَسِيَ خَلْقَهُ ۖ قَالَ مَن يُحْيِي الْعِظَامَ وَهِيَ رَمِيمٌ - قُلْ يُحْيِيهَا الَّذِي أَنشَأَهَا أَوَّلَ مَرَّةٍ ۖ وَهُوَ بِكُلِّ خَلْقٍ عَلِيمٌ\n(Does not man see that We have created him from Nutfah. Yet, behold he stands as an open opponent. And he puts forth for Us a parable, and forgets his own creation. He says: \"Who will give life to these bones after they are rotten and have become dust?\" Say: \"He will give life to them Who created them the first time! And He is the knower of every creature!\")(36:77-79).\nImam Ahmad and Ibn Majah reported that Busr bin Jahhash said: \"The Messenger of Allah spat in his palm, then he said,\nيَقُولُ اللهُ تَعَالَى: ابْنَ آدَمَ أَنَّى تُعْجِزُنِي وَقَدْ خَلَقْتُكَ مِنْ مِثْلِ هَذِهِ، حَتَّى إِذَا سَوَّيْتُكَ فَعَدَلْتُكَ مَشَيْتَ بَيْنَ بُرْدَيْكَ وَلِلْأَرْضِ مِنْكَ وَئِيدٌ، فَجَمَعْتَ وَمَنَعْتَ حَتَّى إِذَا بَلَغَتِ الْحُلْقُومَ قُلْتَ: أَتَصَدَّقُ، وَأَنَّى أَوَانُ الصَّدَقَةِ\n(Allah, may He be exalted, says: \"O son of Adam, how could you be more powerful than I when I have created you from something like this, and when I have fashioned you perfectly and made you complete, you walk wearing your two garments and the earth makes a sound (beneath your feet). You collect money but do not give anything to anyone, then when the soul of a dying person reaches the throat, you say, 'I want to give in charity', but it is too late for charity.\")","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=3","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:5","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:5–7","text":"And the cattle, He has created them for you; in them there is warmth (warm clothing), and numerous benefits, and you eat from them (5)And there is beauty in them for you, when you bring them home in the evening, and as you lead them forth to pasture (in the morning)(6)And they carry your loads to a land that you could not reach yourselves except with great trouble. Truly, your Lord is full of kindness, Most Merciful (7)\n\n## The Cattle are part of the Creation of Allah and a Blessing from Him\n\nAllah reminds His servants of the blessing in His creation of An'am, this term includes camels, cows and sheep, as was explained in detail in Surat Al-An'am where the \"eight pairs\" are mentioned. The blessings include the benefits derived from their wool and hair, from which clothes and furnishings are made, from their milk which is drunk, and their young which are eaten. Their beauty is a kind of adornment, thus Allah says,\nوَلَكُمْ فِيهَا جَمَالٌ حِينَ تُرِيحُونَ\n(And there is beauty in them for you, when you bring them home in the evening.) which is when they are brought back from the pasture in the evening. This is a reference to how their flanks become fat, their udders fill with milk and their humps become bigger.\nوَحِينَ تَسْرَحُونَ\n(and as you lead them forth to pasture (in the morning).) meaning when you send them out to the pasture in the morning.\nوَتَحْمِلُ أَثْقَالَكُمْ\n(And they carry your loads) meaning the heavy burdens that you cannot move or carry by yourselves\nإِلَىٰ بَلَدٍ لَّمْ تَكُونُوا بَالِغِيهِ إِلَّا بِشِقِّ الْأَنفُسِ\n(to a land that you could not reach except with great trouble to yourselves) meaning journeys for Hajj, 'Umrah, military campaigns, and journeys for the purpose of trading, and so on. They use these animals for all kinds of purposes, for riding and for carrying loads, as Allah says:\nوَإِنَّ لَكُمْ فِي الْأَنْعَامِ لَعِبْرَةً ۖ نُّسْقِيكُم مِّمَّا فِي بُطُونِهَا وَلَكُمْ فِيهَا مَنَافِعُ كَثِيرَةٌ وَمِنْهَا تَأْكُلُونَ - وَعَلَيْهَا وَعَلَى الْفُلْكِ تُحْمَلُونَ\n(And verily, there is indeed a lesson for you in the An'am (cattle). We give you to drink (milk) of that which is in their bellies. And there are numerous (other) benefits in them for you. Of them you eat, and on them and on ships you are carried.)(23:21-22)\nاللَّهُ الَّذِي جَعَلَ لَكُمُ الْأَنْعَامَ لِتَرْكَبُوا مِنْهَا وَمِنْهَا تَأْكُلُونَ - وَلَكُمْ فِيهَا مَنَافِعُ وَلِتَبْلُغُوا عَلَيْهَا حَاجَةً فِي صُدُورِكُمْ وَعَلَيْهَا وَعَلَى الْفُلْكِ تُحْمَلُونَ - وَيُرِيكُمْ آيَاتِهِ فَأَيَّ آيَاتِ اللَّهِ تُنكِرُونَ\n(Allah, it is He Who has made cattle for you, so that some you may ride, and some you may eat. And you find (many other) benefits in them; you may reach by their means a desire that is in your breasts (i.e. carry your goods, loads), and on them and on ships you are carried. And He shows you His Ayat. Which, then of the Ayat of Allah do you deny?)(40:79-81).\nThus here Allah says, after enumerating these blessings,\nإِنَّ رَبَّكُمْ لَرَءُوفٌ رَّحِيمٌ\n(Truly, your Lord is full of kindness, Most Merciful.) meaning, your Lord is the One Who has subjugated the An'am (cattle) to you. This is like the Ayat:\nأَوَلَمْ يَرَوْا أَنَّا خَلَقْنَا لَهُم مِّمَّا عَمِلَتْ أَيْدِينَا أَنْعَامًا فَهُمْ لَهَا مَالِكُونَ - وَذَلَّلْنَاهَا لَهُمْ فَمِنْهَا رَكُوبُهُمْ وَمِنْهَا يَأْكُلُونَ\n(Do they not see, that of what Our Hands have created, We created the An'am (cattle) for them, so that they may own them, and We subdued them so that they may ride some and they may eat some.)(36:71-72).\nوَجَعَلَ لَكُم مِّنَ الْفُلْكِ وَالْأَنْعَامِ مَا تَرْكَبُونَ - لِتَسْتَوُوا عَلَىٰ ظُهُورِهِ ثُمَّ تَذْكُرُوا نِعْمَةَ رَبِّكُمْ إِذَا اسْتَوَيْتُمْ عَلَيْهِ وَتَقُولُوا سُبْحَانَ الَّذِي سَخَّرَ لَنَا هَٰذَا وَمَا كُنَّا لَهُ مُقْرِنِينَ - وَإِنَّا إِلَىٰ رَبِّنَا لَمُنقَلِبُونَ\n(And He made mounts for you out of ships and cattle. In order that you may ride on their backs, and may then remember the favor of your Lord when you mount upon them, and say: \"Glory be to the One Who subjected this to us, and we could never have it (by our efforts). And verily, to Our Lord we indeed are to return!\")(43:12-14) Ibn 'Abbas said,\nلَكُمْ فِيهَا دِفْءٌ\n(In them there is warmth) refers to clothing;\nوَمَنَافِعُ\n(and numerous benefits) refers to the ways in which they derive the benefits of food and drink from them.\"","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=5","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:8","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:8","text":"And (He has created) horses, mules and donkeys for you to ride, and as an adornment. And He creates (other) things of which you have no knowledge (8)\n\n## This refers to another category of animals that Allah has created as a blessing for His servants,horses,mules and donkeys,all of which He made for riding and adornment.\n\nThis is the main purpose for which these animals were created. It was reported in the Two Sahihs that Jabir bin 'Abdullah said: \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ forbade us to eat the meat of domestic donkeys, but he allowed us to eat the meat of horses.\"\nImam Ahmad and Abu Dawud reported with two chains of narration, each of which meet the conditions of Muslim, that Jabir said: \"On the day of Khaybar we slaughtered horses, mules and donkeys. The Messenger of Allah ﷺ forbade us from eating the mules and donkeys, but he did not forbid us from eating the horses.\"\nAccording to Sahih Muslim, Asma' bint Abi Bakr (may Allah be pleased with them both) said: \"At the time of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ we slaughtered a horse and ate it when we were in Al-Madinah.\"","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=8","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:9","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:9","text":"And it is up to Allah to show the right way. But there are ways that stray. And had He willed, He would have guided you all (9)\n\n## Explanation of the Different Religious Paths\n\nWhen Allah mentioned the animals which may be used for the purpose of physical journeys, He also referred to the moral, religious routes that people may follow. Often in the Qur'an there is a shift from physical or tangible things to beneficial spiritual and religious matters, as when Allah says,\nوَتَزَوَّدُوا فَإِنَّ خَيْرَ الزَّادِ التَّقْوَىٰ\n(And take a provision (with you) for the journey, but the best provision is Taqwa (piety, righteousness).)[2:197] And,\nيَا بَنِي آدَمَ قَدْ أَنزَلْنَا عَلَيْكُمْ لِبَاسًا يُوَارِي سَوْآتِكُمْ وَرِيشًا ۖ وَلِبَاسُ التَّقْوَىٰ ذَٰلِكَ خَيْرٌ\n(O Children of Adam! We have granted clothing for you to cover yourselves, as well as for adornment; but the raiment of righteousness, that is better.)[7:26]\nSince Allah mentioned cattle and other such animals in this Surah, all of which are ridden or can be used in any way necessary, carrying people's necessities for them to distant places and on difficult journeys - then He mentions the ways which people follow to try to reach Him, and explains that the right way is the one that does reach Him. He says:\nوَعَلَى اللَّهِ قَصْدُ السَّبِيلِ\n(And it is up to Allah to show the right way.) This is like the Ayat,\nوَأَنَّ هَٰذَا صِرَاطِي مُسْتَقِيمًا فَاتَّبِعُوهُ ۖ وَلَا تَتَّبِعُوا السُّبُلَ فَتَفَرَّقَ بِكُمْ عَن سَبِيلِهِ\n(And verily, this is My straight path, so follow it, and do not follow the (other) paths, for they will separate you away from His path.)[6:153] and,\nقَالَ هَٰذَا صِرَاطٌ عَلَيَّ مُسْتَقِيمٌ\n((Allah) said: \"This is the way which will lead straight to Me.\")(15:41)\nوَعَلَى اللَّهِ قَصْدُ السَّبِيلِ\n(And it is up to Allah to show the right way.) Mujahid said: \"The true way is up to Allah.\"\nوَعَلَى اللَّهِ قَصْدُ السَّبِيلِ\n(And it is up to Allah to show the right way.) Al-'Awfi said that Ibn 'Abbas said: \"It is up to Allah to clarify, to explain the guidance and misguidance.\" This was also reported by 'Ali bin Abi Talhah, and was also the opinion of Qatadah and Ad-Dahhak. Hence Allah said:\nوَمِنْهَا جَائِرٌ\n(But there are ways that stray.) meaning they deviate from the truth. Ibn 'Abbas and others said: \"These are the different ways,\" and various opinions and whims, such as Judaism, Christianity and Zoroastrianism. Ibn Mas'ud recited it as\n(وَمِنْكُمْ جَائِرٌ)\nBut among you are those who stray. \" Then Allah tells us that all of that happens by His will and decree. He says:\nوَلَوْ شَاءَ لَهَدَاكُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ\n(And had He willed, He would have guided you all.) And Allah says:\nوَلَوْ شَاءَ رَبُّكَ لَآمَنَ مَن فِي الْأَرْضِ كُلُّهُمْ جَمِيعًا\n(If your Lord had willed, then all who are in the earth would have believed.)[10:99]\nوَلَوْ شَاءَ رَبُّكَ لَجَعَلَ النَّاسَ أُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً ۖ وَلَا يَزَالُونَ مُخْتَلِفِينَ - إِلَّا مَن رَّحِمَ رَبُّكَ ۚ وَلِذَٰلِكَ خَلَقَهُمْ ۗ وَتَمَّتْ كَلِمَةُ رَبِّكَ لَأَمْلَأَنَّ جَهَنَّمَ مِنَ الْجِنَّةِ وَالنَّاسِ أَجْمَعِينَ\n(And if your Lord had so willed, He could surely, have made humanity one Ummah, but they will not stop disagreeing. Except those for whom your Lord has granted mercy. And it is for this that He did create them; and the Word of your Lord has been fulfilled (i.e. His saying): \"Surely, I shall fill Hell with Jinn and men all together.\")(11:118-119).","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=9","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:10","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:10–11","text":"He it is Who sends water down from the sky; from it you drink and from it (grows) the vegetation on which you send your cattle to pasture (10)With it He causes crops to grow for you, the olives, the date palms, the grapes, and every kind of fruit. Verily, in this there is indeed an evident proof and a manifest sign for people who give thought (11)\n\n## The Blessings of Rain, and explaining how it is one of the Signs\n\nWhen Allah mentions the blessings of cattle and other animals that He has granted mankind, He then mentions how He has blessed them by sending rain down from the sky above, which has been fulfilling the needs and bringing joy to people and their cattle. Allah says:\nلَّكُم مِّنْهُ شَرَابٌ\n(from it you drink) meaning, He made it fresh and pure so that they can drink it, not salty and undrinkable.\nوَمِنْهُ شَجَرٌ فِيهِ تُسِيمُونَ\n(and from it (grows) the vegetation on which you send your cattle to pasture.) meaning, from it He raised plants on which your cattle graze. Ibn 'Abbas, 'Ikrimah, Ad-Dahhak, Qatadah and Ibn Zayd, all said that this refers to grazing animals including camels.\nيُنبِتُ لَكُم بِهِ الزَّرْعَ وَالزَّيْتُونَ وَالنَّخِيلَ وَالْأَعْنَابَ وَمِن كُلِّ الثَّمَرَاتِ\n(With it He causes crops to grow for you, olives, date palms, grapes, and every kind of fruit.) meaning, with this one kind of water, He makes the earth sprout plants with different tastes, colors, scents and shapes. For this reason He says,\nإِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً لِّقَوْمٍ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ\n(Verily, in this there is indeed an evident proof and a manifest sign for people who give thought.) meaning, this is a sign and a proof that there is no god besides Allah, as He says:\nأَمَّنْ خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ وَأَنزَلَ لَكُم مِّنَ السَّمَاءِ مَاءً فَأَنبَتْنَا بِهِ حَدَائِقَ ذَاتَ بَهْجَةٍ مَّا كَانَ لَكُمْ أَن تُنبِتُوا شَجَرَهَا ۗ أَإِلَٰهٌ مَّعَ اللَّهِ ۚ بَلْ هُمْ قَوْمٌ يَعْدِلُونَ\n(Is not He (better than your gods) Who created the heavens and the earth, and sends water down for you from the sky, from which We cause wonderful gardens full of beauty and delight to grow? You are not able to cause the growth of their trees. Is there any ilah (god) with Allah? Nay, but they are a people who make equals (to Him)!)(27:60).","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=10","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:12","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:12–13","text":"And He has subjected the night and the day for you, and the sun and the moon; and the stars are subjected by His command. Surely, in this are proofs for people who understand (12)And all He has created of varying colors on the earth for you. Verily, in this is a sign for people who reflect (13)\n\n## Signs in the Subjection of Night and Day, the Sun and the Moon, and in that which grows on Earth\n\nAllah mentions the mighty signs and immense blessings to be found in His subjection of night and day, which follow one another; the sun and moon, which revolve; the stars, both fixed and moving through the skies, offering light by which people may find their way in the darkness. Each of (these heavenly bodies) travels in its own orbit, which Allah has ordained for it, and travels in the manner prescribed for it, without deviating in any way. All of them are under His subjugation, His control and His decree, as Allah says:\nإِنَّ رَبَّكُمُ اللَّهُ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ فِي سِتَّةِ أَيَّامٍ ثُمَّ اسْتَوَىٰ عَلَى الْعَرْشِ يُغْشِي اللَّيْلَ النَّهَارَ يَطْلُبُهُ حَثِيثًا وَالشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ وَالنُّجُومَ مُسَخَّرَاتٍ بِأَمْرِهِ ۗ أَلَا لَهُ الْخَلْقُ وَالْأَمْرُ ۗ تَبَارَكَ اللَّهُ رَبُّ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(Indeed, your Lord is Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth in Six Days, and then He rose (Istawa) over the Throne. He brings the night as a cover over the day, seeking it rapidly, and (He created) the sun, the moon, the stars (all) subjected to His command. Surely, His is the creation and commandment. Blessed is Allah, the Lord of all that exists!)(7:54) Thus Allah says;\nإِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِّقَوْمٍ يَعْقِلُونَ\n(Surely, in this are proofs for people who understand.) meaning, they are indications of His immense power and might, for those who think about Allah and understand His signs.\nوَمَا ذَرَأَ لَكُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ مُخْتَلِفًا أَلْوَانُهُ\n(And whatsoever He has created of varying colors on the earth for you.) When Allah points out the features of the skies, He also points out the wondrous things that He has created on earth, the variety of its animals, minerals, plants and inanimate features, all having different colors and shapes, benefits and qualities.\nإِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً لِّقَوْمٍ يَذَّكَّرُونَ\n(Verily, in this is a sign for people who reflect.) meaning (those who remember) the blessings of Allah and give thanks to Him for them.","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=12","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:14","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:14–18","text":"And He it is Who subjected the sea (to you), that you may eat from the fresh tender meat, and that you bring forth out of it ornaments to wear. And you see the ships plowing through it, that you may seek from His bounty and that you may perhaps be grateful (14)And He has driven firm standing mountains into the earth, lest it should shake with you; and rivers and roads, that you may guide yourselve (15)And (by the) landmarks; and by the stars, they guide themselves (16)Is then He Who creates the same as one who creates, not Will you not then reflect (17)And if you would try to count the favors of Allah, you would never be able to count them. Truly, Allah is Forgiving, Most Merciful (18)\n\n## Signs in the Oceans, Mountains, Rivers, Roads and Stars\n\nAllah tells us how He has subjected the seas, with their waves lapping the shores, and how He blesses His servants by subjecting the seas for them so that they may travel on them, and by putting fish and whales in them, by making their flesh permissible to eat - whether they are caught alive or dead - at all times, including when people are in a state of Ihram. He has created pearls and precious jewels in the oceans, and made it easy for His servants to recover ornaments that they can wear from the ocean floor. He made the sea such that it carries the ships which plow through it. He is the One Who taught mankind to make ships, which is the inheritance of their forefather Nuh. He was the first one to travel by ship, he was taught how to make them, then people took this knowledge from him and passed it down from generation to generation through the centuries, so that they could travel from country to country and from place to place, bringing goods from here to there and from there to here. Thus Allah says:\nوَلِتَبْتَغُوا مِن فَضْلِهِ وَلَعَلَّكُمْ تَشْكُرُونَ\n(that you may seek from His bounty and that you may perhaps be grateful.) - for His bounty and blessings. Then Allah mentions the earth and how He placed in it mountains standing firm, which make it stable and keep it from shaking in such a manner that the creatures dwelling on it would not be able to live. Hence Allah says,\nوَالْجِبَالَ أَرْسَاهَا\n(And the mountains He has fixed firmly.)(79:32).\nوَأَنْهَارًا وَسُبُلًا\n(and rivers and roads) meaning He has made rivers which flow from one place to another, bringing provision for His servants. The rivers arise in one place, and bring provision to people living in another place. They flow through lands and fields and wildernesses, through mountains and hills, until they reach the land whose people they are meant to benefit. They meander across the land, left and right, north and south, east and west - rivers great and small - flowing sometimes and ceasing sometimes, flowing from their sources to the places where the water gathers, flowing rapidly or moving slowly, as decreed by Allah. There is no god besides Him and no Lord except Him. He also made roads or routes along which people travel from one land or city to another, and He even made gaps in the mountains so that there would be routes between them, as He says:\nوَجَعَلْنَا فِيهَا فِجَاجًا سُبُلًا\n(And We placed broad highways for them to pass through.)[21:31]\nوَعَلَامَاتٍ\n(And landmarks) meaning, signs like great mountains and small hills, and so on, things that land and sea travelers use to find their way if they get lost.\nوَبِالنَّجْمِ هُمْ يَهْتَدُونَ\n(and by the stars (during the night), they (mankind) guide themselves.) meaning, in the darkness of the night. This was the opinion of Ibn 'Abbas.\n\n## Worship is Allah's Right\n\nThen Allah tells us of His greatness, and that worship should be directed to Him alone, not to any of the idols which do not create but are rather themselves created. Thus He says\nأَفَمَن يَخْلُقُ كَمَن لَّا يَخْلُقُ ۗ أَفَلَا تَذَكَّرُونَ\n(Is then He, Who creates, the same as one who does not create Will you not then reflect?)(16:17).\nThen He shows His servants some of the many blessings He granted for them, and the many kinds of things that He has done for them. He says;\nوَإِن تَعُدُّوا نِعْمَةَ اللَّهِ لَا تُحْصُوهَا ۗ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَغَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ\n(And if you would try to count the favors of Allah, you would never be able to count them. Truly, Allah is Forgiving, Most Merciful.)(16:18)\nmeaning that He pardons and forgives them. If He were to ask you to thank Him for all of His blessings, you would not be able to do so, and if He were to command you to do so, you would be incapable of it. If He punishes you, He is never unjust in His punishment, but He is Forgiving and Most Merciful, He forgives much and rewards for little. Ibn Jarir said: \"It means that Allah is Forgiving when you fail to thank Him properly, if you repent and turn to Him in obedience, and strive to do that which pleases Him. He is Merciful to you and does not punish you if you turn to Him and repent.\"","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=14","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:19","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:19–21","text":"And Allah knows what you conceal and what you reveal (19)Those whom they invoke besides Allah have not created anything, but are themselves created (20)(They are) dead, not alive; and they do not know when they will be resurrected (21)\nAllah tells us that He knows what is hidden in people's hearts as well as what is apparent. He will reward or punish everyone for their deeds on the Day of Resurrection. If their deeds are good then they will be rewarded, and if their deeds are evil, then they will be punished.\n\n## The gods of the Idolators are Created, they do not create\n\nThen Allah tells us that the idols which people call on instead of Him cannot create anything, they are themselves created, as Al-Khalil (Ibrahim) said:\nأَتَعْبُدُونَ مَا تَنْحِتُونَ - وَاللَّهُ خَلَقَكُمْ وَمَا تَعْمَلُونَ\n(\"Do you worship that which you (yourselves) carve? While Allah has created you and what you make!\")(37:95-96)\nأَمْوَاتٌ غَيْرُ أَحْيَاءٍ\n((They are) dead, not alive) means, they are inanimate and lifeless, they do not hear, see, or think.\nوَمَا يَشْعُرُونَ أَيَّانَ يُبْعَثُونَ\n(and they know not when they will be resurrected.) meaning, they do not know when the Hour will come, so how can anyone hope for any benefit or reward from these idols They should hope for it from the One Who knows all things and is the Creator of all things.","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=19","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:22","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:22–23","text":"Your god is one God. But for those who believe not in the Hereafter, their hearts are in denial, and they are proud (22)Certainly, Allah knows what they conceal and what they reveal. Truly, He does not like the proud (23)\n\n## None is to be worshipped except Allah\n\nAllah tells us that there is none to be worshipped besides Him, the One, the Unique, the Lone, the Self-Sufficient. He tells us that the hearts of the disbelievers deny that and are astonished by that:\nأَجَعَلَ الْآلِهَةَ إِلَٰهًا وَاحِدًا ۖ إِنَّ هَٰذَا لَشَيْءٌ عُجَابٌ\n(\"Has he made the gods (all) into One God?! Verily, this is a curious thing!\")(38:5).\nوَإِذَا ذُكِرَ اللَّهُ وَحْدَهُ اشْمَأَزَّتْ قُلُوبُ الَّذِينَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالْآخِرَةِ ۖ وَإِذَا ذُكِرَ الَّذِينَ مِن دُونِهِ إِذَا هُمْ يَسْتَبْشِرُونَ\n(And when Allah alone is mentioned, the hearts of those who do not believe in the Hereafter are filled with disgust, and when those besides Him are mentioned, behold, they rejoice!)(39:45).\nوَهُم مُّسْتَكْبِرُونَ\n(and they are proud) meaning they are too proud to worship Allah, and their hearts reject the idea of singling Him out, as Allah says:\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ عَنْ عِبَادَتِي سَيَدْخُلُونَ جَهَنَّمَ دَاخِرِينَ\n(Verily! Those who scorn My worship they will surely enter Hell in humiliation!)[40:60] So here, Allah says;\nلَا جَرَمَ\n(Certainly), meaning truly,\nأَنَّ اللَّهَ يَعْلَمُ مَا يُسِرُّونَ وَمَا يُعْلِنُونَ\n(Allah knows what they conceal and what they reveal.) meaning He will requite them for that in full.\nإِنَّهُ لَا يُحِبُّ الْمُسْتَكْبِرِينَ\n(Truly, He does not like the proud.)","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=22","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:24","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:24–25","text":"And when it is said to them: \"What is it that your Lord has revealed?\" They say: \"Tales of the men of old! (24)They will bear their own burdens in full on the Day of Resurrection, and also the burdens of those whom they misled without knowledge. Evil indeed is that which they shall bear (25)\n\n## The Destruction of the Disbelievers and Intensification of their Punishment for rejecting the Revelation\n\nAllah informs us that when it is said to those liars,\nمَّاذَا أَنزَلَ رَبُّكُمْ ۙ قَالُوا\n(\"What is it that your Lord has revealed?\" They say,) not wanting to answer,\nأَسَاطِيرُ الْأَوَّلِينَ\n(\"Tales of the men of old!\") meaning nothing is revealed to him, what he is reciting to us is just tales of the men of old, taken from the previous Books. As Allah says,\nوَقَالُوا أَسَاطِيرُ الْأَوَّلِينَ اكْتَتَبَهَا فَهِيَ تُمْلَىٰ عَلَيْهِ بُكْرَةً وَأَصِيلًا\n(And they say: \"Tales of the ancients, which he has written down, and they are dictated to him morning and afternoon.\")(25:5) i.e., they tell lies against the Messenger ﷺ and say things contradicting one another, but all of it is false, as Allah says,\nانظُرْ كَيْفَ ضَرَبُوا لَكَ الْأَمْثَالَ فَضَلُّوا فَلَا يَسْتَطِيعُونَ سَبِيلًا\n(Look at the parables they make of you, so they have gone astray, and they are not able to find the right way.)(17:48)\nOnce they have gone beyond the bounds of the truth, whatever they say will be in error. They used to say that he (the Prophet ﷺ) was a sorcerer, a poet, a soothsayer, or a madman, then they settled on an idea proposed by their leader, an individual known as Al-Walid bin Al-Mughirah Al-Makhzumi, when:\nفَكَّرَ وَقَدَّرَ - فَقُتِلَ كَيْفَ قَدَّرَ - ثُمَّ قُتِلَ كَيْفَ قَدَّرَ - ثُمَّ نَظَرَ - ثُمَّ عَبَسَ وَبَسَرَ - ثُمَّ أَدْبَرَ وَاسْتَكْبَرَ - فَقَالَ إِنْ هَٰذَا إِلَّا سِحْرٌ يُؤْثَرُ\n(He thought, and plotted. So let him be cursed, how he plotted! And once more let him be cursed, how he plotted! Then he thought. Then he frowned and he looked in a bad tempered way; then he turned back, and was proud. Then he said: \"This is nothing but the magic of old.\")(74:18-24) meaning something that had been transmitted and passed down. So they dispersed having agreed on this opinion, may Allah punish them.\nلِيَحْمِلُوا أَوْزَارَهُمْ كَامِلَةً يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ ۙ وَمِنْ أَوْزَارِ الَّذِينَ يُضِلُّونَهُم بِغَيْرِ عِلْمٍ\n(They will bear their own burdens in full on the Day of Resurrection, and also of the burdens of those whom they misled without knowledge.) meaning, 'We decreed that they would say that, so they will carry the burden of their own sins and some of the burden of those who followed them and agreed with them,' i.e., they will be held guilty not only for going astray themselves, but also for tempting others and having them follow them. As it says in a Hadith:\nمَنْ دَعَا إِلَى هُدًى كَانَ لَهُ مِنَ الْأَجْرِ مِثْلُ أُجُورِ مَنِ اتَّبَعَهُ، لَا يَنْقُصُ ذَلِكَ مِنْ أُجُورِهِمْ شَيْئًا، وَمَنْ دَعَا إِلَى ضَلَالَةٍ كَانَ عَلَيْهِ مِنَ الْإِثْمِ مِثْلُ آثَامِ مَنِ اتَّبَعَهُ، لَا يَنْقُصُ ذَلِكَ مِنْ آثَامِهِمْ شَيْئًا\n(Whoever invites people to guidance, he will receive a reward like that of those who follow him, without diminishing their reward in the least. And whoever invites people to misguidance, he will bear a burden of sin like that of those who follow him, without diminishing their burden in the least.)\nAllah says;\nوَلَيَحْمِلُنَّ أَثْقَالَهُمْ وَأَثْقَالًا مَّعَ أَثْقَالِهِمْ ۖ وَلَيُسْأَلُنَّ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ عَمَّا كَانُوا يَفْتَرُونَ\n(They shall bear their own loads, and other loads besides their own; and they shall be questioned about their false allegations on the Day of Resurrection.)(29:13)\nAl-'Awfi reported from Ibn 'Abbas that it is like the Ayah:\nلِيَحْمِلُوا أَوْزَارَهُمْ كَامِلَةً يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ ۙ وَمِنْ أَوْزَارِ الَّذِينَ يُضِلُّونَهُم بِغَيْرِ عِلْمٍ\n(That they may bear their own burdens in full on the Day of Resurrection, and also of the burdens of those whom they misled without knowledge.)(16:25) Allah says,\nوَلَيَحْمِلُنَّ أَثْقَالَهُمْ وَأَثْقَالًا مَّعَ أَثْقَالِهِمْ\n(They shall bear their own loads, and other loads besides their own)(29:13). Mujahid said: \"They will bear the burden of their own sins, and they will bear the sins of those who obeyed them, but that will not lessen the punishment of those who obeyed them at all.\"","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=24","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:26","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:26–27","text":"Those before them indeed plotted, but Allah struck at the foundation of their building, the roof fell down upon them from above them, and the torment overtook them from directions they did not perceive (26)Then, on the Day of Resurrection, He will disgrace them and will say: \"Where are My (so-called) partners, those over which you caused so much discord?\" Those who have been given the knowledge will say: \"Indeed it is a Day of disgrace and misery for the disbelievers. (27)\n\n## Discussion about what the previous Peoples did, and what was done to Them\n\nقَدْ مَكَرَ الَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِهِمْ\n(Those before them indeed plotted,) Al-'Awfi reported that Ibn 'Abbas said: \"This refers to Namrud (Nimrod), who built the tower.\" Others said that it refers to Bukhtanassar (Nebuchadnezzar). The correct view is that this is said by way of example, to refute what was done by those who disbelieved in Allah and associated others in worship with Him. As Nuh said,\nوَمَكَرُوا مَكْرًا كُبَّارًا\n(\"And they have hatched a mighty scheme.\")(71:22) meaning, they used all sorts of ploys to misguide their people, and tempted them to join them in their Shirk via all possible means. On the Day of Resurrection their followers will say to them:\nبَلْ مَكْرُ اللَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ إِذْ تَأْمُرُونَنَا أَن نَّكْفُرَ بِاللَّهِ وَنَجْعَلَ لَهُ أَندَادًا\n(\"Nay, but it was your plotting by night and day, when you ordered us to disbelieve in Allah and set up rivals to Him!\")(34:33)\nفَأَتَى اللَّهُ بُنْيَانَهُم مِّنَ الْقَوَاعِدِ\n(but Allah struck at the foundation of their building.) meaning, He uprooted it and brought their efforts to naught. This is like the Ayah:\nكُلَّمَا أَوْقَدُوا نَارًا لِّلْحَرْبِ أَطْفَأَهَا اللَّهُ\n(Every time they kindled the fire of war, Allah extinguished it.)[5:64] and\nفَأَتَاهُمُ اللَّهُ مِنْ حَيْثُ لَمْ يَحْتَسِبُوا ۖ وَقَذَفَ فِي قُلُوبِهِمُ الرُّعْبَ ۚ يُخْرِبُونَ بُيُوتَهُم بِأَيْدِيهِمْ وَأَيْدِي الْمُؤْمِنِينَ فَاعْتَبِرُوا يَا أُولِي الْأَبْصَارِ\n(But Allah's (torment) reached them from a place where they were not expecting it, and He cast terror into their hearts so that they destroyed their own dwellings with their own hands and the hands of the believers. So then take admonition, O you with eyes (to see).)[59:2] Allah says here:\nفَأَتَى اللَّهُ بُنْيَانَهُم مِّنَ الْقَوَاعِدِ فَخَرَّ عَلَيْهِمُ السَّقْفُ مِن فَوْقِهِمْ وَأَتَاهُمُ الْعَذَابُ مِنْ حَيْثُ لَا يَشْعُرُونَ - ثُمَّ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ يُخْزِيهِمْ\n(but Allah struck at the foundation of their building, and then the roof fell down upon them, from above them, and the torment overtook them from directions they did not perceive. Then, on the Day of Resurrection, He will disgrace them)[16:26-27] meaning, He will expose their scandalous deeds and what they used to hide in their hearts, and He will bring it out in the open. As He says,\nيَوْمَ تُبْلَى السَّرَائِرُ\n(The Day when all the secrets will be (exposed and) examined.)(86:9) They will be displayed and made known, as found in the Two Sahihs, where Ibn 'Umar reported that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nيُنْصَبُ لِكُلِّ غَادِرٍ لِوَاءٌ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ عِنْدَ اسْتِهِ بِقَدْرِ غَدْرَتِهِ، فَيُقَالُ: هَذِهِ غَدْرَةُ فُلَانِ ابْنِ فُلَانٍ\n(On the Day of Resurrection a banner will be set up by his backside for every deceitful person, (whose size is) in accordance with the amount of his deceit. It be said, \"This is the one who deceived so-and-so, the son of so-and-so.\") Thus, what they used to plot in secret will be made public. Allah will humiliate them before all of His creation, and the Lord will say to them, in rebuke and reprimand;\nأَيْنَ شُرَكَائِيَ الَّذِينَ كُنتُمْ تُشَاقُّونَ فِيهِمْ\n(Where are My (so-called) partners, those over which you caused so much discord?) meaning, you fought and made enemies for their sake, so where are they now to help and save you?\nهَلْ يَنصُرُونَكُمْ أَوْ يَنتَصِرُونَ\n(Can they help you or (even) help themselves?)[26:93]\nفَمَا لَهُ مِن قُوَّةٍ وَلَا نَاصِرٍ\n(Then will (man) have no power, nor any helper.)[86:10] When evidence and proof is established against them, and the Word (of Allah) is justified against them, and they will be unable to give any excuse, realizing that escape is impossible, then\nقَالَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْعِلْمَ\n(Those who have been given the knowledge will say) who are the leaders in this world and the Hereafter and who know about the truth in this world and the Hereafter - will say,\nإِنَّ الْخِزْيَ الْيَوْمَ وَالسُّوءَ عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ\n(Indeed it is a Day of disgrace and misery for the disbelievers.) meaning, today those who disbelieved in Allah and worshipped others who have no power either to benefit or to harm them are now surrounded by disgrace and punishment.","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=26","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:28","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:28–29","text":"Those whose lives the angels take while they are doing wrong to themselves. Then, they will (falsely) submit (saying): \"We did not do any evil.\" (The angels will reply): \"Yes! Truly, Allah is Most Knowing of what you did. (28)\"So enter the gates of Hell, to abide therein, and indeed, what an evil abode there is for the arrogant. (29)\n\n## The Condition of the Disbeliever during and after Death\n\nAllah informs us of the state of the idolators who are doing wrong to themselves when death approaches and the angels come to seize their evil souls.\nفَأَلْقَوُا السَّلَمَ\n(Then, they will (falsely) submit) meaning, they will make it appear as if they used to listen and obey by saying,\nمَا كُنَّا نَعْمَلُ مِن سُوءٍ\n(We did not do any evil.) Similarly, on the Day of Resurrection, they will say,\nوَاللَّهِ رَبِّنَا مَا كُنَّا مُشْرِكِينَ\n(By Allah, our Lord, we were not idolators.)[6:23]\nيَوْمَ يَبْعَثُهُمُ اللَّهُ جَمِيعًا فَيَحْلِفُونَ لَهُ كَمَا يَحْلِفُونَ لَكُمْ\n(On the Day when Allah will resurrect them all together; then they will swear to Him as they swear to you.)[58:18] Allah says, rejecting what they say,\nبَلَىٰ إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلِيمٌ بِمَا كُنتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ - فَادْخُلُوا أَبْوَابَ جَهَنَّمَ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا ۖ فَلَبِئْسَ مَثْوَى الْمُتَكَبِّرِينَ\n(\"Yes! Truly, Allah is Most Knowing of what you did. So enter the gates of Hell, to abide therein, and indeed, what an evil abode there is for the arrogant.\")(16:28-29),\nmeaning, a miserable position in the abode of humiliation for those who were too arrogant to pay attention to the signs of Allah and follow His Messengers. They will enter Hell from the day they die with their souls, and their bodies will feel the heat and hot winds of their graves. When the Day of Resurrec- tion comes, their souls will be reunited with their bodies, to abide forever in the fire of Hell, and\nلَا يُقْضَىٰ عَلَيْهِمْ فَيَمُوتُوا وَلَا يُخَفَّفُ عَنْهُم مِّنْ عَذَابِهَا\n(It will not be complete enough to kill them nor shall its torment be lightened for them.)(35:36) As Allah says,\nالنَّارُ يُعْرَضُونَ عَلَيْهَا غُدُوًّا وَعَشِيًّا ۖ وَيَوْمَ تَقُومُ السَّاعَةُ أَدْخِلُوا آلَ فِرْعَوْنَ أَشَدَّ الْعَذَابِ\n(The Fire, they are exposed to it morning and afternoon. And on the Day when the Hour will be established (it will be said to the angels): \"Cause Fir'awn's people to enter the severest torment!\")(40:46).","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=28","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:30","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:30–32","text":"And (when) it is said to those who had Taqwa (piety and righteousness), \"What is it that your Lord has revealed?\" They say: \"That which is good.\" For those who do good in this world, there is good, and the home of the Hereafter will be better. And excellent indeed will be the home (i.e. Paradise) of those who have Taqwa (30)'Adn (Eden) Paradise (Gardens of Eternity) which they will enter, under which rivers flow, in it they will have all that they wish. Thus Allah rewards those who have Taqwa (31)Those whose lives the angels take while they are in a pious state saying (to them) \"Salamun 'Alaikum (peace be on you!). Enter Paradise because of what (good) you used to do (in the world). (32)\n\n## What the Pious say about the Revelation, their Reward and their Condition during and after Death\n\nHere we are told about the blessed, as opposed to the doomed, who, when they are asked,\nمَّاذَا أَنزَلَ رَبُّكُمْ\n(What is it that your Lord has revealed?) they will reluctantly answer, \"He did not reveal anything, these are just the fables of old.\" But the blessed, on the other hand, will say, \"That which is good,\" meaning - He revealed something good, meaning mercy and blessings for those who followed it and believed in it. Then we are told about Allah's promise to His servants which He revealed to His Messengers. He says:\nلِّلَّذِينَ أَحْسَنُوا فِي هَٰذِهِ الدُّنْيَا حَسَنَةٌ\n(For those who do good in this world, there is good) This is like the Ayah,\nمَنْ عَمِلَ صَالِحًا مِّن ذَكَرٍ أَوْ أُنثَىٰ وَهُوَ مُؤْمِنٌ فَلَنُحْيِيَنَّهُ حَيَاةً طَيِّبَةً ۖ وَلَنَجْزِيَنَّهُمْ أَجْرَهُم بِأَحْسَنِ مَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ\n(Whoever works righteousness - whether male or female - while being a true believer verily, to him We will give a good life, and We shall certainly reward them in proportion to the best of what they used to do.)(16:97), which means that whoever does good in this world, Allah will reward him for his good deeds in this world and in the next. Then we are told that the home of the Hereafter will be better, i.e., better than the life of this world, and that the reward in the Hereafter will be more complete than the reward in this life, as Allah says,\nوَقَالَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْعِلْمَ وَيْلَكُمْ ثَوَابُ اللَّهِ خَيْرٌ\n(But those who were given (religious) knowledge said: \"Woe to you! The reward of Allah (in the Hereafter) is better)[28:80] and,\nوَمَا عِندَ اللَّهِ خَيْرٌ لِّلْأَبْرَارِ\n(and what is with Allah for the righteous is better.)[3:198] and;\nوَالْآخِرَةُ خَيْرٌ وَأَبْقَىٰ\n(Although the Hereafter is better and enduring)(87:17). Allah said to His Messenger ﷺ:\nوَلَلْآخِرَةُ خَيْرٌ لَّكَ مِنَ الْأُولَىٰ\n(And indeed the Hereafter is better for you than the present)(93:4). Then Allah describes the abode of the Hereafter, saying,\nوَلَنِعْمَ دَارُ الْمُتَّقِينَ\n(And excellent indeed will be the home (i.e. Paradise) of those who have Taqwa.)\nجَنَّاتُ عَدْنٍ\n('Adn (Eden) Paradise (Gardens of Eternity)) refers to the home of the Muttaqun, i.e., in the Hereafter they will have Gardens of Eternity in which they will dwell forever.\nتَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ\n(under which rivers flow) meaning, between its trees and palaces.\nلَهُمْ فِيهَا مَا يَشَاءُونَ\n(in it they will have all that they wish) this is like the Ayah:\nوَفِيهَا مَا تَشْتَهِيهِ الْأَنفُسُ وَتَلَذُّ الْأَعْيُنُ ۖ وَأَنتُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ\n(in it (there will be) all that souls could desire, and all that eyes could delight in, and in it you will live forever.)[43:71]\nكَذَٰلِكَ يَجْزِي اللَّهُ الْمُتَّقِينَ\n(Thus Allah rewards those who have Taqwa.) meaning, this is how Allah rewards everyone who believes in Him, fears Him, and does good deeds.\nThen Allah tells us about their condition when death approaches them in a good state, i.e., free from Shirk, impurity and all evil. The angels greet them and give them the good news of Paradise, as Allah says:\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ قَالُوا رَبُّنَا اللَّهُ ثُمَّ اسْتَقَامُوا تَتَنَزَّلُ عَلَيْهِمُ الْمَلَائِكَةُ أَلَّا تَخَافُوا وَلَا تَحْزَنُوا وَأَبْشِرُوا بِالْجَنَّةِ الَّتِي كُنتُمْ تُوعَدُونَ - نَحْنُ أَوْلِيَاؤُكُمْ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَفِي الْآخِرَةِ ۖ وَلَكُمْ فِيهَا مَا تَشْتَهِي أَنفُسُكُمْ وَلَكُمْ فِيهَا مَا تَدَّعُونَ - نُزُلًا مِّنْ غَفُورٍ رَّحِيمٍ\n(Verily, those who say: \"Our Lord is Allah (alone),\" and then behave righteously, on them the angels will descend (at the time of their death)(saying): \"Fear not, nor grieve! But receive the good news of Paradise as you have been promised! We have been your friends in the life of this world and are (so) in the Hereafter. In it you shall have (all) that your souls desire, and in it you shall have (all) that you ask for. An entertainment from (Allah), the Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.\")(41:30-32)\nWe have already referred to the Hadiths that have been reported on the taking of the soul of the believer and the soul of the disbeliever, when we discussed the Ayah,\nيُثَبِّتُ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا بِالْقَوْلِ الثَّابِتِ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَفِي الْآخِرَةِ ۖ وَيُضِلُّ اللَّهُ الظَّالِمِينَ ۚ وَيَفْعَلُ اللَّهُ مَا يَشَاءُ\n(Allah will keep firm those who believe, with the word that stands firm in this world (i.e. they will keep on worshipping Allah Alone and none else), and in the Hereafter. And Allah will cause the wrongdoers to stray, and Allah does as He wills.)(14:27)","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=30","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:33","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:33–34","text":"Are they but waiting for the angels to come to them, or there comes the command of your Lord? Thus did those before them. And Allah did not wrong them, but they were wronging themselves (33)Then, they were afflicted by their evil deeds, and they were surrounded by that which they used to mock (34)\n\n## The Disbelievers' Refrain from Faith means that They were simply awaiting Punishment\n\nThreatening the idolators for their persistence in falsehood and their conceited delusions about this world, Allah says: Are these people waiting only for the angels to come and take their souls? Qatadah said:\nأَوْ يَأْتِيَ أَمْرُ رَبِّكَ\n(Or there comes the command of your Lord?) means the Day of Resurrection and the terror that they will go through.\"\nكَذَٰلِكَ فَعَلَ الَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِهِمْ\n(Thus did those before them.) means, thus did their predecessors and those who were like them among the idolators persist in their Shirk, until they tasted the wrath of Allah and experienced the punishment and torment that they suffered.\nوَمَا ظَلَمَهُمُ اللَّهُ\n(And Allah did not wrong them.) because by sending His Messengers and revealing His Books He gave them enough warning and clearly demonstrated His proofs to them.\nوَلَٰكِن كَانُوا أَنفُسَهُمْ يَظْلِمُونَ\n(but they were wronging themselves.) meaning, by opposing the Messengers and denying what they brought. For this reason Allah's punishment tormented them.\nوَحَاقَ بِهِم\n(they were surrounded) meaning, they were overwhelmed by the painful torment.\nمَّا كَانُوا بِهِ يَسْتَهْزِئُونَ\n(by that which they used to mock.) meaning, they used to make fun of the Messengers when they warned them Allah's punishment, and for this it will be said to them on the Day of Resurrection:\nهَٰذِهِ النَّارُ الَّتِي كُنتُم بِهَا تُكَذِّبُونَ\n(This is the Fire which you used to belie.)(52:14).","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=33","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:35","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:35–37","text":"And those who worshipped others with Allah said: \"If Allah had so willed, neither we nor our fathers would have worshipped any but Him nor would we have forbidden anything without (a command from) Him.\" Those before them did the same. Then! Are the Messengers charged with anything but to clearly convey the Message (35)And We have indeed sent a Messenger to every Ummah (community, nation)(saying): \"Worship Allah (Alone), and shun the Taghut (all false deities). \" Then among them were some whom Allah guided, and among them were some who deserved to be left to stray. So travel through the land and see the end of those who denied (the truth)(36)(Even) if you desire that they be guided, then verily, Allah does not guide those whom He allowed to stray, and they will have no helpers (37)\n\n## The Idolators Argument that their Shirk was Divinely decreed, and the Refutation of this Claim\n\nAllah tells us about the idolators delusion over their Shirk, and the excuse they claimed for it based on the idea that it is ordained by divine decree. He says:\nلَوْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ مَا عَبَدْنَا مِن دُونِهِ مِن شَيْءٍ نَّحْنُ وَلَا آبَاؤُنَا وَلَا حَرَّمْنَا مِن دُونِهِ مِن شَيْءٍ\n((They say:) \"If Allah had so willed, neither we nor our fathers would have worshipped any but Him, nor would we have forbidden anything without (a command from) Him.\")\nThey had superstitious customs dealing with certain animals, e.g. the Bahirah the Sa'ibah and the Wasilah and other things that they had invented and innovated by themselves, with no revealed authority. The essence of what they said was: \"If Allah hated what we did, He would have stopped by punishing us, and He would not have enabled us to do it.\" Rejecting their confusing ideas, Allah says:\nفَهَلْ عَلَى الرُّسُلِ إِلَّا الْبَلَاغُ الْمُبِينُ\n(Are the Messengers charged with anything but to clearly convey the Message?) meaning, the matter is not as you claim. It is not the case that Allah did not rebuke your behavior; rather, He did rebuke you, and in the strongest possible terms, and He emphatically forbade you from such behavior. To every nation - that is, to every generation, to every community of people - He sent a Messenger. All of the Messengers called their people to worship Allah (Alone) as well as forbidding them from worshipping anything or anybody except for Him.\nأَنِ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ وَاجْتَنِبُوا الطَّاغُوتَ\n(Worship Allah (Alone), and shun the Taghut (all false deities).) Allah continued sending Messengers to mankind with this Message, from the first incidence of Shirk that appeared among the Children of Adam, in the people to whom Nuh was sent - the first Messenger sent by Allah to the people of this earth - until He sent the final Messenger, Muhammad ﷺ, whose call was addressed to both men and Jinn, in the east and in the west. All of the Messengers brought the same Message, as Allah says:\nوَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِن قَبْلِكَ مِن رَّسُولٍ إِلَّا نُوحِي إِلَيْهِ أَنَّهُ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا أَنَا فَاعْبُدُونِ\n(And We did not send any Messenger before you (O Muhammad) but We revealed to him (saying): None has the right to be worshipped but I (Allah), so worship Me (alone and none else).\")(21:25)\nوَاسْأَلْ مَنْ أَرْسَلْنَا مِن قَبْلِكَ مِن رُّسُلِنَا أَجَعَلْنَا مِن دُونِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ آلِهَةً يُعْبَدُونَ\n(And ask (O Muhammad) those Messengers of Ours whom We sent before you: \"Did We ever appointed to be worshipped besides the Most Gracious (Allah)?\")(43:45) And in this Ayah, Allah says:\nوَلَقَدْ بَعَثْنَا فِي كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ رَّسُولًا أَنِ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ وَاجْتَنِبُوا الطَّاغُوتَ\n(And We have indeed sent a Messenger to every Ummah (community, nation)(saying): \"Worship Allah (alone), and shun the Taghut (all false deities).\") So how could any of the idolators say,\nلَوْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ مَا عَبَدْنَا مِن دُونِهِ مِن شَيْءٍ\n(If Allah had so willed, we would not have worshipped any but Him,)\nThe legislative will of Allah is clear and cannot be taken as an excuse by them, because He had forbidden them to do that upon the tongue of His Messengers, but by His universal will [i.e., by which He allows things to occur even though they do not please Him] He allowed them to do that as it was decreed for them. So there is no argument in that for them. Allah created Hell and its people both the Shayatin (devils) and disbelievers, but He does not like His servants to disbelieve. And this point constitutes the strongest proof and the most unquestionable wisdom.\nThen Allah informs us that He rebuked them with punishment in this world, after the Messengers issued their warning, thus He says:\nفَمِنْهُم مَّنْ هَدَى اللَّهُ وَمِنْهُم مَّنْ حَقَّتْ عَلَيْهِ الضَّلَالَةُ ۚ فَسِيرُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ فَانظُرُوا كَيْفَ كَانَ عَاقِبَةُ الْمُكَذِّبِينَ\n(Then among them were some whom Allah guided, and among them were some who deserved to be left to stray. So travel through the land and see the end of those who denied (the truth).) This means: ask about what happened to those who went against the Messengers and rejected the truth, see how:\nدَمَّرَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِمْ ۖ وَلِلْكَافِرِينَ أَمْثَالُهَا\n(Allah destroyed them completely, and a similar (end awaits) the disbelievers.)(47:10) and,\nوَلَقَدْ كَذَّبَ الَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِهِمْ فَكَيْفَ كَانَ نَكِيرِ\n(And indeed those before them belied (the Messengers of Allah), so then how terrible was My denial (punishment)?)(67:18) Then Allah told His Messenger ﷺ that His eagerness to guide them will be of no benefit to them if Allah wills that they should be misguided, as He says:\nوَمَن يُرِدِ اللَّهُ فِتْنَتَهُ فَلَن تَمْلِكَ لَهُ مِنَ اللَّهِ شَيْئًا\n(And for whoever Allah wills to try with error, you can do nothing for him against Allah)(5:41). Nuh said to his people:\nوَلَا يَنفَعُكُمْ نُصْحِي إِنْ أَرَدتُّ أَنْ أَنصَحَ لَكُمْ إِن كَانَ اللَّهُ يُرِيدُ أَن يُغْوِيَكُمْ\n(\"And my advice will not profit you, even if I wish to give you good counsel, if Allah's will is to keep you astray.\")(11:34). In this Ayah, Allah says:\nإِن تَحْرِصْ عَلَىٰ هُدَاهُمْ فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَهْدِي مَن يُضِلُّ\n((Even) if you desire that they be guided, then verily, Allah does not guide those whom He allowed to stray,) As Allah says:\nمَن يُضْلِلِ اللَّهُ فَلَا هَادِيَ لَهُ ۚ وَيَذَرُهُمْ فِي طُغْيَانِهِمْ يَعْمَهُونَ\n(Whomsoever Allah allows to stray, then there is no guide for him; and He lets them wander blindly in their transgressions.)(7:186)\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ حَقَّتْ عَلَيْهِمْ كَلِمَتُ رَبِّكَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ - وَلَوْ جَاءَتْهُمْ كُلُّ آيَةٍ حَتَّىٰ يَرَوُا الْعَذَابَ الْأَلِيمَ\n(Truly! Those deserving the Word (wrath) of your Lord will not believe, even if every sign should come to them - until they see the painful torment)(10:96-97).\nفَإِنَّ اللَّهَ\n(then verily, Allah) meaning, this is the way in which Allah does things. If He wills a thing, then it happens, and if He does not will a thing, then it does not happen. For this reason Allah says:\nلَا يَهْدِي مَن يُضِلُّ\n(Allah does not guide those whom He allowed to stray,) meaning the one whom He has caused to go astray, so who can guide him apart from Allah? No one.\nوَمَا لَهُم مِّن نَّاصِرِينَ\n(And they will have no helpers.) means, they will have no one to save them from the punishment of Allah,\nأَلَا لَهُ الْخَلْقُ وَالْأَمْرُ ۗ تَبَارَكَ اللَّهُ رَبُّ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(Surely, His is the creation and commandment. Blessed is Allah, the Lord of all that exists!)(7:54).","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=35","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:38","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:38–40","text":"And they swear by Allah with their strongest oaths, that Allah will not raise up one who dies. Yes, (He will raise them up), a promise (binding) upon Him in truth, but most of mankind know not (38)In order that He may make clear to them what they differed over, and so that those who disbelieved may know that they were liars (39)Verily, Our Word to a thing when We intend it, is only that We say unto it: \"Be!\" - and it is (40)\n\n## The Resurrection after Death is true, there is Wisdom behind it, and it is easy for Allah\n\nAllah tells us that the idolators swore by Allah their strongest oaths, meaning that they made oaths swore fervently that Allah would not resurrect the one who died. They considered that to be improbable, and did not believe the Messengers when they told them about that, swearing that it could not happen. Allah said, refuting them:\nبَلَىٰ\n(Yes), meaning it will indeed happen,\nوَعْدًا عَلَيْهِ حَقًّا\n(a promise (binding) upon Him in truth,) - meaning it is inevitable,\nوَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ\n(but most of mankind know not.) means, because of their ignorance they oppose the Messengers and fall into disbelief. Then Allah mentions His wisdom and the reason why He will resurrect mankind physically on the Day of Calling (between the people of Fire and of Paradise). He says,\nلِيُبَيِّنَ لَهُمُ\n(In order that He may make clear to them) means, to mankind,\nالَّذِي يَخْتَلِفُونَ فِيهِ\n(what they differed over,) means, every dispute.\nلِيَجْزِيَ الَّذِينَ أَسَاءُوا بِمَا عَمِلُوا وَيَجْزِيَ الَّذِينَ أَحْسَنُوا بِالْحُسْنَى\n(that He may requite those who do evil with that which they have done (i. e. punish them in Hell), and reward those who do good, with what is best (i.e. Paradise).)(53:31)\nوَلِيَعْلَمَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا أَنَّهُمْ كَانُوا كَاذِبِينَ\n(and so that those who disbelieved may know that they were liars.) meaning that they lied in their oaths and their swearing that Allah would not resurrect those who die. Thus they will be pushed down by force to the Fire with horrible force on the Day of Resurrection, and the guards of Hell will say to them:\nهَٰذِهِ النَّارُ الَّتِي كُنتُم بِهَا تُكَذِّبُونَ - أَفَسِحْرٌ هَٰذَا أَمْ أَنتُمْ لَا تُبْصِرُونَ - اصْلَوْهَا فَاصْبِرُوا أَوْ لَا تَصْبِرُوا سَوَاءٌ عَلَيْكُمْ ۖ إِنَّمَا تُجْزَوْنَ مَا كُنتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ\n(This is the Fire which you used to belie. Is this magic or do you not see? Taste its heat, and whether you are tolerant of it or intolerant of it - it is all the same. You are only being requited for what you have done.)(52:14-16).\nThen Allah tells us about His ability to do whatever He wills, and that nothing is impossible for Him on earth or in heaven. When He wants a thing, all He has to do is say to it \"Be!\" and it is. The Resurrection is one such thing, when He wants it to happen, all He will have to do is issue the command once, and it will happen as He wills, as He says:\nوَمَا أَمْرُنَا إِلَّا وَاحِدَةٌ كَلَمْحٍ بِالْبَصَرِ\n(And Our commandment is but one as the twinkling of an eye)(54:50) and,\nمَّا خَلْقُكُمْ وَلَا بَعْثُكُمْ إِلَّا كَنَفْسٍ وَاحِدَةٍ\n(The creation of you all and the resurrection of you all are only as (the creation and resurrection of) a single person.)[31:28] And in this Ayah, Allah says:\nإِنَّمَا قَوْلُنَا لِشَيْءٍ إِذَا أَرَدْنَاهُ أَن نَّقُولَ لَهُ كُن فَيَكُونُ\n(Verily, Our Word to a thing when We intend it, is only that We say to it: \"Be!\" - and it is.) meaning, We issue the command once, and then it happens.\nAllah does not need to repeat or confirm whatever He commands, because there is nothing that can stop Him or oppose Him. He is the One, the Compelling, the Almighty, whose power, might and dominion have subjected all things. None has the right to be worshipped except Him, and there is no Lord other than Him.","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=38","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:41","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:41–42","text":"And as for those who emigrated for the cause of Allah, after they had been wronged, We will certainly give them good residence in this world, but indeed the reward of the Hereafter will be greater; if they but knew (41)(They are) those who remained patient, and put their trust in their Lord (42)\n\n## The Reward of the Muhajirin\n\nAllah tells us about the reward of those who migrated for His sake, seeking His pleasure, those who left their homeland behind, brothers and friends, hoping for the reward of Allah. This may have been revealed concerning those who migrated to Ethiopia, those whose persecution at the hands of their own people in Makkah was so extreme that they left them and went to Ethiopia so that they would be able to worship their Lord. Among the most prominent of these migrants were 'Uthman bin 'Affan and his wife Ruqayyah, the daughter of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, Ja'far bin Abi Talib, the cousin of the Messenger ﷺ, and Abu Salamah bin 'Abdul-Asad, among a group of almost eighty sincere and faithful men and women, may Allah be pleased with them. Allah promised them a great reward in this world and the next. Allah said:\nلَنُبَوِّئَنَّهُمْ فِي الدُّنْيَا حَسَنَةً\n(We will certainly give them good residence in this world,)\nIbn 'Abbas, Ash-Sha'bi and Qatadah said: (this means) \"Al-Madinah.\" It was also said that it meant \"good provision\". This was the opinion of Mujahid. There is no contradiction between these two opinions, for they left their homes and wealth, but Allah compensated them with something better in this world. Whoever gives up something for the sake of Allah, Allah compensates him with something that is better for him than that, and this is what happened. He gave them power throughout the land and caused them to rule over the people, so they became governors and rulers, and each of them became a leader of the pious. Allah tells us that His reward for the Muhajirin in the Hereafter is greater than that which He gave them in this world, as He says:\nوَلَأَجْرُ الْآخِرَةِ أَكْبَرُ\n(but indeed the reward of the Hereafter will be greater) meaning, greater than that which We have given you in this world.\nلَوْ كَانُوا يَعْلَمُونَ\n(if they but knew!) means, if those who stayed behind and did not migrate with them only knew what Allah prepared for those who obeyed Him and followed His Messenger ﷺ. Then Allah describes them as:\nالَّذِينَ صَبَرُوا وَعَلَىٰ رَبِّهِمْ يَتَوَكَّلُونَ\n(those who remained patient, and put their trust in their Lord.)(16:42), meaning, they bore their people's persecution with patience, putting their trust in Allah Who made their end good in this world and the Hereafter.","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=41","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:43","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:43–44","text":"And We sent not (as Our Messengers) before you (O Muhammad) any but men, whom We sent revelation. So ask Ahl Adh-Dhikr, if you know not (43)With clear signs and Books (We sent the Messengers). And We have also revealed the Dhikr to you so that you may clearly explain to men what was revealed to them, and that perhaps they may reflect (44)\n\n## Only Human Messengers have been Sent\n\nAd-Dahhak said, reporting from Ibn 'Abbas: \"When Allah sent Muhammad ﷺ as a Messenger, the Arabs, or some of them, denied him and said, 'Allah is too great to send a human being as a Messenger.' Then Allah revealed:\nأَكَانَ لِلنَّاسِ عَجَبًا أَنْ أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَىٰ رَجُلٍ مِّنْهُمْ أَنْ أَنذِرِ النَّاسَ\n(Is it a wonder to people that We have sent Our Inspiration to a man from among themselves (saying): \"Warn mankind...\")[10:2] and He said,\nوَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِن قَبْلِكَ إِلَّا رِجَالًا نُّوحِي إِلَيْهِمْ ۚ فَاسْأَلُوا أَهْلَ الذِّكْرِ إِن كُنتُمْ لَا تَعْلَمُونَ\n(And We sent not (as Our Messengers) before you (O Muhammad) any but men, whom We sent Revelation. So ask Ahl Adh-Dhikr, if you know not.). meaning, (ask) the people of the previous Books, were the Messengers that were sent to them humans or angels? If they were angels, then you have the right to find this strange, but if they were human, then you have no grounds to deny that Muhammad ﷺ is a Messenger. Allah says:\nوَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِن قَبْلِكَ إِلَّا رِجَالًا نُّوحِي إِلَيْهِم مِّنْ أَهْلِ الْقُرَىٰ\n(And We sent not before you (as Messengers) any but men to whom We revealed, from among the people of townships.)[12:109] and not from among the people of heaven as you say.\" It was reported by Mujahid from Ibn 'Abbas that what is meant by Ahl Adh-Dhikr is the People of the Book. This is as Allah says:\nقُلْ سُبْحَانَ رَبِّي هَلْ كُنتُ إِلَّا بَشَرًا رَّسُولًا - وَمَا مَنَعَ النَّاسَ أَن يُؤْمِنُوا إِذْ جَاءَهُمُ الْهُدَىٰ إِلَّا أَن قَالُوا أَبَعَثَ اللَّهُ بَشَرًا رَّسُولًا\n(Say: \"Glorified be my Lord! Am I anything but a man, sent as a Messenger?\" And nothing prevented men from believing when the guidance came to them, except that they said: \"Has Allah sent a man as (His) Messenger?\")(17:93-94)\nوَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا قَبْلَكَ مِنَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ إِلَّا إِنَّهُمْ لَيَأْكُلُونَ الطَّعَامَ وَيَمْشُونَ فِي الْأَسْوَاقِ\n(And We never sent before you (O Muhammad) any of the Messengers but verily, they ate food and walked in the markets.)(25:20)\nوَمَا جَعَلْنَاهُمْ جَسَدًا لَّا يَأْكُلُونَ الطَّعَامَ وَمَا كَانُوا خَالِدِينَ\n(And We did not create them (the Messengers, with) bodies that did not eat food, nor were they immortals.)(21:8)\nقُلْ مَا كُنتُ بِدْعًا مِّنَ الرُّسُلِ\n(Say (O Muhammad ﷺ): \"I am not a new thing among the Messengers.\")[46:9],\nقُلْ إِنَّمَا أَنَا بَشَرٌ مِّثْلُكُمْ يُوحَىٰ إِلَيَّ\n(Say (O Muhammad): \"I am only a man like you. It has been revealed to me.\")[18:110] Then Allah informs those who doubt that a Messenger can be a human to ask those who have knowledge of the previous Scriptures about the Prophets who came before: were their Prophets humans or angels? Then Allah mentions that He has sent them,\nبِالْبَيِّنَاتِ\n(with clear signs), meaning proof and evidence, and\nوَالزُّبُرِ\n(and Books [Zubur]), meaning Scriptures. Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, Ad-Dahhak and others said: Zubur is the plural of Zabur, and the Arabs say, Zaburtul-Kitab meaning, \"I wrote the book.\" Allah says:\nوَكُلُّ شَيْءٍ فَعَلُوهُ فِي الزُّبُرِ\n(And everything they have done is noted in (their) Records (of deeds)[Zubur])(54:52)\nوَلَقَدْ كَتَبْنَا فِي الزَّبُورِ مِن بَعْدِ الذِّكْرِ أَنَّ الْأَرْضَ يَرِثُهَا عِبَادِيَ الصَّالِحُونَ\n(And indeed We have written in Az-Zabur after the Dhikr that My righteous servant shall inherit the land (i.e. the land of Paradise).)(21:105) Then Allah says:\nوَأَنزَلْنَا إِلَيْكَ الذِّكْرَ\n(And We have also revealed the Dhikr to you), meaning the Qur'an,\nلِتُبَيِّنَ لِلنَّاسِ مَا نُزِّلَ إِلَيْهِمْ\n(so that you may clearly explain to men what was revealed to them,) meaning, sent down from their Lord, because you know the meaning of what Allah has revealed to you, and because of your understanding and adherence to it, and because We know that you are the best of creation and the leader of the Children of Adam. So that you may explain in detail what has been mentioned in brief, and explain what is not clear.\nوَلَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ\n(so that perhaps they may reflect.) meaning, they should examine themselves and be guided by it, so that they may attain the victory of salvation in this world and the next.","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=43","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:45","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:45–47","text":"Do then those who devise evil plots feel secure that Allah will not cause them to sink into the earth, or that torment will not seize them from where they do not perceive it (45)Or that He may punish them in the midst of their going to and fro (in their livelihood), so that there be no escape for them (from Allah's punishment)(46)Or that He may punish them where they fear it most? Indeed, Your Lord is full of kindness, Most Merciful (47)\n\n## How the Guilty can feel Secure\n\nAllah informs us about His patience, and how He delays the punishment for the sinners who do evil things and call others to do likewise, plotting to call others to do evil - even though He is able to make the earth swallow them or to bring His wrath upon them.\nمِنْ حَيْثُ لَا يَشْعُرُونَ\n(from where they do not perceive it), meaning in such a way that they do not know where it comes from. As Allah says:\nأَأَمِنتُم مَّن فِي السَّمَاءِ أَن يَخْسِفَ بِكُمُ الْأَرْضَ فَإِذَا هِيَ تَمُورُ - أَمْ أَمِنتُم مَّن فِي السَّمَاءِ أَن يُرْسِلَ عَلَيْكُمْ حَاصِبًا ۖ فَسَتَعْلَمُونَ كَيْفَ نَذِيرِ\n(Do you feel secure that He Who is over the heaven (Allah), will not cause you to sink into the earth, when it quakes? Or do you feel secure that He Who is over the heaven (Allah), will not send a storm of stones upon you? Then you shall know how My warning really is.)(67:16-17).\nأَوْ يَأْخُذَهُمْ فِي تَقَلُّبِهِمْ\n(Or that He may punish them in the midst of their going to and fro) meaning, when they are busy with their daily business, travel, and other distracting activities. Qatadah and As-Suddi said:\nتَقَلُّبِهِمْ\n(Their going to and fro) means their journeys.\" As Allah says:\nأَفَأَمِنَ أَهْلُ الْقُرَىٰ أَن يَأْتِيَهُم بَأْسُنَا بَيَاتًا وَهُمْ نَائِمُونَ - أَوَأَمِنَ أَهْلُ الْقُرَىٰ أَن يَأْتِيَهُم بَأْسُنَا ضُحًى وَهُمْ يَلْعَبُونَ\n(Did the people of the towns feel secure against the coming of Our punishment by night while they were asleep? Or, did the people of the towns feel secure against the coming of Our punishment in the forenoon while they were playing?)(7:97-98)\nفَمَا هُم بِمُعْجِزِينَ\n(so that there be no escape for them (from Allah's punishment)) meaning, it is not impossible for Allah, no matter what their situation.\nأَوْ يَأْخُذَهُمْ عَلَىٰ تَخَوُّفٍ\n(Or that He may punish them where they fear it most?) meaning, or Allah will take from them what they most fear, which is even more frightening, because when the thing you most fear to happen does happen, this is even worse. Hence Al-'Awfi reported that Ibn 'Abbas said that,\nأَوْ يَأْخُذَهُمْ عَلَىٰ تَخَوُّفٍ\n(Or that He may punish them where they fear it most?) means that Allah is saying: If I wish, I can take him after the death of his companion and after he has become frightened of that.' This was also reported from Mujahid, Ad-Dahhak, Qatadah and others. Then Allah says:\nفَإِنَّ رَبَّكُمْ لَرَءُوفٌ رَّحِيمٌ\n(Indeed your Lord is full of kindness, Most Merciful.) meaning, because He does not hasten to punish, as was reported in the Two Sahihs:\nلَا أَحَدَ أَصْبَرُ عَلَى أَذًى سَمِعَهُ مِنَ اللهِ، إِنَّهُمْ يَجْعَلُونَ لَهُ وَلَدًا وَهُوَ يَرْزُقُهُمْ وَيُعَافِيهِم\n(No one is more patient in the case of hearing offensive speech than Allah, for they attribute to Him a son, while He [alone] is giving them provision and good health.) And it is also recorded in Two Sahihs,\nإِنَّ اللهَ لَيُمْلِي لِلظَّالِمِ حَتَّى إِذَا أَخَذَهُ لَمْ يُفْلِتْهُ\n(Allah will let the wrongdoer continue until, when He begins to punish him, He will never let him go.) Then the Messenger of Allah ﷺ recited:\nوَكَذَٰلِكَ أَخْذُ رَبِّكَ إِذَا أَخَذَ الْقُرَىٰ وَهِيَ ظَالِمَةٌ ۚ إِنَّ أَخْذَهُ أَلِيمٌ شَدِيدٌ\n(Such is the punishment of your Lord when He seizes the (population of) towns while they are doing wrong. Indeed, His punishment is painful, (and) severe)(11:102) And Allah says:\nوَكَأَيِّن مِّن قَرْيَةٍ أَمْلَيْتُ لَهَا وَهِيَ ظَالِمَةٌ ثُمَّ أَخَذْتُهَا وَإِلَيَّ الْمَصِيرُ\n(And many a township did I give respite while it was given to wrongdoing. Then I punished it. And to Me is the (final) return (of all).)(22:48)","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=45","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:48","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:48–50","text":"Have they not observed things that Allah has created: (how) their shadows shift from right to left, prostrating to Allah while they are humble (48)And to Allah prostrate all that are in the heavens and all that are in the earth, the moving creatures and the angels, and they are not proud [i.e. they worship their Lord (Allah) with humility (49)They fear their Lord above them, and they do what they are commanded (50)\n\n## Everything prostrates to Allah\n\nAllah informs us about His might, majesty and pride, meaning that all things submit themselves to Him and every created being - animate and inanimate, as well as the responsible - humans and Jinns, and the angels - all humble themselves before Him. He tells us that everything that has a shadow leaning to the right and the left, i.e., in the morning and the evening, is by its shadow, prostrating to Allah. Mujahid said, \"When the sun passes its zenith, everything prostrates to Allah, may He be glorified.\" This was also said by Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak and others.\nوَهُمْ دَاخِرُونَ\n(while they are humble) means, they are in a state of humility. Mujahid also said: \"The prostration of every thing is its shadow\", and he mentioned the mountains and said that their prostrations are their shadows. Abu Ghalib Ash-Shaybani said: \"The waves of the sea are its prayers\". It is as if reason is attributed to these inanimate objects when they are described as prostrating, so Allah says:\nوَلِلَّهِ يَسْجُدُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ مِن دَابَّةٍ\n(And to Allah prostrate all that are in the heavens and all that are in the earth, of the moving creatures) As Allah says:\nوَلِلَّهِ يَسْجُدُ مَن فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ طَوْعًا وَكَرْهًا وَظِلَالُهُم بِالْغُدُوِّ وَالْآصَالِ\n(And to Allah (alone) all who are in the heavens and the earth fall in prostration, willingly or unwillingly, and so do their shadows in the mornings and in the afternoons.)(13:15)\nوَالْمَلَائِكَةُ وَهُمْ لَا يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ\n(and the angels, and they are not proud.) means, they prostrate to Allah and are not too proud to worship Him.\nيَخَافُونَ رَبَّهُم مِّن فَوْقِهِمْ\n(They fear their Lord above them) means, they prostrate out of fear of their Lord, may He be glorified.\nوَيَفْعَلُونَ مَا يُؤْمَرُونَ\n(and they do what they are commanded.) meaning they continually obey Allah, doing what He tells them to do and avoiding that which He forbids.","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=48","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:51","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:51–55","text":"And Allah said \"Do not worship two gods. Indeed, He (Allah) is only One God. Then fear Me Alone (51)To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth and the religion. Will you then fear any other than Allah (52)And whatever of blessings and good things you have, it is from Allah. Then, when harm touches you, unto Him you cry aloud for help (53)Then, when He has removed the harm from you, behold! some of you associate others in worship with their Lord (Allah)(54)So they are ungrateful for that which We have given them! Then enjoy yourselves but you will soon come to know (55)\n\n## Allah Alone is Deserving of Worship\n\nAllah tells us that there is no god but He, and that no one else should be worshipped except Him, alone, without partners, for He is the Sovereign, Creator, and Lord of all things.\nوَلَهُ الدِّينُ وَاصِبًا\n(His is the religion Wasiba) Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Maymun bin Mahran, As-Suddi, Qatadah and others said that this means forever. It was also reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"It means obligatory.\" Mujahid said: \"It means purely for Him,\" i.e., worship is due to Him Alone, from whoever is in the heavens and on earth. As Allah says:\nأَفَغَيْرَ دِينِ اللَّهِ يَبْغُونَ وَلَهُ أَسْلَمَ مَن فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ طَوْعًا وَكَرْهًا وَإِلَيْهِ يُرْجَعُونَ\n(Do they seek other than the religion of Allah, while to Him submitted all creatures in the heavens and the earth, willingly or unwillingly. And to Him shall they all be returned.)(3:83) This is in accordance with the opinion of Ibn 'Abbas and 'Ikrimah, which is that this Ayah is merely stating the case. According to the opinion of Mujahid, it is by way of instruction, i.e., it is saying: You had better fear associating partners in worship with Me, and be sincere in your obedience to Me. As Allah says:\nأَلَا لِلَّهِ الدِّينُ الْخَالِصُ\n(Surely, the pure religion (sincere devotion) is for Allah only.)(39:3) Then Allah tells us that He is the One Who has the power to benefit and harm, and that the provisions, blessings, good health and help, His servants enjoy are from His bounty and graciousness towards them.\nثُمَّ إِذَا مَسَّكُمُ الضُّرُّ فَإِلَيْهِ تَجْأَرُونَ\n(Then, when harm touches you, to Him you cry aloud for help.) meaning because you know that none has the power to remove that harm except for Him, so when you are harmed, you turn to ask Him for help and beg Him for aid. As Allah says:\nوَإِذَا مَسَّكُمُ الضُّرُّ فِي الْبَحْرِ ضَلَّ مَن تَدْعُونَ إِلَّا إِيَّاهُ ۖ فَلَمَّا نَجَّاكُمْ إِلَى الْبَرِّ أَعْرَضْتُمْ ۚ وَكَانَ الْإِنسَانُ كَفُورًا\n(And when harm touches you at sea, those that you call upon vanish, except for Him. But when He brings you safe to land, you turn away. And man is ever ungrateful.)(17:67) Here, Allah tells us:\nثُمَّ إِذَا كَشَفَ الضُّرَّ عَنكُمْ إِذَا فَرِيقٌ مِّنكُم بِرَبِّهِمْ يُشْرِكُونَ - لِيَكْفُرُوا بِمَا آتَيْنَاهُمْ\n(Then, when He has removed the harm from you, behold! some of you associate others in worship with their Lord (Allah). So they are ungrateful for that which We have given them!)(16:54-55)\nIt was said that the Lam here (translated as \"So\") is an indicator of sequence, or that it serves an explanatory function, meaning, 'We decreed that they would conceal the truth and deny the blessings that Allah has bestowed upon them. He is the One Who bestows blessings and the One Who removes distress.' Then Allah threatens them, saying:\nفَتَمَتَّعُوا\n(Then enjoy yourselves) meaning, do what you like and enjoy what you have for a little while.\nفَسَوْفَ تَعْلَمُونَ\n(but you will soon come to know.) meaning the consequences of that.","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=51","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:56","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:56–60","text":"And they assign a portion of that which We have provided them with, to what they have no knowledge of (false deities). By Allah, you shall certainly be questioned about (all) that you used to fabricate (56)And they assign daughters to Allah! Glorified (and Exalted) is He (above all that they associate with Him!). And for themselves (they assign) what they desire (57)And when the news of (the birth of) a female (child) is brought to any of them, his face becomes dark, and he is filled with inner grief (58)He hides himself from the people because of the evil of what he has been informed. Shall he keep her with dishonor or bury her in the earth? Certainly, evil is their decision (59)For those who do not believe in the Hereafter is an evil description, and for Allah is the highest description. And He is the All-Mighty, the All-Wise (60)\n\n## Among the Behavior of the Idolators was vowing to Things that Allah had provided for Them to their gods\n\nAllah tells us about some of the heinous deeds of those who used to perform baseless worship of other gods besides Him, such as idols and statues, with no grounds for doing so. They gave their idols a share of that which Allah had provided for them,\nفَقَالُوا هَٰذَا لِلَّهِ بِزَعْمِهِمْ وَهَٰذَا لِشُرَكَائِنَا ۖ فَمَا كَانَ لِشُرَكَائِهِمْ فَلَا يَصِلُ إِلَى اللَّهِ ۖ وَمَا كَانَ لِلَّهِ فَهُوَ يَصِلُ إِلَىٰ شُرَكَائِهِمْ ۗ سَاءَ مَا يَحْكُمُونَ\n(They say: \"This is for Allah,\" according to their claim, \"and this is for our partners.\" But the share of their \"partners\" is not directed to Allah, while the share of Allah is directed to their \"partners\"! How evil is that with which they judge)(6:136)\nThat is they assigned a share for their idols as well as Allah, but they gave preference to their gods over Him, so Allah swore by His Almighty Self to question them about these lies and fabrications. He will most certainly call them to account for it and give them the unrelenting punishment in the fire of Hell. So He says,\nتَاللَّهِ لَتُسْأَلُنَّ عَمَّا كُنتُمْ تَفْتَرُونَ\n(By Allah, you shall certainly be questioned about (all) that you used to fabricate.) Then Allah tells us how they used to regard the angels, who are servants of the Most Merciful, as being female, and that they considered them to be Allah's daughters, and they worshipped them with Him. In all of the above, they made very serious errors. They attributed offspring to Him when He has no offspring, then they assigned Him the kind of offspring they regarded as inferior, namely daughters, which they did not even want for themselves, as He said:\nأَلَكُمُ الذَّكَرُ وَلَهُ الْأُنثَىٰ - تِلْكَ إِذًا قِسْمَةٌ ضِيزَىٰ\n(Are the males for you and the females for Him? That is indeed an unfair division!)(53:21-22) And Allah says here:\nوَيَجْعَلُونَ لِلَّهِ الْبَنَاتِ سُبْحَانَهُ\n(And they assign daughters unto Allah! Glorified (and Exalted) is He.) meaning, above their claims and fabrications.\nأَلَا إِنَّهُم مِّنْ إِفْكِهِمْ لَيَقُولُونَ - وَلَدَ اللَّهُ وَإِنَّهُمْ لَكَاذِبُونَ - أَصْطَفَى الْبَنَاتِ عَلَى الْبَنِينَ - مَا لَكُمْ كَيْفَ تَحْكُمُونَ\n(But no! It is from their falsehood that they say: \"Allah has begotten.\" They are certainly liars! Has He (then) chosen daughters rather than sons? What is the matter with you? How do you decide?)(37:151-154)\nوَلَهُم مَّا يَشْتَهُونَ\n(And for themselves, what they desire;) meaning they choose the males for themselves, rejecting the daughters that they assign to Allah. Exalted be Allah far above what they say!\n\n## The Idolators' Abhorrence for Daughters\n\nوَإِذَا بُشِّرَ أَحَدُهُم بِالْأُنثَىٰ ظَلَّ وَجْهُهُ مُسْوَدًّا\n(And when the news of (the birth of) a female (child) is brought to any of them, his face becomes dark) meaning with distress and grief.\nوَهُوَ كَظِيمٌ\n(and he is filled with inner grief!) meaning he is silent because of the intensity of the grief he feels.\nيَتَوَارَىٰ مِنَ الْقَوْمِ\n(He hides himself from the people) meaning he does not want anyone to see him.\nمِن سُوءِ مَا بُشِّرَ بِهِ ۚ أَيُمْسِكُهُ عَلَىٰ هُونٍ أَمْ يَدُسُّهُ فِي التُّرَابِ\n(because of the evil of that whereof he has been informed. Shall he keep her with dishonor or bury her in the earth?) meaning should he keep her, humiliating her, not letting her inherit from him and not taking care of her, preferring his male children over her?\nأَمْ يَدُسُّهُ فِي التُّرَابِ\n(or bury her in the earth?) meaning bury her alive, as they used to do during the days of ignorance. How could they dislike something so intensely, yet attribute it to Allah?\nأَلَا سَاءَ مَا يَحْكُمُونَ\n(Certainly, evil is their decision.) meaning how evil are the words they say, the way they want to share things out and the things they attribute to Him. As Allah says:\nوَإِذَا بُشِّرَ أَحَدُهُم بِمَا ضَرَبَ لِلرَّحْمَٰنِ مَثَلًا ظَلَّ وَجْهُهُ مُسْوَدًّا وَهُوَ كَظِيمٌ\n(And if one of them is informed of the news of (the birth of a girl) that which he sets forth as a parable to the Most Gracious (Allah), his face becomes dark, and he is filled with grief!)(43:17). Here, Allah says:\nلِلَّذِينَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالْآخِرَةِ مَثَلُ السَّوْءِ\n(For those who do not believe in the Hereafter there is an evil description,) meaning, only imperfection is to be attributed to\nوَلِلَّهِ الْمَثَلُ الْأَعْلَىٰ\n(and for Allah is the highest description) meaning He is absolutely perfect in all ways and this absolute perfection is His Alone.\nوَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ\n(And He is the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.)","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=56","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:61","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:61–62","text":"And if Allah were to punish (all) mankind for their wrongdoing, He would not leave on it (the earth) a single moving creature, but He defers them to an appointed term; and when their term comes, they can neither delay nor advance it an hour (or a moment)(61)They assign to Allah that which they dislike (for themselves), and their tongues assert the lie that the better things will be theirs. No doubt the Fire is for them, and they will be forsaken (62)\n\n## Allah does not immediately punish for Disobedience\n\nAllah tells us about His patience with His creatures, even though they do wrong. If He were to punish them for what they have done, there would be no living creature left on the face of the earth, i.e., He would have destroyed every animal on earth after destroying the sons of Adam. But the Lord - magnificent is His glory - is forbearing and He covers people's faults. He waits until the appointed time, i.e., He does not rush to punish them. If He did, then there would be no one left. Ibn Jarir reported that Abu Salamah said: \"Abu Hurayrah heard a man saying, 'The wrongdoer harms no one but himself.' He turned to him and said, 'That is not true, by Allah! Even the buzzard dies in its nest because of the sins of the wrongdoer.'\"\n\n## They attribute to Allah what They Themselves dislike\n\nوَيَجْعَلُونَ لِلَّهِ مَا يَكْرَهُونَ\n(They assign to Allah that which they dislike (for themselves),) meaning, daughters, and partners, who are merely His servants, yet none of them would like to have someone sharing in his wealth.\nوَتَصِفُ أَلْسِنَتُهُمُ الْكَذِبَ أَنَّ لَهُمُ الْحُسْنَىٰ\n(and their tongues assert the lie that the better things will be theirs.) This is a denunciation of their claims that better things will be theirs in this world, and in the Hereafter. Allah tells us about what some of them said, as in the Ayat:\nوَلَئِنْ أَذَقْنَا الْإِنسَانَ مِنَّا رَحْمَةً ثُمَّ نَزَعْنَاهَا مِنْهُ إِنَّهُ لَيَئُوسٌ كَفُورٌ - وَلَئِنْ أَذَقْنَاهُ نَعْمَاءَ بَعْدَ ضَرَّاءَ مَسَّتْهُ لَيَقُولَنَّ ذَهَبَ السَّيِّئَاتُ عَنِّي ۚ إِنَّهُ لَفَرِحٌ فَخُورٌ\n(And if We give man a taste of mercy from Us, and then take it from him, verily! He is hopelessly, ungrateful. But if We let him taste of goodness after harm has touched him, he is sure to say: \"Ills have departed from me.\" Surely, he is cheerful, and boastful (ungrateful to Allah).)(11:9-10)\nوَلَئِنْ أَذَقْنَاهُ رَحْمَةً مِّنَّا مِن بَعْدِ ضَرَّاءَ مَسَّتْهُ لَيَقُولَنَّ هَٰذَا لِي وَمَا أَظُنُّ السَّاعَةَ قَائِمَةً وَلَئِن رُّجِعْتُ إِلَىٰ رَبِّي إِنَّ لِي عِندَهُ لَلْحُسْنَىٰ ۚ فَلَنُنَبِّئَنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِمَا عَمِلُوا وَلَنُذِيقَنَّهُم مِّنْ عَذَابٍ غَلِيظٍ\n(And if We give him a taste of mercy from Us, after some adversity has touched him, he is sure to say: \"This is due to me; I do not think that the Hour will occur. But if I am brought back to my Lord, then , with Him, there will surely be the best for me.\" Then, We will certainly show the disbelievers what they have done, and We shall make them taste severe torment.)(41:50)\nأَفَرَأَيْتَ الَّذِي كَفَرَ بِآيَاتِنَا وَقَالَ لَأُوتَيَنَّ مَالًا وَوَلَدًا\n(Have you seen the one who disbelieved in Our Ayat and said: \"I shall certainly be given wealth and children (if I came back to life).\")(19:77) Allah tells us about one of the two men:\nدَخَلَ جَنَّتَهُ وَهُوَ ظَالِمٌ لِّنَفْسِهِ قَالَ مَا أَظُنُّ أَن تَبِيدَ هَٰذِهِ أَبَدًا - وَمَا أَظُنُّ السَّاعَةَ قَائِمَةً وَلَئِن رُّدِدتُّ إِلَىٰ رَبِّي لَأَجِدَنَّ خَيْرًا مِّنْهَا مُنقَلَبًا\n(He went into his garden while wronging himself. He said: \"I do not think that this will ever perish. And I do not think that the Hour will ever come, and if indeed I am brought back to my Lord, (on the Day of Resurrection), then surely, I shall find better than this when I return to Him.\")(18:35-36)\nThese people combined bad deeds with the false hopes of being rewarded with good for those bad deeds, which is impossible. Thus Allah refuted their false hopes, when He said:\nلَا جَرَمَ\n(No doubt), meaning, truly it is inevitable that\nأَنَّ لَهُمُ النَّارَ\n(for them is the Fire), meaning, on the Day of Resurrection.\nوَأَنَّهُم مُّفْرَطُونَ\n(and they will be forsaken). Mujahid, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Qatadah and others said: \"This means they will be forgotten and neglected there.\" This is like the Ayah:\nفَالْيَوْمَ نَنسَاهُمْ كَمَا نَسُوا لِقَاءَ يَوْمِهِمْ هَٰذَا\n(So today We forget them just as they forgot meeting on this day of theirs.)(7:51). It was also reported from Qatadah that,\nمُّفْرَطُونَ\n(they will be forsaken) means 'they are hastened into the Fire.' There is no contradiction between the two, because they will be hastened into the Fire on the Day of Resurrection, then they will be forgotten there, i.e., left to dwell there for eternity.","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=61","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:63","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:63–65","text":"By Allah, We indeed sent (Messengers) to the nations before you, but Shaytan made their deeds seeming fair to them. So today he is their helper, and theirs will be a painful torment (63)And We have not revealed the Book to you, except that you may clearly explain to them those things in which they differ, and (as) a guidance and a mercy for a people who believe (64)And Allah sends water down from the sky, then He revives the earth with it after its death. Surely that is a sign for people who listen (65)\n\n## Finding Consolation in the Reminder of Those Who came before\n\nAllah says, 'He sent Messengers to the nations of the past, and they were rejected. You, O Muhammad, have an example in your brothers among the Messengers, so do not be distressed by your people's rejection. As for the idolators' rejection of the Messengers, the reason for this is that the Shaytan made their deeds attractive to them.'\nفَهُوَ وَلِيُّهُمُ الْيَوْمَ\n(So today he (Shaytan) is their helper,) meaning they will be suffering punishment while Shaytan is their only helper, and he cannot save them, so they have no one to answer their calls for help, and theirs is a painful punishment.\n\n## The Reason why the Qur'an was revealed\n\nThen Allah says to His Messenger ﷺ that He has revealed the Book to him to explain the truth to mankind in matters which they dispute over. So the Qur'an is a decisive arbitrator for every issue that they argue about.\nوَهُدًى\n(and (as) a guidance) meaning, for their hearts.\nوَرَحْمَةً\n(and a mercy) meaning, for the one who adheres to it.\nلِّقَوْمٍ يُؤْمِنُونَ\n(for a people who believe.) Just as Allah causes the Qur'an to bring life to hearts that were dead from disbelief, so He brings the earth to life after it has died, by sending down water from the sky.\nإِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً لِّقَوْمٍ يَسْمَعُونَ\n(Surely that is a sign for people who listen.) meaning those who understand the words and their meanings.","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=63","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:66","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:66–67","text":"And there is indeed a lesson for you in the An'am (cattle). We have made a drink for you out of what is in its belly, from between excretions and blood, pure milk; palatable to the drinkers (66)And from the fruits of date palms and grapes, you derive strong drink and a goodly provision. There is indeed a sign in this for those of reason (67)\n\n## Lessons and Blessings in Cattle and the Fruit of the Date-palm and Grapevine\n\nوَإِنَّ لَكُمْ\n(there is for you) - O mankind -\nفِي الْأَنْعَامِ\n(in the cattle) - meaning camels, cows and sheep,\nلَعِبْرَةً\n(a lesson) meaning a sign and an evidence of the wisdom, power, mercy and kindness of the Creator.\nنُّسْقِيكُم مِّمَّا فِي بُطُونِهِ\n(We have made a drink for you out of what is in its belly) meaning its singular forms refers to one cattle, or it could refer to the whole species. For cattle are the creatures which provide a drink from what is in their bellies and in another Ayah it is 'in their bellies.' Either way is plausible. He said,\nمِن بَيْنِ فَرْثٍ وَدَمٍ لَّبَنًا خَالِصًا\n(from between excretions and blood, pure milk;) meaning it is free of blood, and is pure in its whiteness, taste and sweetness. It is between excrement and blood in the belly of the animal, but each of them goes its own way after the food has been fully digested in its stomach. The blood goes to the veins, the milk goes to the udder, the urine goes to the bladder and the feces goes to the anus. None of them gets mixed with another after separating, and none of them is affected by the other.\nلَّبَنًا خَالِصًا سَائِغًا لِّلشَّارِبِينَ\n(pure milk; palatable to the drinkers.) meaning nothing to cause one to choke on it. When Allah mentions milk and how He has made it a palatable drink for mankind, He follows this with a reference to the drinks that people make from the fruits of the date palm and grapevine, and what they used to do with intoxicating Nabidh (drink made from dates) before it was forbidden. Thus He reminds them of His blessings, and says:\nوَمِن ثَمَرَاتِ النَّخِيلِ وَالْأَعْنَابِ تَتَّخِذُونَ مِنْهُ سَكَرًا\n(And from the fruits of date palms and grapes, you derive strong drink) This indicates that it was permissible to drink it before it was forbidden. It also indicates that strong drink (i.e., intoxicating drink) derived from dates is the same as strong drink derived from grapes. Also forbidden are strong drinks derived from wheat, barley, corn and honey, as is explained in detail in the Sunnah.\nسَكَرًا وَرِزْقًا حَسَنًا\n(strong drink and a goodly provision.) Ibn 'Abbas said: \"Strong drink is the product of these two fruits that is forbidden, and the good provision is what is permitted of them.\" According to another report: \"Strong drink is its unlawful, and the goodly provision is its lawful,\" referring to the fruits when they are dried, like dates and raisins, or products derived from them such as molasses, vinegar and wine (of grapes, dates) which are permissible to drink before they become strong (becomes alcoholic), as was stated in the Sunnah.\nإِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً لِّقَوْمٍ يَعْقِلُونَ\n(There is indeed a sign in this for those of reason.) It is appropriate to mention reason here, because it is the noblest feature of man. Hence Allah forbade this Ummah from drinking intoxicants, in order to protect their ability to reason. Allah says:\nوَجَعَلْنَا فِيهَا جَنَّاتٍ مِّن نَّخِيلٍ وَأَعْنَابٍ وَفَجَّرْنَا فِيهَا مِنَ الْعُيُونِ - لِيَأْكُلُوا مِن ثَمَرِهِ وَمَا عَمِلَتْهُ أَيْدِيهِمْ ۖ أَفَلَا يَشْكُرُونَ - سُبْحَانَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ الْأَزْوَاجَ كُلَّهَا مِمَّا تُنبِتُ الْأَرْضُ وَمِنْ أَنفُسِهِمْ وَمِمَّا لَا يَعْلَمُونَ\n(And We placed gardens of date palms and grapes in it, and We caused springs of water to gush forth in it. So that they may eat of its fruit - while their hands did not make it. Will they not then give thanks? Glory be to Him Who created all the pairs of that which the earth produces, as well as their own (human) kind (male and female), and of that which they know not.)(36:34-36)","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=66","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:68","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:68–69","text":"And your Lord inspired the bee, saying: \"Take you habitations in the mountains and in the trees and in what they (humans) erect. (68)\"Then, eat of all fruits, and follow the routes that your Lord made easy (for you).\" There comes forth from their bellies, a drink of varying colors, in which there is a cure for men. There is indeed a sign in that for people who reflect (69)\n\n## In the Bee and its Honey there is Blessing and a Lesson\n\nWhat is meant by inspiration here is guidance. The bee is guided to make its home in the mountains, in trees and in structures erected by man. The bee's home is a solid structure, with its hexagonal shapes and interlocking forms there is no looseness in its combs. Then Allah decrees that the bee will have permission to eat from all fruits and to follow the ways which Allah has made easy for it, wherever it wants to go in the vast spaces of the wilderness, valleys and high mountains. Then each bee comes back to its hive without swerving to the right or left, it comes straight back to its home where its offspring and honey are. It makes wax from its wings, and regurgitates honey from its mouth, and lays eggs from its rear, then the next morning it goes out to the fields again.\nفَاسْلُكِي سُبُلَ رَبِّكِ ذُلُلًا\n(and follow the routes of your Lord made easy (for you)) Qatadah and 'Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam said: \"This means, in an obedient way\", understanding it to be a description of the route of migration. Ibn Zayd said that this is like the Ayah:\nوَذَلَّلْنَاهَا لَهُمْ فَمِنْهَا رَكُوبُهُمْ وَمِنْهَا يَأْكُلُونَ\n(And We have subdued them for them so that some they may ride and some they may eat.)(36:72) He said: \"Do you not see that they move the bees' home from one land to another, and the bees follow them?\" The first opinion is clearly the more likely, as it describes the routes that the bees follow, i.e., 'follow these routes as they are easy for you.' This was stated by Mujahid. Ibn Jarir said that both opinions are correct.\nيَخْرُجُ مِن بُطُونِهَا شَرَابٌ مُّخْتَلِفٌ أَلْوَانُهُ فِيهِ شِفَاءٌ لِّلنَّاسِ\n(There comes forth from their bellies, a drink of varying colors, wherein is healing for men.)[meaning, honey, that is] white, yellow, red, or of other good colors, depending on the different things that the bees eat.\nفِيهِ شِفَاءٌ لِّلنَّاسِ\n(in which there is a cure for men.)\nmeaning there is a cure in honey for diseases that people suffer from. Some of those who spoke about the study of Prophetic medicine said that if [Allah] had said, 'in which there is the cure for men', then it would be the remedy for all diseases, but He said, 'in which there is a cure for men', meaning that it is the right treatment for every \"cold\" disease, because it is \"hot\", and a disease should be treated with its opposite.\nAl-Bukhari and Muslim recorded in their Sahihs from Qatadah from Abu Al-Mutawakkil 'Ali bin Dawud An-Naji from Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri that a man came to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and said, \"My brother is suffering from diarrhea\". He said,\nاسْقِهِ عَسَلًا\n(Give him honey to drink.) The man went and gave him honey, then he came back and said, \"O Messenger of Allah! I gave him honey to drink, and he only got worse.\" The Prophet ﷺ said,\nاذْهَبْ فَاسْقِهِ عَسَلًا\n(Go and give him honey to drink.) So he went and gave him honey, then he came back and said, \"O Messenger of Allah! it only made him worse. \" The Prophet ﷺ said,\nصَدَقَ اللهُ وَكَذَبَ بَطْنُ أَخِيكَ، اذْهَبْ فَاسْقِهِ عَسَلًا\n(Allah speaks the truth and your brother's stomach is lying. Go and give him honey to drink.) So he went and gave him honey, and he recovered.\"\nIt is reported in the Two Sahihs from 'A'ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to like sweet things and honey. This is the wording of Al-Bukhari, who also reported in his Sahih from Ibn 'Abbas that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nالشِّفَاءُ فِي ثَلَاثَةٍ: فِي شَرْطَةِ مِحْجَمٍ، أَوْ شَرْبَةِ عَسَلٍ، أَوْ كَيَّةٍ بِنَارٍ، وَأَنْهَى أُمَّتِي عَنِ الْكَيِّ\n(Healing is to be found in three things: the cut made by the cupper, or drinking honey, or in branding with fire (cauterizing), but I have forbidden my Ummah to use branding.)\nإِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً لِّقَوْمٍ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ\n(There is indeed a sign in that for people who reflect.) meaning in the fact that Allah inspires this weak little creature to travel through the vast fields and feed from every kind of fruit, then gather it for wax and honey, which are some of the best things, in this is a sign for people who think about the might and power of the bee's Creator Who causes all of this to happen. From this they learn that He is the Initiator, the All-Powerful, the All-Wise, the All-Knowing, the Most Generous, the Most Merciful.","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=68","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:70","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:70","text":"And Allah created you and then He will cause you to die; and among you there are some who are sent back to senility, so that they know nothing after having known (much). Truly, Allah is Knowing, capable of all things (70)\n\n## In Man there is a Lesson\n\nAllah tells us that He is controlling the affairs of His servants. He is the One Who created them out of nothing, then He will cause them to die. But there are some of them that He allows to grow old, which is a physical weakness, as Allah says:\nاللَّهُ الَّذِي خَلَقَكُم مِّن ضَعْفٍ ثُمَّ جَعَلَ مِن بَعْدِ ضَعْفٍ قُوَّةً\n(Allah is He Who created you in (a state of) weakness, then gave you strength after weakness, then after strength gave (you) weakness)(30:54)\nلِكَيْ لَا يَعْلَمَ بَعْدَ عِلْمٍ شَيْئًا\n(so that they know nothing after having known.) meaning, after he knew things, he will reach a stage where he knows nothing because of weakness of mind due to old age and senility. Thus Al-Bukhari, when commenting on this Ayah, reported a narration from Anas bin Malik that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to pray:\nأَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنَ الْبُخْلِ وَالْكَسَلِ وَالْهَرَمِ، وَأَرْذَلِ الْعُمُرِ وَعَذَابِ الْقَبْرِ، وَفِتْنَةِ الدَّجَّالِ وَفِتْنَةِ الْمَحْيَا وَالْمَمَاتِ\n(I seek refuge with You from miserliness, laziness, old age, senility, the punishment of the grave, the Fitnah of the Dajjal and the trials of life and death.)\nZuhayr bin Abi Sulma said, in his famous Mu'allaqah: \"I became exhausted from the responsibilities of life. Whoever lives for eighty years, no wonder he is tired. I saw death hitting people like a crazed camel, and whoever it hit dies, but whoever is not hit lives until he grows old.\"","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=70","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:71","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:71","text":"And Allah honored some of you over others with wealth and properties. Then, those who are so honored will by no means hand over their wealth and properties to those (captives of war) whom their right hands possess, so that they may be equal with them in that. Do they then deny the favor of Allah (71)\n\n## There is a Sign and a Blessing in Matters of People's Livelihood\n\nAllah explains to the idolators the ignorance and disbelief involved in their claim that Allah has partners while also admitting that these partners are His servants. In their Talbiyah for Hajj, they used to say, \"Here I am, there are no partners for You except Your own partner, You own him and everything he owns.\" Allah says, denouncing them: 'You would not accept for your servant to have an equal share in your wealth, so how is it that Allah would accept His servant to be His equal in divinity and glory? As Allah says elsewhere:\nضَرَبَ لَكُم مَّثَلًا مِّنْ أَنفُسِكُمْ ۖ هَل لَّكُم مِّن مَّا مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَانُكُم مِّن شُرَكَاءَ فِي مَا رَزَقْنَاكُمْ فَأَنتُمْ فِيهِ سَوَاءٌ تَخَافُونَهُمْ كَخِيفَتِكُمْ أَنفُسَكُمْ\n(He sets forth a parable for you from yourselves: Do you have partners among those whom your right hands possess (i.e. your servant) to share as equals in the wealth We have granted you, those whom you fear as you fear each other?)(30:28)\nAl-'Awfi reported that Ibn 'Abbas mentioned this Ayah, saying, \"Allah is saying - 'If they did not want their servant to have a share with them in their wealth and wives, how can My servant have a share with Me in My power?' Thus Allah says:\nأَفَبِنِعْمَةِ اللَّهِ يَجْحَدُونَ\n(Do they then deny the favor of Allah?)\" According to another report, Ibn 'Abbas said: \"How can they accept for Me that which they do not accept for themselves?\"\nأَفَبِنِعْمَةِ اللَّهِ يَجْحَدُونَ\n(Do they then deny the favor of Allah?) meaning, they assign to Allah a share of the tilth and cattle which He has created. They denied His blessings and associated others in worship with Him. Al-Hasan Al-Basri said: \"Umar bin Al-Khattab wrote this letter to Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari: 'Be content with your provision in this world, for the Most Merciful has honored some of His servants over others in terms of provision as a test of both. The one who has been given plenty is being tested to see if he will give thanks to Allah and fulfill the duties which are his by virtue of his wealth...'\" It was reported by Ibn Abi Hatim.","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=71","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:72","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:72","text":"And Allah has made for you mates of your own kind, and has made for you, from your mates, sons and grandsons, and has granted you good provisions. Do they then believe in false deities and deny favor of Allah (72)\n\n## Among His Blessings and Signs are Mates, Children and Grandchildren\n\nAllah mentions the blessing He has bestowed upon His servant by giving them mates from among themselves, mates of their own kind. If He had given them mates of another kind, there would be no harmony, love and mercy between them. But out of His mercy He has made the Children of Adam male and female, and has made the females wives or mates for the males. Then Allah mentions that from these wives He creates children and grandchildren, one's children's children. This was the opinion of Ibn 'Abbas, 'Ikrimah, Al-Hasan, Ad-Dahhak and Ibn Zayd.\nShu'bah said, narrating from Abu Bishr from Sa'id bin Jubayr from Ibn 'Abbas: \"Children and grandchildren, who are one's children and one's children's children.\" It was also said that this means servants and helpers, or it means sons-in-law or in-laws. I say: if we understand\nوَحَفَدَةً\n(grandsons) to refer back to wives, then it must mean children, children's children, and sons-in-law, because they are the husbands of one's daughter or the children of one's wife.\nوَرَزَقَكُم مِّنَ الطَّيِّبَاتِ\n(and has granted you good provisions.) meaning your food and drink. Then Allah denounces those who associate others in worship with the One Who bestows blessings on them:\nأَفَبِالْبَاطِلِ يُؤْمِنُونَ\n(Do they then believe in false deities), meaning idols and rivals to Allah\nوَبِنِعْمَتِ اللَّهِ هُمْ يَكْفُرُونَ\n(and deny the favor of Allah?) meaning, by concealing the blessings that Allah has given them and attributing them to others. According to a Sahih Hadith, the Prophet ﷺ said:\nإِنَّ اللهَ يَقُولُ لِلْعَبْدِ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ مُمْتَنًّا عَلَيْهِ: أَلَمْ أُزَوِّجْكَ؟ أَلَمْ أُكْرِمْكَ؟ أَلَمْ أُسَخِّرْ لَكَ الْخَيْلَ وَالْإِبِلَ، وَأَذَرْكَ تَرْأَسُ وَتَرْبَعُ؟\n(Allah will say to His servant on the Day of Resurrection, reminding him of His blessings: \"Did I not give you a wife? Did I not honor you? Did I not subject horses and camels to your use, and cause you to occupy a position of leadership and honor?\")","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=72","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:73","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:73–74","text":"And they worship others besides Allah such as do not have power to grant them any provision from the heavens or the earth nor the ability to do so (73)So do not give examples on behalf of Allah. Truly, Allah knows and you know not (74)\n\n## Denouncing the Worship of anything besides Allah\n\nAllah tells us about the Mushrikin who worship others besides Him, even though He alone is the bountiful Provider, the Creator and Sustainer, without partners or associates, but they still worship idols and make rivals for Him. He says:\nمَا لَا يَمْلِكُ لَهُمْ رِزْقًا مِّنَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ شَيْئًا\n(such as do not have power to grant them any provision from the heavens or the earth) meaning, nobody can cause rain to fall, or make plants and trees grow. They cannot do these things for themselves, even if they wanted to. Thus Allah says:\nفَلَا تَضْرِبُوا لِلَّهِ الْأَمْثَالَ\n(So do not give examples on behalf of Allah.) meaning, do not set up rivals to Him or describe anything as being like Him.\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ يَعْلَمُ وَأَنتُمْ لَا تَعْلَمُونَ\n(Truly, Allah knows and you know not.) meaning, He knows and bears witness that there is no god but Him, but you are ignorant and associate others in worship with Him.","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=73","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:75","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:75","text":"Allah gives the example of a servant under the possession of another, he has no power of any sort, and a man on whom We have bestowed good provisions from Us, and he spends from that secretly and openly. Can they be equal? (By no means). All the praises and thanks are to Allah. Nay! (But) most of them know not (75)\n\n## The Example of the Believer and the Disbeliever, or the Idol and the True God\n\nAl-'Awfi reported that Ibn 'Abbas said: \"This is the example which Allah gives of the disbeliever and the believer.\" This was also the view of Qatadah and Ibn Jarir. The servant who has no power over anything is like the disbeliever, and the one who is given good provisions and spends of them secretly and openly is like the believer. Ibn Abi Najih reported that Mujahid said: \"This is an example given of the idol and the True God - can they be the same?\" Once the difference between them is so clear and so obvious, no one can be unaware of it except the one who is foolish. Allah says:\nالْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ ۚ بَلْ أَكْثَرُهُمْ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ\n(All the praises and thanks are to Allah. Nay! (But) most of them know not.)","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=75","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:76","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:76","text":"And Allah gives an example of two men, one of them dumb, who has no power over anything, and he is a burden on his master; whichever way he directs him, he brings no good. Is such a man equal to one who commands justice, and is himself on the straight path (76)\n\n## Another Example\n\nMujahid said, \"This also refers to idols and the True God, may He be exalted.\" Meaning that the idol is dumb and cannot speak or say anything, good or otherwise. It cannot do anything at all, no words, no action, it is dependent and is a burden on its master.\nأَيْنَمَا يُوَجِّههُّ\n(whichever way he directs him,) meaning, wherever he sends him\nلَا يَأْتِ بِخَيْرٍ\n(he brings no good.) meaning, he does not succeed in what he wants.\nهَلْ يَسْتَوِي\n(Is such a man equal) meaning, a man who has these attributes\nوَمَن يَأْمُرُ بِالْعَدْلِ\n(to one who commands justice) meaning fairness, one whose words are true and whose deeds are righteous.\nوَهُوَ عَلَىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُّسْتَقِيمٍ\n(and is himself on the straight path?) Al-'Awfi reported that Ibn 'Abbas said: \"This is also an example of the disbeliever and the believer\", as in the previous Ayah.","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=76","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:77","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:77–79","text":"And to Allah belongs the Unseen of the heavens and the earth. And the matter of the Hour is not but as a twinkling of the eye, or even nearer. Truly, Allah is able to do all things (77)And Allah has brought you out from the wombs of your mothers while you knew nothing. And He gave you hearing, sight, and hearts, that you might give thanks (78)Do they not see the birds held (flying) in the midst of the sky None holds them up but Allah. Verily, in this are clear signs for people who believe (79)\n\n## The Unseen belongs to Allah and only He has Knowledge of the Hour\n\nAllah tells us of the perfection of His knowledge and ability to do all things, by telling us that He alone knows the Unseen of the heavens and the earth. No one knows anything about such things except for what Allah informs about as He wills. His complete power, which no one can oppose or resist, means that when He wants a thing, He only has to say to it \"Be!\" and it is, as Allah says:\nوَمَا أَمْرُنَا إِلَّا وَاحِدَةٌ كَلَمْحٍ بِالْبَصَرِ\n(And Our commandment is but one as the twinkling of an eye.)(54:50) meaning, whatever He wills happens in blinking. Thus Allah says here:\nوَمَا أَمْرُ السَّاعَةِ إِلَّا كَلَمْحِ الْبَصَرِ أَوْ هُوَ أَقْرَبُ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ\n(And the matter of the Hour is not but as a twinkling of the eye, or even nearer. Truly, Allah is Able to do all things.) Elsewhere, Allah says:\nمَّا خَلْقُكُمْ وَلَا بَعْثُكُمْ إِلَّا كَنَفْسٍ وَاحِدَةٍ\n(The processes of creating you all and resurrecting you all are but like that of (the creation and resurrection of) a single person.)(31:28)\n\n## Among the Favors Allah has granted People are Hearing, Sight and the Heart\n\nThen Allah mentions His blessings to His servants in that He brought them from their mothers' wombs not knowing a thing, then He gives them hearing to recognize voices, sight to see visible things and hearts - meaning reason - whose seat, according to the correct view, is the heart, although it was also said that its seat is the brain. With his reason, a person can distinguish between what is harmful and what is beneficial. These abilities and senses develop gradually in man. The more he grows, the more his hearing, vision and reason increase, until they reach their peak. Allah has created these faculties in man to enable him to worship his Lord, so he uses all these organs, abilities and strengths to obey his Master.\nAl-Bukhari reported in his Sahih from Abu Hurayrah that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nيَقُولُ تَعَالَى: مَنْ عَادَى لِي وَلِيًّا فَقَدْ بَارَزَنِي بِالْحَرْبِ، وَمَا تَقَرَّبَ إِلَيَّ عَبْدِي بِشَيْءٍ أَفْضَلُ مِنْ أَدَاءِ مَا افْتَرَضْتُ عَلَيْهِ، وَلَا يَزَالُ عَبْدِي يَتَقَرَّبُ إِلَيَّ بِالنَّوَافِلِ حَتَّى أُحِبَّهُ، فَإِذَا أَحْبَبْتُهُ كُنْتُ سَمْعَهُ الَّذِي يَسْمَعُ بِهِ، وَبَصَرَهُ الَّذِي يُبْصِرُ بِهِ، وَيَدَهُ الَّتِي يَبْطِشُ بِهَا، وَرِجْلَهُ الَّتِي يَمْشِي بِهَا، وَلَئِنْ سَأَلَنِي لَأُعْطِيَنَّهُ، وَلَئِنْ دَعَانِي لَأُجِيبَنَّهُ، وَلَئِنِ اسْتَعَاذَ بِي لَأُعِيذَنَّهُ، وَمَا تَرَدَّدْتُ فِي شَيْءٍ أَنَا فَاعِلُهُ تَرَدُّدِي فِي قَبْضِ نَفْسِ عَبْدِي الْمُؤْمِنِ يَكْرَهُ الْمَوْتَ وَأَكْرَهُ مَسَاءَتَهُ وَلَا بُدَّ لَهُ مِنْهُ\n(Allah says: \"Whoever takes My friend as an enemy, has declared war on Me. My servant does not draw near to Me with anything better than his doing that which I have enjoined upon him, and My servant keeps drawing near to Me by doing Nawafil (supererogatory) deeds until I love him. And when I love him, I am his hearing with which he hears, his vision with which he sees, his hand with which he strikes and his foot with which he walks. Were he to ask Me for anything, I would give it to him, if he were to call on Me, I would respond, if he were to seek Me for refuge I would surely grant him it. I do not hesitate to do anything as I hesitate to take the soul of My believing servant, because he hates death and I hate to upset him, but it is inevitable.\")\nThe meaning of the Hadith is that when a person is sincere in his obedience towards Allah, all his deeds are done for the sake of Allah, so he only hears for the sake of Allah, he only sees for the sake of Allah - meaning he only listens to or looks at what has been allowed by Allah. He does not strike or walk except in obedience to Allah, seeking Allah's help in all of these things. Thus in some versions of the Hadith, narrated outside the Sahih, after the phrase \"his foot with which he walks\", there is added:\nفَبِي يَسْمَعُ، وَبِي يُبْصِرُ، وَبِي يَبْطِشُ، وَبِي يَمْشِي\n(So through Me he hears, through Me he sees, through Me he strikes and through Me he walks.) Thus Allah says:\nوَجَعَلَ لَكُمُ السَّمْعَ وَالْأَبْصَارَ وَالْأَفْئِدَةَ ۙ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَشْكُرُونَ\n(And He gave you hearing, sight, and hearts that you might give thanks.) Elsewhere, He says:\nقُلْ هُوَ الَّذِي أَنشَأَكُمْ وَجَعَلَ لَكُمُ السَّمْعَ وَالْأَبْصَارَ وَالْأَفْئِدَةَ ۖ قَلِيلًا مَّا تَشْكُرُونَ - قُلْ هُوَ الَّذِي ذَرَأَكُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَإِلَيْهِ تُحْشَرُونَ\n(Say it is He Who has created you, and endowed you with hearing and seeing, and hearts. Little thanks you give. Say: \"It is He Who has created you on the earth, and to Him shall you be gathered (in the Hereafter).\")(67:23-24)\n\n## In the Subjection of the Birds in the Sky there is a Sign\n\nThen Allah tells His servants to look at the birds held (flying) in the sky, between heaven and earth, and how He has caused them to fly with their wings in the sky. They are held up only by Him, it is He Who gave them the strength to do that, subjecting the air to carry them and support them. As Allah says in Surat Al-Mulk:\nأَوَلَمْ يَرَوْا إِلَى الطَّيْرِ فَوْقَهُمْ صَافَّاتٍ وَيَقْبِضْنَ ۚ مَا يُمْسِكُهُنَّ إِلَّا الرَّحْمَٰنُ ۚ إِنَّهُ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ بَصِيرٌ\n(Do they not see the birds above them, spreading their wings out and folding them in? None holds them up except the Most Gracious (Allah). Verily, He is the All-Seer of everything.)(67:19) And here Allah says:\nإِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِّقَوْمٍ يُؤْمِنُونَ\n(Verily, in this are clear signs for people who believe.)","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=77","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:80","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:80–83","text":"And Allah had made your homes a place of rest for you, and made dwellings for you out of the hides of the cattle which you find so light when you travel and when you camp; and furnishings and articles of convenience out of their wool, fur, and hair - comfort for a while (80)And Allah has made shade for you out of that which He has created, and He has made places of refuge in the mountains for you, and He has made garments for you to protect you from the heat, and coats of mail to protect you from your violence. Thus does He perfect His favor for you, that you may submit yourselves to His will (81)Then, if they turn away, your duty (O Muhammad) is only to convey (the Message) in a clear way (82)They recognize the grace of Allah, yet they deny it (by worshipping others besides Allah) and most of them are disbelievers (83)\n\n## Homes, Furnishings and Clothing are also Blessings from Allah\n\nAllah mentions His great blessings for His servant in that He has given them homes to dwell in and protect themselves with, in which they find all kinds of benefits. He has also given them homes from the hides of cattle, i.e., leather, which are light and easy to carry on journeys and can be erected wherever they stop, whether they are traveling or are settled. Thus Allah says:\nتَسْتَخِفُّونَهَا يَوْمَ ظَعْنِكُمْ وَيَوْمَ إِقَامَتِكُمْ\n(which you find so light when you travel and when you camp;)\nوَمِنْ أَصْوَافِهَا وَأَوْبَارِهَا وَأَشْعَارِهَا\n(out of their wool, fur and hair) refers to sheep, camels and goats respectively.\nأَثَاثًا\n(furnishings) meaning what you take from them, i.e., wealth. It was also said that it means articles of convenience, or clothing. The correct view is more general in meaning than this; it means that you make carpets, clothing and other things from their wool, hair etc., which you use as wealth and for trade. Ibn 'Abbas said: 'Al-Athath means articles of convenience and comfort.\" This was also the view of Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Al-Hasan, 'Atiyah Al-'Awfi, 'Ata' Al-Khurasani, Ad-Dahhak and Qatadah. The phrase,\nإِلَىٰ حِينٍ\n(for a while) means, until the appointed time.\n\n## Shade, Places of Refuge in the Mountains, Garments and Coats of Mail are also Blessings from Allah\n\nوَاللَّهُ جَعَلَ لَكُم مِّمَّا خَلَقَ ظِلَالًا\n(And Allah has made shade for you out of that which He has created,) Qatadah said: \"This means trees.\"\nوَجَعَلَ لَكُم مِّنَ الْجِبَالِ أَكْنَانًا\n(and He has made places of refuge in the mountains for you,) meaning fortresses and strongholds.\nجَعَلَ لَكُمْ سَرَابِيلَ تَقِيكُمُ الْحَرَّ\n(and He has made garments for you to protect you from the heat,) meaning clothing of cotton, linen and wool.\nوَسَرَابِيلَ تَقِيكُم بَأْسَكُمْ\n(and coats of mail to protect you from your violence.) such as shields made of layers of sheet iron, coats of mail and so on.\nكَذَٰلِكَ يُتِمُّ نِعْمَتَهُ عَلَيْكُمْ\n(Thus does He perfect His favor for you,) meaning, thus He gives you what you need to go about your business, so that this will help you to worship and obey Him.\nلَعَلَّكُمْ تُسْلِمُونَ\n(that you may submit yourselves to His will). This is interpreted by the majority to mean submitting to Allah or becoming Muslim.\n\n## All the Messenger has to do is convey the Message\n\nفَإِن تَوَلَّوْا\n(Then, if they turn away,) meaning, after this declaration and reminder, do not worry about them.\nفَإِنَّمَا عَلَيْكَ الْبَلَاغُ الْمُبِينُ\n(your duty (O Muhammad) is only to convey (the Message) in a clear way), and you have delivered the Message to them.\nيَعْرِفُونَ نِعْمَتَ اللَّهِ ثُمَّ يُنكِرُونَهَا\n(They recognize the grace of Allah, yet they deny it) meaning they know that Allah is the One Who grants these blessings to them, and that He is Bountiful towards them, but they still deny this by worshipping others besides Him and thinking that their help and provisions come from others besides Him.\nوَأَكْثَرُهُمُ الْكَافِرُونَ\n(and most of them are disbelievers.)","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=80","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:84","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:84–88","text":"And on the Day when We resurrect a witness from each nation, then those who disbelieve will not be given leave, nor will they be allowed (to return to the world) to repent and ask for Allah's forgiveness.) 85. And once those who did wrong see the torment, it will not decrease for them, nor will they be given respite (84)And when those who associated partners with Allah see their partners, they will say: \"Our Lord! These are our partners whom we used to call upon besides you.\" But they will throw back their statement at them (saying): \"You indeed are liars! (85)And they will offer (their full) submission to Allah on that Day, and what they falsely invented will wander away from them (86)Those who disbelieved and tried to obstruct the path of Allah, for them We will add torment on top of the torment because of the corruption they spread (87)\n\n## The Plight of the Idolators on the Day of Judgement\n\nAllah tells us about the predicament of the idolators on the Day when they will be resurrected in the realm of the Hereafter. He will raise a witness from every nation - that is - their Prophet, to testify about their response to the Message he conveyed from Allah.\nثُمَّ لَا يُؤْذَنُ لِلَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا\n(then, those who disbelieved will not be given leave.) meaning, they will not be allowed to offer any excuse, as Allah says:\nهَٰذَا يَوْمُ لَا يَنطِقُونَ - وَلَا يُؤْذَنُ لَهُمْ فَيَعْتَذِرُونَ\n(That will be a Day when they do not speak. And they will not be permitted to present any excuse)(77:35-36). Hence, Allah says:\nوَلَا هُمْ يُسْتَعْتَبُونَ - وَإِذَا رَأَى الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا\n(nor will they be allowed (to return to the world) to repent and ask for Allah's forgiveness. And once those who did wrong see) meaning those who associated others in worship with Allah,\nالْعَذَابَ فَلَا يُخَفَّفُ عَنْهُمْ\n(the torment, it will not decrease for them,) meaning it will not be reduced for them even for a moment.\nوَلَا هُمْ يُنظَرُونَ\n(nor will they be given respite.) meaning, it will not be delayed for them, rather they will be taken quickly from the place of gathering, with no calling to account. Then Hell will be brought forth, pulled by seventy thousand ropes, each of which is held by seventy thousand angels, and a neck will stretch forth from Hell towards the people, and it will expel a gust of hot air. No one will be left but will fall to his knees. Then it (the neck that is stretched forth) will say, \"I have been entrusted to deal with every stubborn, arrogant one who joined another god with Allah,\" and so and so, mentioning different types of people, as was reported in the Hadith. Then it will come down upon them and pick them up from where they are standing as a bird picks up a seed. Allah says:\nإِذَا رَأَتْهُم مِّن مَّكَانٍ بَعِيدٍ سَمِعُوا لَهَا تَغَيُّظًا وَزَفِيرًا - وَإِذَا أُلْقُوا مِنْهَا مَكَانًا ضَيِّقًا مُّقَرَّنِينَ دَعَوْا هُنَالِكَ ثُبُورًا - لَّا تَدْعُوا الْيَوْمَ ثُبُورًا وَاحِدًا وَادْعُوا ثُبُورًا كَثِيرًا\n(When it (Hell) sees them from a far place, they will hear its raging and its roaring. And when they are thrown into a narrow part of it, chained together, they will cry for destruction. Today, do not scream for one destruction, but scream repeatedly for destruction.)(25:12-14)\nوَرَأَى الْمُجْرِمُونَ النَّارَ فَظَنُّوا أَنَّهُم مُّوَاقِعُوهَا وَلَمْ يَجِدُوا عَنْهَا مَصْرِفًا\n(And the guilty shall see the Fire and apprehend that they are about to fall into it. And they will find no way to avoid it.)(18:53)\nلَوْ يَعْلَمُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا حِينَ لَا يَكُفُّونَ عَن وُجُوهِهِمُ النَّارَ وَلَا عَن ظُهُورِهِمْ وَلَا هُمْ يُنصَرُونَ - بَلْ تَأْتِيهِم بَغْتَةً فَتَبْهَتُهُمْ فَلَا يَسْتَطِيعُونَ رَدَّهَا وَلَا هُمْ يُنظَرُونَ\n(If only those who disbelieved knew (about the time) when they will not be able to protect their faces nor their backs from the Fire, and they have no help. Nay, it (the Fire) will come upon them all of a sudden and will perplex them, and they will have no power to avert it nor will they have any respite.)(21:39-40)\n\n## The gods of the Idolators will disown Them at the Time when They need them most\n\nThen Allah tells us that their gods will disown them when they need them most. He says:\nوَإِذَا رَأَى الَّذِينَ أَشْرَكُوا شُرَكَاءَهُمْ\n(And when those who associated partners with Allah see their partners) meaning, those whom they used to worship in this world.'\nقَالُوا رَبَّنَا هَٰؤُلَاءِ شُرَكَاؤُنَا الَّذِينَ كُنَّا نَدْعُو مِن دُونِكَ ۖ فَأَلْقَوْا إِلَيْهِمُ الْقَوْلَ إِنَّكُمْ لَكَاذِبُونَ\n(they will say: \"Our Lord! These are our partners whom we used to call upon besides you.\" But they will throw their statements back at them (saying): \"You are indeed liars!\") i.e., those gods will say to them, 'you are lying. We never commanded you to worship us.' Allah says:\nوَمَنْ أَضَلُّ مِمَّن يَدْعُو مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ مَن لَّا يَسْتَجِيبُ لَهُ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ وَهُمْ عَن دُعَائِهِمْ غَافِلُونَ - وَإِذَا حُشِرَ النَّاسُ كَانُوا لَهُمْ أَعْدَاءً وَكَانُوا بِعِبَادَتِهِمْ كَافِرِينَ\n(And who is more astray than one who calls upon others besides Allah, such as will not answer him till the Day of Resurrection, and who are (even) unaware of their invocations to them? And when the people are gathered (on the Day of Resurrection), they (false deities) will become their enemies and will deny their worship,)(46:5-6)\nوَاتَّخَذُوا مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ آلِهَةً لِّيَكُونُوا لَهُمْ عِزًّا - كَلَّا ۚ سَيَكْفُرُونَ بِعِبَادَتِهِمْ وَيَكُونُونَ عَلَيْهِمْ ضِدًّا\n(And they have taken gods besides Allah, that they might give them honor, power and glory. Nay, but they will deny their worship, and become their adversaries (on the Day of Resurrection).)(19:81-82) Al-Khalil [Ibrahim] said:\nثُمَّ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ يَكْفُرُ بَعْضُكُم بِبَعْضٍ\n(but on the Day of Resurrection, you will disown each other)[29:25] And Allah says:\nوَقِيلَ ادْعُوا شُرَكَاءَكُمْ\n(And it will be said (to them): \"Call upon your partners\")[28:64] And there are many other similar Ayat.\n\n## Everything will surrender to Allah on the Day of Resurrection\n\nوَأَلْقَوْا إِلَى اللَّهِ يَوْمَئِذٍ السَّلَمَ\n(And they will offer (their full) submission to Allah on that Day,) Qatadah and 'Ikrimah said: \"They will humble themselves and surrender on that Day,\" i.e., they will all surrender to Allah, there will not be anyone who does not hear and obey. As Allah says:\nأَسْمِعْ بِهِمْ وَأَبْصِرْ يَوْمَ يَأْتُونَنَا\n(How clearly will they see and hear, the Day when they will appear before Us!)[19:38] meaning, they will see and hear better than they have ever seen and heard before. And Allah says:\nوَلَوْ تَرَىٰ إِذِ الْمُجْرِمُونَ نَاكِسُو رُءُوسِهِمْ عِندَ رَبِّهِمْ رَبَّنَا أَبْصَرْنَا وَسَمِعْنَا\n(And if you only could see when the guilty hang their heads before their Lord (saying): \"Our Lord! We have now seen and heard.\")[32:12]\nوَعَنَتِ الْوُجُوهُ لِلْحَيِّ الْقَيُّومِ\n(And (all) faces shall be humbled before the Ever Living, the Sustainer.)[20:111] meaning, they will humble and submit themselves.\nوَأَلْقَوْا إِلَى اللَّهِ يَوْمَئِذٍ السَّلَمَ ۖ وَضَلَّ عَنْهُم مَّا كَانُوا يَفْتَرُونَ\n(And they will offer (their full) submission to Allah on that Day, and what they falsely invented will wander away from them.) The things that they used to worship which were all based on fabrications and lies, will all disappear, and they will have no helper or supporter, and no one to turn to.\n\n## Those among the Idolators who corrupted Others will receive a Greater Punishment\n\nThen Allah tells us:\nالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَصَدُّوا عَن سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ زِدْنَاهُمْ عَذَابًا\n(Those who disbelieved and tried to obstruct the path of Allah, for them We will add torment) meaning one punishment for their disbelief and another punishment for turning others away from following the truth, as Allah says:\nوَهُمْ يَنْهَوْنَ عَنْهُ وَيَنْأَوْنَ عَنْهُ\n(And they prevent others from him and they themselves keep away from him)[6:26] meaning they forbade others to follow him and they themselves shunned him, but:\nوَإِن يُهْلِكُونَ إِلَّا أَنفُسَهُمْ وَمَا يَشْعُرُونَ\n(they destroyed only themselves, while they do not realize it.)[6:26] This is evidence that there will be varying levels of punishment for the disbelievers, just as there will be varying degrees of Paradise for the believers, as Allah says:\nقَالَ لِكُلٍّ ضِعْفٌ وَلَٰكِن لَّا تَعْلَمُونَ\n(For each one there is double (torment), but you know not.)[7:38]","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=84","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:89","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:89","text":"And on the Day when We resurrect a witness from each nation from among themselves, and We bring you (O Muhammad) as a witness against these. And We have revealed the Book (the Qur'an) to you as an explanation of everything, a guidance, a mercy, and good news for the Muslims (89)\n\n## Every Prophet will bear Witness against his Nation on the Day of Resurrection\n\nAllah addressed His servant and Messenger Muhammad ﷺ, saying:\nوَيَوْمَ نَبْعَثُ فِي كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ شَهِيدًا عَلَيْهِم مِّنْ أَنفُسِهِمْ ۖ وَجِئْنَا بِكَ شَهِيدًا عَلَىٰ هَٰؤُلَاءِ\n(And on the Day when We resurrect a witness from each nation from among themselves, and We bring you (O Muhammad) as a witness against these.), meaning, your Ummah. The Ayah means: remember that Day and its terrors, and the great honor and high position that Allah has bestowed upon you. This Ayah is like the Ayah with which 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud ended when he recited to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ from the beginning of Surat An-Nisa'. When he reached the Ayah:\nفَكَيْفَ إِذَا جِئْنَا مِن كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ بِشَهِيدٍ وَجِئْنَا بِكَ عَلَىٰ هَٰؤُلَاءِ شَهِيدًا\n(How (will it be) then, when We bring from each nation a witness and We bring you (O Muhammad) as a witness against these?)[4:41] the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said to him:\nحَسْبُكَ\n(Enough.) Ibn Mas'ud said: \"I turned to him and saw his eyes streaming with tears.\"\n\n## The Qur'an explains Everything\n\nوَنَزَّلْنَا عَلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ تِبْيَانًا لِّكُلِّ شَيْءٍ\n(And We revealed the Book (the Qur'an) to you as an explanation of everything,) Ibn Mas'ud said: \"[Allah] made it clear that in this Qur'an there is complete knowledge and about everything.\" The Qur'an contains all kinds of beneficial knowledge, such as reports of what happened in the past, information about what is yet to come, what is lawful and unlawful, and what people need to know about their worldly affairs, their religion, their livelihood in this world, and their destiny in the Hereafter.\nوَهُدًى\n(a guidance) means, for their hearts.\nوَرَحْمَةً وَبُشْرَىٰ لِلْمُسْلِمِينَ\n(a mercy, and good news for the Muslims.) Al-Awza'i said:\nوَنَزَّلْنَا عَلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ تِبْيَانًا لِّكُلِّ شَيْءٍ\n(And We have revealed the Book (the Qur'an) as an explanation of everything,) meaning, with the Sunnah. The is the reason why the phrase,\nوَنَزَّلْنَا عَلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ\n(And We have revealed the Book to you) is mentioned immediately after the phrase,\nوَجِئْنَا بِكَ شَهِيدًا عَلَىٰ هَٰؤُلَاءِ\n(And We shall bring you (O Muhammad) as a witness against these.) the meaning - and Allah knows best - is that the One Who obligated you to convey the Book which He revealed to you, will also ask you about that on the Day of Resurrection.\nفَلَنَسْأَلَنَّ الَّذِينَ أُرْسِلَ إِلَيْهِمْ وَلَنَسْأَلَنَّ الْمُرْسَلِينَ\n(Then We shall indeed question those (people) to whom it (the Book) was sent and We shall indeed question the Messengers.)(7:6)\nفَوَرَبِّكَ لَنَسْأَلَنَّهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ - عَمَّا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ\n(So by your Lord We question them all about what they did.)(15:92-93)\nيَوْمَ يَجْمَعُ اللَّهُ الرُّسُلَ فَيَقُولُ مَاذَا أُجِبْتُمْ ۖ قَالُوا لَا عِلْمَ لَنَا ۖ إِنَّكَ أَنتَ عَلَّامُ الْغُيُوبِ\n(On the Day when Allah gathers the Messengers together and says to them: \"What was the response you received (to your Message)?\" They will say: \"We have no knowledge, indeed only You are the Knower of all that is hidden.\")(5:109) And Allah says:\nإِنَّ الَّذِي فَرَضَ عَلَيْكَ الْقُرْآنَ لَرَادُّكَ إِلَىٰ مَعَادٍ\n(Verily, He Who obligated the Qur'an upon you (O Muhammad) will surely bring you back to the return.)[28:85] meaning, the One Who gave you the obligation of conveying the Qur'an will bring you back to Him, and your return will be on the Day of Resurrection, and He will question you about you commission of the duty He gave you. This is one of the opinions, and it presents a good understanding of it.","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=89","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:90","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:90","text":"Verily, Allah orders justice and kindness, and giving (help) to the relatives, and He forbids immoral sins, and evil and tyranny. He admonishes you, so that perhaps you may take heed (90)\n\n## The Command to be Fair and Kind\n\nAllah tells us that He commands His servant to be just, i.e., fair and moderate, and that He encourages kindness and good treatment. As He says:\nوَإِنْ عَاقَبْتُمْ فَعَاقِبُوا بِمِثْلِ مَا عُوقِبْتُم بِهِ ۖ وَلَئِن صَبَرْتُمْ لَهُوَ خَيْرٌ لِّلصَّابِرِينَ\n(And if you punish them, then punish them with the like of that with which you were afflicted. But if you have patience with them, then it is better for those who are patient.)(16:126)\nوَجَزَاءُ سَيِّئَةٍ سَيِّئَةٌ مِّثْلُهَا ۖ فَمَنْ عَفَا وَأَصْلَحَ فَأَجْرُهُ عَلَى اللَّهِ\n(The recompense for an offense is an offense the like thereof; but whoever forgives and makes reconciliation, his reward is with Allah.)(42:40)\nوَالْجُرُوحَ قِصَاصٌ ۚ فَمَن تَصَدَّقَ بِهِ فَهُوَ كَفَّارَةٌ لَّهُ\n(and wounds equal for equal. But if anyone remits the retaliation by way of charity, it shall count as atonement for him.)(5:45) And there are other Ayat which support the institution of justice in Islam, as well as encouraging a fair and generous attitude.\n\n## The Command to maintain the Ties of Kinship and the prohibition of Immoral Sins, Evil and Tyranny\n\nوَإِيتَاءِ ذِي الْقُرْبَىٰ\n(and giving (help) to relatives,) meaning that Allah is commanding us to uphold the ties of kinship, as He says:\nوَآتِ ذَا الْقُرْبَىٰ حَقَّهُ وَالْمِسْكِينَ وَابْنَ السَّبِيلِ وَلَا تُبَذِّرْ تَبْذِيرًا\n(And give the relative his due and to the poor and to the wayfarer. But do not spend wastefully in the manner of a spendthrift.)(17:26)\nوَيَنْهَىٰ عَنِ الْفَحْشَاءِ وَالْمُنكَرِ\n(and He forbids immoral sins, and evil) Fahsha' refers to all things that are forbidden, and Munkar refers to those forbidden deeds that are committed openly by the one who does them. Hence Allah says elsewhere:\nقُلْ إِنَّمَا حَرَّمَ رَبِّيَ الْفَوَاحِشَ مَا ظَهَرَ مِنْهَا وَمَا بَطَنَ\n(Say (O Muhammad): \"(But) the things that my Lord has indeed forbidden are the indecencies, whether committed openly or secretly)(7:33) Baghy refers to aggression towards people. In a Hadith, the Prophet ﷺ said:\nمَا مِنْ ذَنْبٍ أَجْدَرَ أَنْ يُعَجِّلَ اللهُ عُقُوبَتَهُ فِي الدُّنْيَا مَعَ مَا يَدَّخِرُ لِصَاحِبِهِ فِي الْآخِرَةِ مِنَ الْبَغْيِ وَقَطِيعَةِ الرَّحِمِ\n(There is no sin more deserving of having its punishment hastened in this world, as well as what is reserved in the Hereafter for the one who does it, than tyrannical aggression and cutting the ties of kinship.)\nيَعِظُكُمْ\n(He admonishes you,) meaning, He commands what He commands you of good and He forbids what He forbids you of evil;\nلَعَلَّكُمْ تَذَكَّرُونَ\n(so that perhaps you may take heed) Ash-Sha'bi reported that Shatiyr bin Shakl said: \"I heard Ibn Mas'ud say: 'The most comprehensive Ayah in the Qur'an is in Surat An-Nahl:\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ يَأْمُرُ بِالْعَدْلِ وَالْإِحْسَانِ\n(Verily, Allah enjoins justice and kindness...)'\" It was reported by Ibn Jarir.\n\n## The Eyewitness Account of 'Uthman\n\nConcerning the revelation of this Ayah, Imam Ahmad reported a Hasan Hadith from 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas who said: \"While the Messenger of Allah ﷺ was sitting in the courtyard of his house, 'Uthman bin Maz'un passed by and smiled at the Messenger of Allah ﷺ. The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said to him,\nأَلَا تَجْلِسُ؟\n(Won't you sit down?) He said, 'Certainly.' So the Messenger of Allah ﷺ sat facing him, and while they were talking, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ began looking up at the sky, looking at it for a while, then he brought his gaze down until he was looking at the ground to his right. Then the Messenger of Allah ﷺ turned slightly away from his companion 'Uthman to where he was looking. Then he began to tilt his head as if trying to understand something, and Ibn Maz'un was looking on. When the matter was finished and he had understood what had been said to him, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ stared at the sky again as he had the first time, looking at whatever he could see until it disappeared. Then he turned back to face 'Uthman again. 'Uthman said, 'O Muhammad, I have never seen you do anything like you did today while I was sitting with you.' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nوَمَا رَأَيْتَنِي فَعَلْتُ؟\n(What did you see me do?) 'Uthman said: 'I saw you staring at the sky, then you lowered your gaze until you were looking to your right, then you turned to him and left me. Then you tilted your head as if you were trying to understand something that was being said to you.' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nوَفَطِنْتَ لِذَلِكَ؟\n(Did you notice that?) 'Uthman said, 'Yes'. The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nأَتَانِي رَسُولُ اللهِ آنِفًا وَأَنْتَ جَالِس\n(A messenger from Allah came to me just now, when you were sitting here.) 'Uthman said, 'A messenger from Allah?' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nنَعَم\n(Yes.) 'Uthman said, 'And what did he say to you?' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ يَأْمُرُ بِالْعَدْلِ وَالإْحْسَانِ\n(Verily, Allah orders justice and kindness...)\nUthman said: 'That was when faith was established in my heart and I began to love Muhammad ﷺ.\" It is a Hasan Hadith having a good connected chain of narrators in which their hearing it from each other is clear.","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=90","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:91","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:91–92","text":"And fulfill the covenants (taken in the Name of) Allah when you have taken them, and do not break the oaths after you have confirmed them - and indeed you have appointed Allah as your guarantor. Verily, Allah knows what you do (91)And do not be like the one who undoes the thread which she has spun, after it has become strong, by taking your oaths as a means of deception among yourselves when one group is more numerous than another group. Allah only tests you by this, and on the Day of Resurrection, He will certainly clarify that which used to differ over (92)\n\n## The Command to fulfill the Covenant\n\nThis is one of the commands of Allah, to fulfill covenants, keep promises and to fulfill oaths after confirming them. Thus Allah says:\nوَلَا تَنقُضُوا الْأَيْمَانَ بَعْدَ تَوْكِيدِهَا\n(and do not break the oaths after you have confirmed them) There is no conflict between this and the Ayat:\nوَلَا تَجْعَلُوا اللَّهَ عُرْضَةً لِّأَيْمَانِكُمْ\n(And do not use Allah as an excuse in your oaths)[2:224]\nذَٰلِكَ كَفَّارَةُ أَيْمَانِكُمْ إِذَا حَلَفْتُمْ ۚ وَاحْفَظُوا أَيْمَانَكُمْ\n(That is the expiation for oaths when you have sworn. And protect your oaths.)[5:89] meaning, do not forgo your oaths without offering the penance.\nThere is also no conflict between this Ayah (16:91) and the Hadith reported in the Two Sahihs according to which the Prophet ﷺ said:\nإِنِّي وَاللهِ إِنْ شَاءَ اللهُ لَا أَحْلِفُ عَلَى يَمِينٍ فَأَرَى غَيْرَهَا خَيْرًا مِنْهَا إِلَّا أَتَيْتُ الَّذِي هُوَ خَيْرٌ وَتَحَلَّلْتُهَا - وَفِي رِوَايَةٍ - وَكَفَّرْتُ عَنْ يَمِينِي\n(By Allah, if Allah wills, I will not swear an oath and then realize that something else is better, but I do that which is better and find a way to free myself from the oath. According to another report he said: \"and I offer penance for my oath.\")\nThere is no contradiction at all between all of these texts and the Ayah under discussion here, which is:\nوَلَا تَنقُضُوا الْأَيْمَانَ بَعْدَ تَوْكِيدِهَا\n(and do not break the oaths after you have confirmed them) because these are the kinds of oaths that have to do with covenants and promises, not the kind that have to do with urging oneself to do something or preventing him from doing something. Therefore Mujahid said concerning this Ayah:\nوَلَا تَنقُضُوا الْأَيْمَانَ بَعْدَ تَوْكِيدِهَا\n(and do not break the oaths after you have confirmed them) \"The oath here refers to oaths made during Jahiliyyah.\" This supports the Hadith recorded by Imam Ahmad from Jubayr bin Mut'im, who said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nلَا حِلْفَ فِي الْإِسْلَامِ، وَأَيُّمَا حِلْفٍ كَانَ فِي الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ فَإِنَّهُ لَا يَزِيدُهُ الْإِسْلَامُ إِلَّا شِدَّةً\n(There is no oath in Islam, and any oath made during the Jahiliyyah is only reinforced by Islam.)\nThis was also reported by Muslim. The meaning is that Islam does not need oaths as they were used by the people of the Jahiliyyah; adherence to Islam is sufficient to do away with any need for what they used to customarily give oaths for.\nIn the Two Sahihs it was reported that Anas said: \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ swore the treaty of allegiance between the Muhajirin (emigrants) and the Ansar (helpers) in our house.\" This means that he established brotherhood between them, and they used to inherit from one another, until Allah abrogated that. And Allah knows best.\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ يَعْلَمُ مَا تَفْعَلُونَ\n(Verily, Allah knows what you do.) This is a warning and a threat to those who break their oaths after confirming them.\nوَلَا تَكُونُوا كَالَّتِي نَقَضَتْ غَزْلَهَا مِن بَعْدِ قُوَّةٍ أَنكَاثًا\n(And do not be like the one who undoes the thread which she has spun, after it has become strong,)\nAbdullah bin Kathir and As-Suddi said: \"This was a foolish woman in Makkah. Everytime she spun thread and made it strong, she would undo it again.\" Mujahid, Qatadah and Ibn Zayd said: \"This is like the one who breaks a covenant after confirming it.\" This view is more correct and more apparent, whether or not there was a woman in Makkah who undid her thread after spinning it. The word Ankathan could be referring back to the word translated as \"undoes\", reinforcing the meaning, or it could be the predicate of the verb \"to be\", meaning, do not be Ankathan, the plural of Nakth (breach, violation), from the word Nakith (perfidious). Hence after this, Allah says:\nتَتَّخِذُونَ أَيْمَانَكُمْ دَخَلًا بَيْنَكُمْ\n(by taking your oaths as a means of deception among yourselves) meaning for the purposes of cheating and tricking one another.\nأَن تَكُونَ أُمَّةٌ هِيَ أَرْبَىٰ مِنْ أُمَّةٍ\n(when one group is more numerous than another group.) meaning, you swear an oath with some people if they are more in number than you, so that they can trust you, but when you are able to betray them you do so. Allah forbids that, by showing a case where treachery might be expected or excused, but He forbids it. If treachery is forbidden in such a case, then in cases where one is in a position of strength it is forbidden more emphatically.\nMujahid said: \"They used to enter into alliances and covenants, then find other parties who were more powerful and more numerous, so they would cancel the alliance with the first group and make an alliance with the second who were more powerful and more numerous. This is what they were forbidden to do.\" Ad-Dahhak, Qatadah and Ibn Zayd said something similar.\nإِنَّمَا يَبْلُوكُمُ اللَّهُ بِهِ\n(Allah only tests you by this) Sa'id bin Jubayr said: \"This means (you are tested) by the large numbers.\" This was reported by Ibn Abi Hatim. Ibn Jarir said: \"It means (you are being tested) by His command to you to adhere to your covenants.\"\nوَلَيُبَيِّنَنَّ لَكُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ مَا كُنتُمْ فِيهِ تَخْتَلِفُونَ\n(And on the Day of Resurrection, He will certainly clarify that which you differed over.) Everyone will be rewarded or punished in accordance with his deeds, good or evil.","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=91","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:93","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:93–96","text":"And had Allah willed, He would have made you (all) one nation, but He allows whom He wills to stray and He guides whom He wills. But you shall certainly be called to account for what you used to do (93)And do not make your oaths a means of deception among yourselves, resulting in the slip of a foot after it was firmly planted, and you taste the evil of having hindered from the path of Allah, and you will suffer a terrible punishment (94)And do not use an oath by Allah for the purchase of little value, what is with Allah is better for you if you only knew (95)Whatever you have will be exhausted, and what is with Allah will remain. And to those who are patient, We will certainly grant them their rewards in proportion to the best of what they used to do (96)\n\n## If Allah had willed, He would have made all of Humanity one Nation\n\nAllah says:\nوَلَوْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ لَجَعَلَكُمْ\n(And had Allah willed, He would have made you) meaning - O mankind,\nأُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً\n((all) one nation,) This is like the Ayah:\nوَلَوْ شَاءَ رَبُّكَ لَآمَنَ مَن فِي الْأَرْضِ كُلُّهُمْ جَمِيعًا\n(And had your Lord willed, all of those on earth would have believed together.)[10:99], meaning, He could have created harmony among them, and there would not be any differences, conflicts or hatred between them.\nوَلَوْ شَاءَ رَبُّكَ لَجَعَلَ النَّاسَ أُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً ۖ وَلَا يَزَالُونَ مُخْتَلِفِينَ - إِلَّا مَن رَّحِمَ رَبُّكَ ۚ وَلِذَٰلِكَ خَلَقَهُمْ\n(And if your Lord had so willed, He would surely, have made mankind one Ummah [nation or community], but they will not cease to disagree. Except him on whom your Lord has bestowed His mercy, and for that did He create them.)(11:118-119) Similarly, Allah says here:\nوَلَٰكِن يُضِلُّ مَن يَشَاءُ وَيَهْدِي مَن يَشَاءُ\n(but He allows whom He wills to stray and He guides whom He wills.) Then on the Day of Resurrection, He will ask them all about their deeds, and will reward or punish them even equal to a scalish thread in the long slit of a date stone or the size of a speck on the back of a date stone, or even a thin membrane of the date stone.\n\n## The Prohibition on taking on Oath for Purposes of Treachery\n\nThen Allah warns His servant against taking oaths as means of deception, i.e., using them for treacherous purposes, lest a foot should slip after being firmly planted. This is an analogy describing one who was on the right path but then deviated and slipped from the path of guidance because of an unfulfilled oath that involved hindering people from the path of Allah. This is because if a disbeliever were to find that after having agreed to a covenant, then the believer betrayed him, then the believer will have hindered him from entering Islam. Thus Allah says:\nوَتَذُوقُوا السُّوءَ بِمَا صَدَدتُّمْ عَن سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ ۖ وَلَكُمْ عَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ\n(and you taste the evil of having hindered from the path of Allah, and you will suffer a terrible punishment.)\n\n## Do not break Oaths for the sake of Worldly Gain\n\nThen Allah says:\nوَلَا تَشْتَرُوا بِعَهْدِ اللَّهِ ثَمَنًا قَلِيلًا\n(And do not use an oath by Allah for the purchase of little value.) meaning, do not neglect an oath sworn in the Name of Allah for the sake of this world and its attractions, for they are few, and even if the son of Adam were to gain this world and all that is in it, that which is with Allah is better for him, i.e., the reward of Allah is better for the one who puts his hope in Him, believes in Him, seeks Him and fulfills his oaths in the hope of that which Allah has promised. This is why Allah says:\nإِن كُنتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ - مَا عِندَكُمْ يَنفَدُ\n(if you only knew. Whatever you have will be exhausted,) meaning, it will come to an end and will vanish, because it is only there for a certain, limited time.\nوَمَا عِندَ اللَّهِ بَاقٍ\n(and what is with Allah will remain.) meaning, His reward for you in Paradise will remain, without interruption or end, because it is eternal and will never change nor disappear.\nوَلَنَجْزِيَنَّ الَّذِينَ صَبَرُوا أَجْرَهُم بِأَحْسَنِ مَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ\n(And to those who are patient, We will certainly grant them their rewards in proportion to the best of what they used to do.) Here the Lord swears, with the Lam of affirmation, that He will reward the patient for the best of their deeds, i.e., He will forgive them for their bad deeds.","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=93","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:97","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:97","text":"Whoever does righteous deeds - whether male or female - while he (or she) is a believer; then We will certainly give them a good life, and We will certainly grant them their rewards in proportion to the best of what they used to do (97)\n\n## Righteous Deeds and their Reward\n\nThis is a promise from Allah to those Children of Adam, male or female, who do righteous deeds - deeds in accordance with the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His Prophet ﷺ, with a heart that believes in Allah and His Messenger ﷺ, while believing that these deeds are commanded and enjoined by Allah. Allah promises that He will give them a good life in this world and that He will reward them according to the best of their deeds in the Hereafter. The good life includes feeling tranquillity in all aspects of life. It has been reported that Ibn 'Abbas and a group (of scholars) interpreted it to mean good, lawful provisions. It was reported that 'Ali bin Abi Talib interpreted as contentment. This was also the opinion of Ibn 'Abbas, 'Ikrimah and Wahb bin Munabbih. 'Ali bin Abi Talhah recorded from Ibn 'Abbas that it meant happiness. Al-Hasan, Mujahid and Qatadah said: \"None gets [this] good life [mentioned] except in Paradise.\" Ad-Dahhak said: \"It means lawful provisions and worship in this life\". Ad-Dahhak also said: \"It means working to obey Allah and finding joy in that.\" The correct view is that a good life includes all of these things. as found in the Hadith recorded by Imam Ahmad from 'Abdullah bin 'Amr that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nقَدْ أَفْلَحَ مَنْ أَسْلَمَ، وَرُزِقَ كَفَافًا، وَقَنَّعَهُ اللهُ بِمَا آتَاهُ\n(He who submits [becomes a Muslim] has succeeded, is given sufficient provisions, and is content with Allah for what he is given.) It was also recorded by Muslim.","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=97","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:98","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:98–100","text":"So when you recite the Qur'an, seek refuge with Allah from Shaytan, the outcast (98)Verily, he has no power over those who believe and put their trust only in their Lord (99)His power is only over those who obey and follow him (Shaytan), and those who join partners with Him (Allah)(100)\n\n## The Command to seek Refuge with Allah before reciting the Qur'an\n\nThis is a command from Allah to His servants upon the tongue of His Prophet ﷺ, telling them that when they want to read Qur'an, they should seek refuge with Allah from the cursed Shaytan. The Hadiths mentioned about seeking refuge with Allah (Isti'adhah), were quoted in our discussion at the beginning of this Tafsir, praise be to Allah. The reason for seeking refuge with Allah before reading is that the reader should not get confused or mixed up, and that the Shaytan would not confuse him or stop him from thinking about and pondering over the meaning of what he reads. Hence the majority of scholars said that refuge should be sought with Allah before starting to read.\nإِنَّهُ لَيْسَ لَهُ سُلْطَانٌ عَلَى الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَلَىٰ رَبِّهِمْ يَتَوَكَّلُونَ\n(Verily, he has no power over those who believe and put their trust only in their Lord.) Ath-Thawri said: \"He has no power to make them commit a sin they will not repent from.\" Others said: it means that he has no argument for them. Others said it is like the Ayah:\nإِلَّا عِبَادَكَ مِنْهُمُ الْمُخْلَصِينَ\n(Except Your chosen servants amongst them.)[15:40]\nإِنَّمَا سُلْطَانُهُ عَلَى الَّذِينَ يَتَوَلَّوْنَهُ\n(His power is only over those who obey and follow him (Shaytan),) Mujahid said: \"Those who obey him.\" Others said, \"Those who take him as their protector instead of Allah.\"\nوَالَّذِينَ هُم بِهِ مُشْرِكُونَ\n(and those who join partners with Him.) means, those who associate others in worship with Allah.","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=98","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:101","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:101–102","text":"And when We change a verse in place of another - and Allah knows best what He reveals - they (the disbelievers) say: \"You (O Muhammad) are but a forger.\" Rather, most of them know not (101)Say (O Muhammad); \"Ruh-ul-Qudus has brought it (the Qur'an) down from your Lord with truth.\" for the conviction of those who believe, and as a guide and good news for the Muslims (102)\n\n## The Idolators' Accusation that the Prophet (ﷺ) was a Liar since some Ayat were abrogated, and the Refutation of their Claims\n\nAllah tells us of the weak minds of the idolators, and their lack of faith and conviction. He explains that it is impossible for them to have faith when He has decreed that they are doomed. When they saw that some rulings had been changed by being abrogated, they said to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ:\nإِنَّمَا أَنتَ مُفْتَرٍ\n(You are but a forger) meaning one who tells lies. But Allah is the Lord Who does whatever He wills, and rules as He wants.\nبَدَّلْنَا آيَةً مَّكَانَ آيَةٍ\n(And when We change a verse (of the Qur'an) in place of another) Mujahid said: this means, \"We remove one and put another in its place.\" Qatadah said: this is like the Ayah:\nمَا نَنسَخْ مِنْ آيَةٍ أَوْ نُنسِهَا\n(Whatever verse We change [abrogate] or omit [the abrogated]...)\" (2:106). Allah said, in response to them:\nقُلْ نَزَّلَهُ رُوحُ الْقُدُسِ\n(Say: \"Ruh-ul-Qudus has brought it...\") meaning, Jibril,\nمِن رَّبِّكَ بِالْحَقِّ\n(from your Lord with truth,) meaning, with truthfulness and justice\nلِيُثَبِّتَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا\n(for the conviction of those who believe,) so that they will believe what was revealed earlier and what was revealed later, and humble themselves towards Allah.\nوَهُدًى وَبُشْرَىٰ لِلْمُسْلِمِينَ\n(and as a guide and good news for the Muslims.) meaning He has made it a guide and good news to the Muslims who believe in Allah and His Messengers.","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=101","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:103","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:103","text":"And indeed We know that they (polytheists and pagans) say: \"It is only a human being who teaches him.\" The tongue of the man they refer to is foreign, while this (the Qur'an) is (in) a clear Arabic tongue (103)\n\n## The Idolators' Claim that the Qur'an was taught by a Human, and the Refutation of their Claim\n\nAllah tells us about the idolators' lies, allegations, and slander when they claimed that this Qur'an which Muhammad ﷺ had recited for them, was actually taught to him by a human. They referred to a foreign (i.e., non-Arab) man who lived among them as the servant of some of the clans of Quraysh and who used to sell goods by As-Safa. Maybe the Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to sit with him sometimes and talk to him a little, but he was a foreigner who did not know much Arabic, only enough simple phrases to answer questions when he had to. So in refutation of their claims of fabrication, Allah said:\nلِّسَانُ الَّذِي يُلْحِدُونَ إِلَيْهِ أَعْجَمِيٌّ وَهَٰذَا لِسَانٌ عَرَبِيٌّ مُّبِينٌ\n(The tongue of the man they refer to is foreign, while this (the Qur'an) is a (in) clear Arabic tongue.) meaning, how could it be that this Qur'an with its eloquent style and perfect meanings, which is more perfect than any Book revealed to any previously sent Prophet, have been learnt from a foreigner who hardly speaks the language? No one with the slightest amount of common sense would say such a thing.","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=103","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:104","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:104–105","text":"Verily, those who do not believe in Allah's Ayat (signs, or revelation), Allah will not guide them, and theirs will be a painful punishment (104)It is only those who do not believe in Allah's Ayat who fabricate the falsehood, and it is they who are liars (105)\nAllah tells us that He does not guide those who turn away from remembering Him and who are heedless of that which He revealed to His Messenger ﷺ, those who have no intention of believing in that which he has brought from Allah. This kind of people will never be guided to faith by the signs of Allah and the Message which He sent His Messengers in this world, and they will suffer a painful and severe punishment in the Hereafter. Then Allah informs us that His Messenger ﷺ is not a forger nor a liar, because the one who fabricates falsehood about Allah and His Messenger ﷺ is the most evil of creatures.\nالَّذِينَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِآيَاتِ اللَّهِ\n(Verily, those who do not believe in Allah's Ayat,) Allah will not guide them, and theirs will be a painful punishment, meaning, the disbelievers and heretics who are known to the people as liars. The Messenger Muhammad ﷺ, on the other hand, was the most honest and righteous of people, the most perfect in knowledge, deeds, faith and conviction. He was known among his people for his truthfulness and no one among them had any doubts about that - to such an extent that they always addressed him as Al-Amin (the Trustworthy) Muhammad. Thus when Heraclius, the king of the Romans, asked Abu Sufyan about the attributes of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, one of the things he said to him was, \"Did you ever accuse him of lying before he made his claim?\" Abu Sufyan said, \"No\". Heraclius said, \"He would refrain from lying about people and then go and fabricate lies about Allah?\"","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=104","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:106","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:106–109","text":"Whoever disbelieves in Allah after his belief - except one who was forced while his heart is at peace with the faith - but whoever opens their breasts to disbelief, on them is wrath from Allah, and theirs will be a terrible torment (106)That is because they preferred the life of this world over that of the Hereafter. And Allah does not guide the people who disbelieve (107)They are those upon whose hearts, hearing (ears) and sight (eyes) Allah has set a seal over. And they are the heedless (108)No doubt, in the Hereafter they will be the losers (109)\n\n## Allah's Wrath against the Apostate, except for the One Who is forced into Disbelief\n\nAllah tells us that He is angry with them who willingly disbelieve in Him after clearly believing in Him, who open their hearts to disbelief finding peace in that, because they understood the faith yet they still turned away from it. They will suffer severe punishment in the Hereafter, because they preferred this life to the Hereafter, and they left the faith for the sake of this world and Allah did not guide their hearts and help them to stand firm in the true religion. He put a seal on their hearts so that they would not be able to understand what is beneficial for them, and He sealed their ears and eyes so that they would not benefit from them. Their faculties did not help them at all, so they are unaware of what is going to happen to them.\nلَا جَرَمَ\n(No doubt) means, it is inevitable, and no wonder that those who are like this -\nأَنَّهُمْ فِي الْآخِرَةِ هُمُ الْخَاسِرُونَ\n(in the Hereafter, they will be the losers.) meaning, they will lose themselves and their families on the Day of Resurrection.\nإِلَّا مَنْ أُكْرِهَ وَقَلْبُهُ مُطْمَئِنٌّ بِالْإِيمَانِ\n(except one who was forced while his heart is at peace with the faith) This is an exception in the case of one who utters statements of disbelief and verbally agrees with the Mushrikin because he is forced to do so by the beatings and abuse to which he is subjected, but his heart refuses to accept what he is saying, and he is, in reality, at peace with his faith in Allah and His Messenger ﷺ.\nThe scholars agreed that if a person is forced into disbelief, it is permissible for him to either go along with them in the interests of self-preservation, or to refuse, as Bilal did when they were inflicting all sorts of torture on him, even placing a huge rock on his chest in the intense heat and telling him to admit others as partners with Allah. He refused, saying, \"Alone, Alone.\" And he said, \"By Allah, if I knew any word more annoying to you than this, I would say it.\" May Allah be pleased with him.\nSimilarly, when the Liar Musaylimah asked Habib bin Zayd Al-Ansari, \"Do you bear witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah?\" He said, \"Yes.\" Then Musaylimah asked, \"Do you bear witness that I am the messenger of Allah?\" Habib said, \"I do not hear you.\" Musaylimah kept cutting him, piece by piece, but he remained steadfast insisting on his words.\nIt is better and preferable for the Muslim to remain steadfast in his religion, even if that leads to him being killed, as was mentioned by Al-Hafiz Ibn 'Asakir in his biography of 'Abdullah bin Hudhafah Al-Sahmi, one of the Companions. He said that he was taken prisoner by the Romans, who brought him to their king. The king said, \"Become a Christian, and I will give you a share of my kingdom and my daughter in marriage.\" 'Abdullah said: \"If you were to give me all that you possess and all that Arabs possess to make me give up the religion of Muhammad ﷺ even for an instant, I would not do it.\" The king said, \"Then I will kill you.\" 'Abdullah said, \"It is up to you.\" The king gave orders that he should be crucified, and commanded his archers to shoot near his hands and feet while ordering him to become a Christian, but he still refused. Then the king gave orders that he should be brought down, and that a big vessel made of copper be brought and heated up. Then, while 'Abdullah was watching, one of the Muslim prisoners was brought out and thrown into it, until all that was left of him was scorched bones. The king ordered him to become a Christian, but he still refused. Then he ordered that 'Abdullah be thrown into the vessel, and he was brought back to the pulley to be thrown in. 'Abdullah wept, and the king hoped that he would respond to him, so he called him, but 'Abdullah said, \"I only weep because I have only one soul with which to be thrown into this vessel at this moment for the sake of Allah; I wish that I had as many souls as there are hairs on my body with which I could undergo this torture for the sake of Allah.\" According to some reports, the king imprisoned him and deprived him of food and drink for several days, then he sent him wine and pork, and he did not come near them. Then the king called him and asked him, \"What stopped you from eating?\" 'Abdullah said, \"It is permissible for me [under these circumstances], but I did not want to give you the opportunity to gloat.\" The king said to him, \"Kiss my head and I will let you go.\" 'Abdullah said, \"And will you release all the Muslim prisoners with me?\" The king said, \"Yes.\" So 'Abdullah kissed his head and he released him and all the other Muslim prisoners he was holding. When he came back, 'Umar bin Al-Khattab said, \"Every Muslim should kiss the head of 'Abdullah bin Hudhafah, and I will be the first to do so.\" And he stood up and kissed his head. May Allah be pleased with them both.","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=106","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:110","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:110–111","text":"Then, verily, your Lord for those who emigrated after they were put to trials and then performed Jihad, and were patient, - after this, your Lord is indeed Forgiving, Most Merciful (110)(Remember) the Day when every person will come pleading for himself, and every one will be paid in full for what he did, and they will not be dealt with unjustly (111)\n\n## The One who is forced to renounce Islam will be forgiven if He does Righteous Deeds afterwards\n\nThis refers to another group of people who were oppressed in Makkah and whose position with their own people was weak, so they went along with them when they were tried by them. Then they managed to escape by emigrating, leaving their homeland, families and wealth behind, seeking the pleasure and forgiveness of Allah. They joined the believers and fought with them against the disbelievers, bearing hardship with patience. Allah tells them that after this, meaning after their giving in when put to the test, He will forgive them and show mercy to them when they are resurrected.\nيَوْمَ تَأْتِي كُلُّ نَفْسٍ تُجَادِلُ\n((Remember) the Day when every person will come pleading) meaning making a case in his own defence.\nعَن نَّفْسِهَا\n(for himself.) means, no one else will plead on his behalf; not his father, not his son, nor his brother, nor his wife.\nوَتُوَفَّىٰ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَّا عَمِلَتْ\n(and every one will be paid in full for what he did,) meaning whatever he did, good or evil.\nوَهُمْ لَا يُظْلَمُونَ\n(and they will not be dealt with unjustly.) meaning there will be no decrease in the reward for good, and no increase in the punishment for evil. They will not be dealt with unjustly in the slightest way.","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=110","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:112","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:112–113","text":"And Allah gives the example of a township (Makkah), it was secure and peaceful: its provision coming to it in abundance from every place, but it (its people) denied the favors of Allah. So Allah made it taste extreme hunger (famine) and fear, because of what they did (112)There has come to them a Messenger from among themselves, but they denied him, so the torment seized them while they were wrongdoers (113)\n\n## The Example of Makkah\n\nThis example refers to the people of Makkah, which had been secure, peaceful and stable, a secure sanctuary while men were being snatched away from everywhere outside of it. Whoever entered Makkah, he was safe, and he had no need to fear, as Allah said:\nوَقَالُوا إِن نَّتَّبِعِ الْهُدَىٰ مَعَكَ نُتَخَطَّفْ مِنْ أَرْضِنَا ۚ أَوَلَمْ نُمَكِّن لَّهُمْ حَرَمًا آمِنًا يُجْبَىٰ إِلَيْهِ ثَمَرَاتُ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ رِّزْقًا مِّن لَّدُنَّا\n(And they say: \"If we follow the guidance with you, we would be snatched away from our land.\" Have We not established a secure sanctuary (Makkah) for them, to which are brought fruits of all kinds, a provision from Ourselves.)[28:57] Similarly, Allah says here:\nيَأْتِيهَا رِزْقُهَا رَغَدًا\n(its provision coming to it in abundance) meaning, with ease and in plenty,\nمِّن كُلِّ مَكَانٍ فَكَفَرَتْ بِأَنْعُمِ اللَّهِ\n(from every place, but it (its people) denied the favors of Allah.) meaning, they denied the blessings of Allah towards them, the greatest of which was Muhammad ﷺ being sent to them, as Allah said:\nأَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ بَدَّلُوا نِعْمَتَ اللَّهِ كُفْرًا وَأَحَلُّوا قَوْمَهُمْ دَارَ الْبَوَارِ - جَهَنَّمَ يَصْلَوْنَهَا ۖ وَبِئْسَ الْقَرَارُ\n(Have you not seen those who have changed the favors of Allah into disbelief, and caused their people to dwell in the abode of destruction; Hell, in which they will burn, - and what an evil place to settle in!)(14:28-29). Hence Allah replaced their former blessings with the opposite, and said:\nفَأَذَاقَهَا اللَّهُ لِبَاسَ الْجُوعِ وَالْخَوْفِ\n(So Allah made it taste extreme hunger (famine) and fear,) meaning, He inflicted it and made them taste of hunger after fruits of all kinds and provision in abundance from every place had been brought to it. This was when they defied the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and insisted on opposing him, so he supplicated against them, asking Allah to send them seven years like the seven years of Yusuf (i.e., seven years of famine), and they were stricken with a year in which everything that they had was destroyed, and they ate 'Alhaz', which is the hair of the camel mixed with its blood when it is slaughtered.\nوَالْخَوْفِ\n(and fear). This refers to the fact that their sense of security was replaced with fear of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and his Companions after they had migrated to Al-Madinah. They feared the power and the attack of his armies, and they started to lose and face the destruction of everything that belonged to them, until Allah made it possible for His Messenger ﷺ to conquer Makkah. This happened because of their evil deeds, their wrongdoing and their rejection of the Messenger ﷺ that Allah sent to them from among themselves. He reminded them of this blessing in the Ayah:\nلَقَدْ مَنَّ اللَّهُ عَلَى الْمُؤْمِنِينَ إِذْ بَعَثَ فِيهِمْ رَسُولًا مِّنْ أَنفُسِهِمْ\n(Indeed, Allah blessed the believers when He sent Messenger from among themselves to them.)(3:164) and,\nفَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ يَا أُولِي الْأَلْبَابِ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا ۚ قَدْ أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ إِلَيْكُمْ ذِكْرًا - رَّسُولًا\n(So have Taqwa of Allah! O men of understanding who have believed, Allah has indeed revealed to you a reminder (this Qur'an). (And has also sent to you) a Messenger.)[65:10-11] and:\nكَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا فِيكُمْ رَسُولًا مِّنكُمْ يَتْلُو عَلَيْكُمْ آيَاتِنَا وَيُزَكِّيكُمْ وَيُعَلِّمُكُمُ الْكِتَابَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ\n(Similarly (as a blessing), We have sent a Messenger to you from among you, reciting Our Ayat to you, and purifying you, and teaching you the Book (the Qur'an) and the Hikmah (i.e. Sunnah).) Until\nوَلَا تَكْفُرُونِ\n(and do not be ungrateful.)[2:151-152] Allah changed the situation of the disbelievers and made it the opposite of what it had been, so they lived in fear after being secure, they were hungry after having plenty of provisions. After the believers lived in fear, Allah granted them security, giving them ample provisions after they lived in poverty, making them rulers, governors and leaders of mankind. This is what we say about the example that was given of the people of Makkah. It was also the opinion of Al-'Awfi and Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, Qatadah, 'Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam, and Malik narrated it from Az-Zuhri as well. May Allah have mercy on them all.","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=112","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:114","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:114–117","text":"So eat of the lawful and good food which Allah has provided for you. And be grateful for Allah's favor, if it is He Whom you worship (114)He has only forbidden dead flesh, blood, the flesh of swine, and any animal which is slaughtered as a sacrifice for other than Allah. But if one is forced by necessity, without willful disobedience, nor transgressing, then, Allah is Pardoning, Most Merciful (115)And do not describe what your tongues have lied about, saying: \"This is lawful and this is forbidden,\" to invent lies against Allah. Verily, those who invent lies against Allah, will never succeed (116)A passing brief enjoyment (will be theirs), but they will suffer a painful torment (117)\n\n## The Command to eat Lawful Provisions and to be Thankful, and an Explanation of what is Unlawful\n\nAllah orders His believing servants to eat the good and lawful things that He has provided, and to give thanks to Him for that, for He is the Giver and Originator of all favors, Who alone deserves to be worshipped, having no partners or associate. Then Allah mentions what He has forbidden things which harm them in both religious and worldly affairs, i.,e., dead meat, blood and the flesh of pigs.\nوَمَا أُهِلَّ لِغَيْرِ اللَّهِ بِهِ\n(and any animal which is slaughtered as a sacrifice for other than Allah.) meaning, it was slaughtered with the mention of a name other than that of Allah. Nevertheless,\nفَمَنِ اضْطُرَّ\n(But if one is forced by necessity.) meaning, if one needs to do it, without deliberately disobeying or transgressing, then,\nفَإِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ\n(Allah is Pardoning, Most Merciful.) We have already discussed a similar Ayah in Surat Al-Baqarah, and there is no need to repeat it here. And to Allah be praise.\nThen Allah forbids us to follow the ways of the idolators who declare things to be permitted or forbidden based upon their own whims and whatever names they agree on, such as the Bahirah (a she-camel whose milk was spared for the idols and nobody was allowed to milk it), the Sa'ibah (a she-camel let loose for free pasture for their false gods, idols, etc., and nothing was allowed to be carried on it), the Wasilah (a she-camel set free for idols because it has given birth to a she-camel at its first delivery and then again gives birth to a she-camel at its second delivery) and the Ham (a stallion camel freed from work for the sake of their idols, after it had finished a number of acts of copulation assigned for it), and so on. All of these were laws and customs that were invented during jahiliyyah. Then Allah says:\nوَلَا تَقُولُوا لِمَا تَصِفُ أَلْسِنَتُكُمُ الْكَذِبَ هَٰذَا حَلَالٌ وَهَٰذَا حَرَامٌ لِّتَفْتَرُوا عَلَى اللَّهِ الْكَذِبَ\n(And do not describe what your tongues have lied about, saying: \"This is lawful and this is forbidden,\" to invent lies against Allah.)\nThis includes everyone who comes up with an innovation (Bid'ah) for which he has no evidence from the Shari'ah, or whoever declares something lawful that Allah has forbidden, or whoever declares something unlawful that Allah has permitted, only because it suits his opinions or whim to do so.\nلِمَا تَصِفُ\n(describe what...) meaning, do not speak lies because of what your tongues put forth. Then Allah warns against that by saying:\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَفْتَرُونَ عَلَى اللَّهِ الْكَذِبَ لَا يُفْلِحُونَ\n(Verily, those who invent lies against Allah, will never succeed.) meaning, either in this world or the Hereafter. As for this world, it is transient pleasure, and in the Hereafter, theirs will be a severe punishment, as Allah says:\nنُمَتِّعُهُمْ قَلِيلًا ثُمَّ نَضْطَرُّهُمْ إِلَىٰ عَذَابٍ غَلِيظٍ\n(We let them enjoy for a little while, then in the end We will drive them into an unrelenting punishment.)(31:24) and\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَفْتَرُونَ عَلَى اللَّهِ الْكَذِبَ لَا يُفْلِحُونَ - مَتَاعٌ فِي الدُّنْيَا ثُمَّ إِلَيْنَا مَرْجِعُهُمْ ثُمَّ نُذِيقُهُمُ الْعَذَابَ الشَّدِيدَ بِمَا كَانُوا يَكْفُرُونَ\n(Verily, those who invent a lie against Allah, will never be successful. (A brief) enjoyment in this world! and then to Us will be their return, then We shall make them taste the severest torment because they disbelieved.)(10:69-70)","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=114","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:118","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:118–119","text":"And for those who are Jews, We have forbidden such things as We have mentioned to you before. And We did not wrong them, but they wronged themselves (118)Then, your Lord for those who did evil out of ignorance and afterward repent and do righteous deeds - verily, after that, your Lord is Pardoning, Most Merciful (119)\n\n## Some Good Things were Forbidden for the Jews\n\nAfter mentioning that He has forbidden us to eat dead meat, blood, the flesh of swine, and any animal which is slaughtered as a sacrifice for others than Allah, and after making allowances for cases of necessity - which is part of making things easy for this Ummah, because Allah desires ease for us, not hardship - Allah then mentions what He forbade for the Jews in their laws before they were abrogated, and the restrictions, limitations and difficulties involved therein. He tells us:\nوَعَلَى الَّذِينَ هَادُوا حَرَّمْنَا مَا قَصَصْنَا عَلَيْكَ مِن قَبْلُ\n(And for those who are Jews, We have forbidden such things as We have mentioned to you before.) meaning in Surat Al-An'am, where Allah says:\nوَعَلَى الَّذِينَ هَادُوا حَرَّمْنَا كُلَّ ذِي ظُفُرٍ ۖ وَمِنَ الْبَقَرِ وَالْغَنَمِ حَرَّمْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ شُحُومَهُمَا إِلَّا مَا حَمَلَتْ ظُهُورُهُمَا\n(And unto those who are Jews, We forbade every (animal) with undivided hoof, and We forbade them the fat of the ox and the sheep except what adheres to their backs) Until,\nلَصَادِقُونَ\n(We are indeed truthful)[6:146] Hence Allah says here:\nوَمَا ظَلَمْنَاهُمْ\n(And We did not wrong them,) meaning, in the restrictions that We imposed upon them.\nوَلَٰكِن كَانُوا أَنفُسَهُمْ يَظْلِمُونَ\n(but they wronged themselves.) meaning, they deserved that. This is like the Ayah:\nفَبِظُلْمٍ مِّنَ الَّذِينَ هَادُوا حَرَّمْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ طَيِّبَاتٍ أُحِلَّتْ لَهُمْ وَبِصَدِّهِمْ عَن سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ كَثِيرًا\n(Because of the wrong committed of those who were Jews, We prohibited certain good foods which had been lawful for them - and (also) for their hindering many from Allah's way.)(4:160) Then Allah tells us, honoring and reminding believers who have sinned of His blessings, that whoever among them repents, He will accept his repentance, as He says:\nثُمَّ إِنَّ رَبَّكَ لِلَّذِينَ عَمِلُوا السُّوءَ بِجَهَالَةٍ\n(Then, your Lord for those who did evil out of ignorance) Some of the Salaf said that this means that everyone who disobeys Allah is ignorant.\nثُمَّ تَابُوا مِن بَعْدِ ذَٰلِكَ وَأَصْلَحُوا\n(and afterward repent and do righteous deeds) meaning, they give up the sins they used to commit and turn to doing acts of obedience to Allah.\nإِنَّ رَبَّكَ مِن بَعْدِهَا\n(verily, after that, your Lord is...) means, after that mistake\nلَغَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ\n(...Pardoning, Most Merciful.)","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=118","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:120","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:120–123","text":"Verily, Ibrahim was (himself) an Ummah, obedient to Allah, a Hanif (monotheist), and he was not one of the idolators (120)(He was) thankful for His favors. He (Allah) chose him and guided him to a straight path (121)And We gave him good in this world, and in the Hereafter he shall be of the righteous (122)Then, We have sent the revelation to you: \"Follow the religion of Ibrahim (he was a) Hanif, and he was not one of the idolators. (123)\n\n## The Khalil (Close Friend) of Allah\n\nAllah praises His servant, Messenger and close friend Ibrahim, the Imam of the Hanifs the father of the Prophets, and Allah declares Ibrahim's innocence of the idolators, Jews or Christians. Allah says:\nإِنَّ إِبْرَاهِيمَ كَانَ أُمَّةً قَانِتًا لِّلَّهِ حَنِيفًا\n(Verily, Ibrahim was (himself) an Ummah, obedient to Allah, a Hanif (monotheist))[16:120]\nUmmah here means the leader who is followed. Qanit (obedient to Allah) means humble and obedient. Hanif means one who deliberately steers clear of Shirk in favor of Tawhid. Hence Allah says:\nوَلَمْ يَكُ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ\n(and he was not one of the idolators.)\nMujahid said: \"Ummah (here) means that he was a nation on his own.\"\nشَاكِرًا لِّأَنْعُمِهِ\n((He was) thankful for His favors.)\nmeans, he gave thanks for the blessings that Allah gave him. As Allah says:\nوَإِبْرَاهِيمَ الَّذِي وَفَّىٰ\n(And of Ibrahim the one who fulfilled.)[53:37]\nwhich means that he did everything that Allah commanded him to do.\nاجْتَبَاهُ\n(He (Allah) chose him) means, He selected him, as Allah says:\nوَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَا إِبْرَاهِيمَ رُشْدَهُ مِن قَبْلُ وَكُنَّا بِهِ عَالِمِينَ\n(And before, We indeed gave Ibrahim his integrity, and We were indeed most knowledgeable about him)(21:51). Then Allah says:\nوَهَدَاهُ إِلَىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُّسْتَقِيمٍ\n(and guided him to a straight path.) which means to worship Allah alone, without partners or associate, in the manner that He prescribed and which pleases Him.\nوَآتَيْنَاهُ فِي الدُّنْيَا حَسَنَةً\n(And We gave him good in this world,) meaning, 'We granted him all that a believer may require for a good and complete life in this world.'\nوَإِنَّهُ فِي الْآخِرَةِ لَمِنَ الصَّالِحِينَ\n(and in the Hereafter he shall be of the righteous.) Concerning the Ayah:\nوَآتَيْنَاهُ فِي الدُّنْيَا حَسَنَةً\n(And We gave him good in this world,) Mujahid said: \"This means a truthful tongue.\"\nثُمَّ أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْكَ أَنِ اتَّبِعْ مِلَّةَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ حَنِيفًا\n(Then, We have sent the revelation to you: \"Follow the religion of Ibrahim (he was a) Hanif...) meaning, 'because of his perfection, greatness, and the soundness of his Tawhid and his way, We revealed to you, O Seal of the Messengers and Leader of the Prophets ﷺ,'\nأَنِ اتَّبِعْ مِلَّةَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ حَنِيفًا ۖ وَمَا كَانَ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ\n(Follow the religion of Ibrahim (he was a) Hanif and he was not of the idolators.) This is like the Ayah in Surat Al-An'am:\nقُلْ إِنَّنِي هَدَانِي رَبِّي إِلَىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُّسْتَقِيمٍ دِينًا قِيَمًا مِّلَّةَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ حَنِيفًا ۚ وَمَا كَانَ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ\n(Say: \"Truly, my Lord has guided me to a straight path, a right religion, the religion of Ibrahim, (he was a) Hanif and he was not of the idolators.\")(6:161). Then Allah rebukes the Jews,","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=120","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:124","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:124","text":"The Sabbath was only prescribed for those who differed concerning it, and verily, your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection about what they differed over (124)\n\n## The Prescription of the Sabbath for the Jews\n\nThere is no doubt that for every nation, Allah prescribed one day of the week for people to gather to worship Him. For this Ummah He prescribed Friday, because it is the sixth day, on which Allah completed and perfected His creation. On this day He gathered and completed His blessings for His servants. It was said that Allah prescribed this day for the Children of Israel through His Prophet Musa, but they changed it and chose Saturday because it was the day on which the Creator did not create anything, as He had completed His creation on Friday. Allah made observance of the Sabbath obligatory for them in the laws of the Tawrah (Torah), telling them to keep the Sabbath. At the same time, He told them to follow Muhammad ﷺ when he was sent, and took their promises and covenant to that effect. Hence Allah says:\nإِنَّمَا جُعِلَ السَّبْتُ عَلَى الَّذِينَ اخْتَلَفُوا فِيهِ\n(The Sabbath was only prescribed for those who differed concerning it,) Mujahid said: \"They observed the Sabbath (Saturday) and ignored Friday.\" Then they continued to observe Saturday until Allah sent 'Isa bin Maryam. It was said that he told them to change it to Sunday, and it was also said that he did not forsake the laws of the Tawrah except for a few rulings which were abrogated, and he continued to observe the Sabbath until he was taken up (into heaven). Afterwards, the Christians at the time of Constantine were the ones who changed it to Sunday in order to be different from the Jews, and they started to pray towards the east instead of facing the Dome (i.e., Jerusalem). And Allah knows best.\nIt was reported in the Two Sahihs that Abu Hurayrah heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ say:\nنَحْنُ الْآخِرُونَ السَّابِقُونَ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ، بَيْدَ أَنَّهُمْ أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ مِنْ قَبْلِنَا، ثُمَّ هَذَا يَوْمُهُمُ الَّذِي فَرَضَ اللهُ عَلَيْهِمْ فَاخْتَلَفُوا فِيهِ، فَهَدَانَا اللهُ لَهُ، فَالنَّاسُ لَنَا فِيهِ تَبَعٌ: الْيَهُودُ غَدًا وَالنَّصَارَى بَعْدَ غَدٍ\n(We are the last, but we will be the first on the Day of Resurrection, even though they were given the Book before us. This is the day that Allah obligated upon them, but they differed concerning it. Allah guided us to this day, and the people observe their days after us, the Jews on the following day and the Christians on the day after that.)\nThis version was recorded by Al-Bukhari. It was reported that Abu Hurayrah and Hudhayfah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nأَضَلَّ اللهُ عَنِ الْجُمُعَةِ مَنْ كَانَ قَبْلَنَا، فَكَانَ لِلْيَهُودِ يَوْمُ السَّبْتِ، وَكَانَ لِلنَّصَارَى يَوْمُ الْأَحَدِ، فَجَاءَ اللهُ بِنَا فَهَدَانَا اللهُ لِيَوْمِ الْجُمُعَةِ، فَجَعَلَ الْجُمُعَةَ وَالسَّبْتَ وَالْأَحَدَ، وَكَذَلِكَ هُمْ تَبَعٌ لَنَا يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ نَحْنُ الْآخِرُونَ مِنْ أَهْلِ الدُّنْيَا، وَالْأَوَّلُونَ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ، وَالْمَقْضِيُّ بَيْنَهُمْ قَبْلَ الْخَلَائِقِ\n(Allah let the people who came before us stray from Friday, so the Jews had Saturday and the Christians had Sunday. Then Allah brought us and guided us to Friday. So now there are Friday, Saturday and Sunday, thus they will follow us on the Day of Resurrection. We are the last of the people of this world, but will be the first on the Day of Resurrection, and will be the first to be judged, before all of creation.) It was reported by Muslim.","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=124","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:125","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:125","text":"Invite to the way of your Lord with wisdom and fair preaching, and argue with them with that which is best. Truly, your Lord best knows who has strayed from His path, and He best knows those who are guided (125)\n\n## The Command to invite people to Allah with Wisdom and Good Preaching\n\nAllah commands His Messenger Muhammad ﷺ to invite the people to Allah with Hikmah (wisdom). Ibn Jarir said: \"That is what was revealed to him from the Book and the Sunnah.\"\nوَالْمَوْعِظَةِ الْحَسَنَةِ\n(and fair preaching) meaning, with exhortation and stories of the events that happened to people that are mentioned in the Qur'an, which he is to tell them about in order to warn them of the punishment of Allah.\nوَجَادِلْهُم بِالَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ\n(and argue with them with that which is best.) meaning, if any of them want to debate and argue, then let that be in the best manner, with kindness, gentleness and good speech, as Allah says elsewhere:\nوَلَا تُجَادِلُوا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ إِلَّا بِالَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ إِلَّا الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا مِنْهُمْ\n(And do not argue with the People of the Book, unless it be with that which is best, except for those who purposefully do wrong.)[29:46] Allah commanded him to speak gently, as He commanded Musa and Harun to do when he sent them to Pharaoh, as He said:\nفَقُولَا لَهُ قَوْلًا لَّيِّنًا لَّعَلَّهُ يَتَذَكَّرُ أَوْ يَخْشَىٰ\n(And speak to him mildly, perhaps he may accept admonition or fear (Allah))(20:44).\nإِنَّ رَبَّكَ هُوَ أَعْلَمُ بِمَن ضَلَّ عَن سَبِيلِهِ\n(Truly, your Lord best knows who has strayed from His path,) meaning, Allah already knows who is doomed (destined for Hell) and who is blessed (destined for Paradise). This has already been written with Him and the matter is finished, so call them to Allah, but do not exhaust yourself with regret over those who go astray, for it is not your task to guide them. You are just a warner, and all you have to do is convey the Message, and it is He Who will bring them to account.\nإِنَّكَ لَا تَهْدِي مَنْ أَحْبَبْتَ\n(You cannot guide whom you love)[28:56]\nلَّيْسَ عَلَيْكَ هُدَاهُمْ وَلَٰكِنَّ اللَّهَ يَهْدِي مَن يَشَاءُ\n(It is not up to you to guide them, but Allah guides whom He wills.)(2:272)","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=125","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:16:126","title":"Ibn Kathir · 16:126–128","text":"And if you punish them, then punish them with the like of that with which you were afflicted. But if you have patience with them, then it is better for those who are patient (126)And be patient, and your patience will not be, but by the help of Allah. And do not grieve over them, and do not be distressed by their plots (127)Truly, Allah is with those who have Taqwa, and the doers of good (128)\n\n## The Command for Equality in Punishment\n\nAllah commands justice in punishment and equity in settling the cases of rights. 'Abdur-Razzaq recorded that, concerning the Ayah,\nفَعَاقِبُوا بِمِثْلِ مَا عُوقِبْتُم بِهِ\n(then punish them with the like of that with which you were afflicted.)\nIbn Sirin said, \"If a man among you takes something from you, then you should take something similar from him.\" This was also the opinion of Mujahid, Ibrahim, Al-Hasan Al-Basri, and others. Ibn Jarir also favored this opinion. Ibn Zayd said: \"They had been commanded to forgive the idolators, then some men became Muslim who were strong and powerful. They said, 'O Messenger of Allah, if only Allah would give us permission, we would sort out these dogs!' Then this Ayah was revealed, then it was latter abrogated by the command to engage in Jihad.\"\nوَاصْبِرْ وَمَا صَبْرُكَ إِلَّا بِاللَّهِ\n(And be patient, and your patience will not be but by the help of Allah.) This emphasizes the command to be patient and tells us that patience cannot be acquired except by the will, help, decree and power of Allah. Then Allah says:\nوَلَا تَحْزَنْ عَلَيْهِمْ\n(And do not grieve over them,) meaning, those who oppose you, for Allah has decreed that this should happen.\nوَلَا تَكُ فِي ضَيْقٍ\n(and do not be distressed) means do not be worried or upset.\nمِّمَّا يَمْكُرُونَ\n(by their plots.) meaning; because of the efforts they are putting into opposing you and causing you harm, for Allah is protecting, helping, and supporting you, and He will cause you to prevail and defeat them.\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ مَعَ الَّذِينَ اتَّقَوا وَّالَّذِينَ هُم مُّحْسِنُونَ\n(Truly, Allah is with those who have Taqwa, and the doers of good.) meaning; He is with them in the sense of supporting them, helping them and guiding them. This is a special kind of \"being with\", as Allah says elsewhere:\nإِذْ يُوحِي رَبُّكَ إِلَى الْمَلَائِكَةِ أَنِّي مَعَكُمْ فَثَبِّتُوا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا\n((Remember) when your Lord revealed to the angels, \"Verily, I am with you, so support those who believe.\")(8:12) And Allah said to Musa and Harun:\nلَا تَخَافَا ۖ إِنَّنِي مَعَكُمَا أَسْمَعُ وَأَرَىٰ\n(Fear not, verily I am with you both, hearing and seeing.)[20:46] The Prophet ﷺ said to (Abu Bakr) As-Siddiq when they were in the cave:\nلَا تَحْزَنْ إِنَّ اللهَ مَعَنَا\n(Do not worry, Allah is with us.\") The general kind of \"being with\" some one, or something is by means of seeing, hearing and knowing, as Allah says:\nوَهُوَ مَعَكُمْ أَيْنَ مَا كُنتُمْ ۚ وَاللَّهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ بَصِيرٌ\n(And He is with you wherever you may be. And Allah sees whatever you do.)[57:4]\nأَلَمْ تَرَ أَنَّ اللَّهَ يَعْلَمُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ ۖ مَا يَكُونُ مِن نَّجْوَىٰ ثَلَاثَةٍ إِلَّا هُوَ رَابِعُهُمْ وَلَا خَمْسَةٍ إِلَّا هُوَ سَادِسُهُمْ وَلَا أَدْنَىٰ مِن ذَٰلِكَ وَلَا أَكْثَرَ إِلَّا هُوَ مَعَهُمْ أَيْنَ مَا كَانُوا\n(Have you not seen that Allah knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth? There is no secret counsel of three but He is their fourth, - nor of five but He is their sixth, - nor of less than that or more, but He is with them wherever they may be.)(58:7)\nوَمَا تَكُونُ فِي شَأْنٍ وَمَا تَتْلُو مِنْهُ مِن قُرْآنٍ وَلَا تَعْمَلُونَ مِنْ عَمَلٍ إِلَّا كُنَّا عَلَيْكُمْ شُهُودًا\n(You will not be in any circumstance, nor recite any portion of the Qur'an, nor having done any deeds, but We are witnessing you.)(10:61)\nالَّذِينَ اتَّقَوا\n(those who have Taqwa) means, they keep away from that which is forbidden.\nوَّالَّذِينَ هُم مُّحْسِنُونَ\n(and the doers of good.) meaning they do deeds of obedience to Allah. These are the ones whom Allah takes care of, He gives them support, and helps them to prevail over their enemies and opponents.\nThis is end of the Tafsir of Surat An-Nahl. To Allah be praise and blessings, and peace and blessings be upon Muhammad and his family and Companions.","href":"/tafsir/16?verse=126","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:17:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 17:1","text":"## The Virtues of Surat Al-Isra'\n\nImam Al-Hafiz Abu 'Abdullah Muhammad bin Isma'il Al-Bukhari recorded that Ibn Mas'ud said concerning Surah Bani Isra'il (i.e., Surat Al-Isra'), Al-Kahf and Maryam: \"They are among the earliest and most beautiful Surahs and they are my treasure.\"\nImam Ahmad recorded that 'A'ishah said: \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to fast until we would say, he does not want to break his fast, then he would not fast until we would say, he does not want to fast, and he used to recite Bani Isra'il and Az-Zumar every night.\"\nبِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nسُبْحَانَ الَّذِي أَسْرَىٰ بِعَبْدِهِ لَيْلًا مِّنَ الْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ إِلَى الْمَسْجِدِ الْأَقْصَى الَّذِي بَارَكْنَا حَوْلَهُ لِنُرِيَهُ مِنْ آيَاتِنَا ۚ إِنَّهُ هُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْبَصِيرُ\n(1. Glorified be He Who took His servant for a Journey by Night from Al-Masjid Al-Haram to Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa, the neighborhood whereof We have blessed, in order that We might show him of Our Ayat. Verily, He is the All-Hearer, the All-Seer.)\n\n## The Isra' (Night Journey)\n\nAllah glorifies Himself, for His ability to do that which none but He can do, for there is no God but He and no Lord besides Him.\nالَّذِي أَسْرَىٰ بِعَبْدِهِ\n(Who took His servant for a Journey) refers to Muhammad ﷺ\nلَيْلًا\n(by Night) means, in the depths of the night.\nمِّنَ الْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ\n(from Al-Masjid Al-Haram) means the Masjid in Makkah.\nإِلَى الْمَسْجِدِ الْأَقْصَى\n(to Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa,) means the Sacred House which is in Jerusalem, the origin of the Prophets from the time of Ibrahim Al-Khalil. The Prophets all gathered there, and he (Muhammad pbuh) led them in prayer in their own homeland. This indicates that he is the greatest leader of all, may the peace and blessings of Allah be upon him and upon them.\nالَّذِي بَارَكْنَا حَوْلَهُ\n(the neighborhood whereof We have blessed) means, its agricultural produce and fruits are blessed\nلِنُرِيَهُ\n(in order that We might show him), i.e., Muhammad ﷺ\nمِنْ آيَاتِنَا\n(of Our Ayat.) i.e., great signs. As Allah says:\nلَقَدْ رَأَىٰ مِنْ آيَاتِ رَبِّهِ الْكُبْرَىٰ\n(Indeed he did see of the greatest signs, of his Lord (Allah).)(53:18) We will mention below what was narrated in the Sunnah concerning this.\nإِنَّهُ هُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْبَصِيرُ\n(Verily, He is the All-Hearer, the All-Seer.) means, He hears all the words of His servants, believers and disbelievers, faithful and infidel, and He sees them and gives each of them what he deserves in this world and the Hereafter.\nAhadeeth about Al-Isra'\n\n## The Report of Anas bin Malik\n\nImam Ahmad reported from Anas bin Malik that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nأُتِيتُ بالْبُرَاقِ وَهُوَ دَابَّةٌ أَبْيَضُ فَوْقَ الْحِمَارِ وَدُونَ الْبَغْلِ، يَضَعُ حَافِرَهُ عِنْدَ مُنْتَهَى طَرَفِهِ، فَرَكِبْتُهُ فَسَارَ بِي حَتَّى أَتَيْتُ بَيْتَ الْمَقْدِسِ، فَرَبَطْتُ الدَّابَّةَ بِالْحَلَقَةِ الَّتِي يَرْبِطُ فِيهَا الْأَنْبِيَاءُ، ثُمَّ دَخَلْتُ فَصَلَّيْتُ فِيهِ رَكْعَتَيْنِ ثُمَّ خَرَجْتُ فَأَتَانِي جِبْرِيلُ بِإِنَاءٍ مِنْ خَمْرٍ وَإِنَاءٍ مِنْ لَبَنٍ، فَاخْتَرْتُ اللَّبَنَ فَقَالَ جِبْرِيلُ: أَصَبْتَ الْفِطْرَةَ. قَالَ: ثُمَّ عُرِجَ بِي إِلَى السَّمَاءِ الدُّنْيَا فَاسْتَفْتَحَ جِبْرِيلُ فَقِيلَ لَهُ: مَنْ أَنْتَ؟ قَالَ: جِبْرِيلُ. قِيلَ: وَمَنْ مَعَكَ؟ قَالَ: مُحَمَّدٌ. قِيلَ: وَقَدْ أُرْسِلَ إِلَيْهِ؟ قَالَ: قَدْ أُرْسِلَ إِلَيْهِ. فَفُتِحَ لَنَا فَإِذَا أَنَا بِآدَمَ فَرَحَّبَ بِي وَدَعَا لِي بِخَيْرٍ، ثُمَّ عُرِجَ بِنَا إِلَى السَّمَاءِ الثَّانِيَةِ فَاسْتَفْتَحَ جِبْرِيلُ فَقِيلَ لَهُ: مَنْ أَنْتَ؟\nقَالَ: جِبْرِيلُ. قِيلَ: وَمَنْ مَعَكَ؟ قَالَ: مُحَمَّدٌ. قِيلَ: وَقَدْ أُرْسِلَ إِلَيْهِ؟ قَالَ: قَدْ أُرْسِلَ إِلَيْهِ، فَفُتِحَ لَنَا فَإِذَا أَنَا بِابْنَيِ الْخَالَةِ يَحْيَى وَعِيسَى فَرَحَّبَا بِي وَدَعَوَا لِي بِخَيْرٍ ثُمَّ عُرِجَ بِنَا إِلَى السَّمَاءِ الثَّالِثَةِ فَاسْتَفْتَحَ جِبْرِيلُ فَقِيلَ لَهُ: مَنْ أَنْتَ؟ قَالَ: جِبْرِيلُ، قِيلَ: وَمَنْ مَعَكَ؟ قَالَ: مُحَمَّدٌ قِيلَ: وَقَدْ أُرْسِلَ إِلَيْهِ؟ قَالَ: قَدْ أُرْسِلَ إِلَيْهِ. فَفُتِحَ لَنَا، فَإِذَا أَنَا بِيُوسُفَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلَامُ، وَإِذَا هُوَ قَدْ أُعْطِيَ شَطْرَ الْحُسْنِ فَرَحَّبَ بِي وَدَعَا لِي بِخَيْرٍ. ثُمَّ عُرِجَ بِنَا إِلَى السَّمَاءِ الرَّابِعَةِ فَاسْتَفْتَحَ جِبْرِيلُ فَقِيلَ: مَنْ أَنْتَ؟ قَالَ: جِبْرِيلُ قِيلَ: وَمَنْ مَعَكَ؟ قَالَ: مُحَمَّدٌ قِيلَ: وَقَدْ أُرْسِلَ إِلَيْهِ؟ قَالَ: قَدْ بُعِثَ إِلَيْهِ. فَفُتِحَ لَنَا فَإِذَا أَنَا بِإِدْرِيسَ فَرَحَّبَ بِي وَدَعَا لِي بِخَيْرٍ، ثُمَّ قَالَ: يَقُولُ اللهُ تَعَالَى:\n(Al-Buraq was brought to me, and it was a white animal bigger than a donkey and smaller than a mule. One stride of this creature covered a distance as far as it could see. I rode on it and it took me to Bayt Al-Maqdis (Jerusalem), where I tethered it at the hitching post of the Prophets. Then I entered and prayed two Rak'ahs there, and came out. Jibril brought me a vessel of wine and a vessel of milk, and I chose the milk. Jibril said: 'You have chosen the Fitrah (natural instinct).' Then I was taken up to the first heaven and Jibril asked for it to be opened. It was said, 'Who are you?' He said, 'Jibril.' It was said, 'Who is with you?' He said, 'Muhammad.' It was asked, 'Has his Mission started?' He said, 'His Mission has started.' So it was opened for us, and there I saw Adam, who welcomed me and prayed for good for me. Then I was taken up to the second heaven and Jibril asked for it to be opened. It was said, 'Who are you?' He said, 'Jibril.' It was said, 'Who is with you?' He said, 'Muhammad.' It was asked, 'Has his Mission started?' He said, 'His Mission has started.' So it was opened for us, and there I saw the two maternal cousins, Yahya and 'Isa, who welcomed me and prayed for good for me. Then I was taken up to the third heaven and Jibril asked for it to be opened. It was said, 'Who are you?' He said, 'Jibril.' It was said, 'Who is with you?' He said, 'Muhammad.' It was asked, 'Has his Mission started?' He said, 'His Mission has started.' So it was opened for us, and there I saw Yusuf, who had been given the beautiful half. He welcomed me and prayed for good for me. Then I was taken up to the fourth heaven and Jibril asked for it to be opened. It was said, 'Who are you?' He said, 'Jibril.' It was said, 'Who is with you?' He said, 'Muhammad.' It was asked, 'Has his Mission started?' He said, 'His Mission has started.' So it was opened for us, and there I saw Idris, who welcomed me and prayed for good for me. - then (the Prophet ﷺ) said: Allah says:\nوَرَفَعْنَاهُ مَكَانًا عَلِيًّا\n(And We raised him to a high station)(19:57)\nثُمَّ عُرِجَ بِنَا إِلَى السَّمَاءِ الْخَامِسَةِ فَاسْتَفْتَحَ جِبْرِيلُ فَقِيلَ: مَنْ أَنْتَ؟ قَالَ جِبْرِيلُ قِيلَ: وَمَنْ مَعَكَ؟ قَالَ: مُحَمَّدٌ قِيلَ: وَقَدْ أُرْسِلَ إِلَيْهِ؟ قَالَ: قَدْ بُعِثَ إِلَيْهِ. فَفُتِحَ لَنَا فَإِذَا أَنَا بِهَارُونَ فَرَحَّبَ بِي وَدَعَا لِي بِخَيْرٍ ثُمَّ عُرِجَ بِنَا إِلَى السَّمَاءِ السَّادِسَةِ فَاسْتَفْتَحَ جِبْرِيلُ فَقِيلَ مَنْ أَنْتَ؟ قَالَ: جِبْرِيلُ قِيلَ: وَمَنْ مَعَكَ؟ قَالَ: مُحَمَّدٌ قِيلَ: وَقَدْ بُعِثَ إِلَيْهِ؟ قَالَ: قَدْ بُعِثَ إِلَيْهِ. فَفُتِحَ لَنَا فَإِذَا أَنَا بِمُوسَى عَلَيْهِ السَّلَامُ فَرَحَّبَ بِي وَدَعَا لِي بِخَيْرٍ ثُمَّ عُرِجَ بِنَا إِلَى السَّمَاءِ السَّابِعَةِ فَاسْتَفْتَحَ جِبْرِيلُ فَقِيلَ مَنْ أَنْتَ؟\nقَالَ: جِبْرِيلُ قِيلَ: وَمَنْ مَعَكَ؟ قَالَ: مُحَمَّدٌ قِيلَ: وَقَدْ بُعِثَ إِلَيْهِ؟ قَالَ: قَدْ بُعِثَ إِلَيْهِ. فَفُتِحَ لَنَا فَإِذَا أَنَا بِإِبْرَاهِيمَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلَامُ، وَإِذَا هُوَ مُسْتَنِدٌ إِلَى الْبَيْتِ الْمَعْمُورِ، وَإِذَا هُوَ يَدْخُلُهُ كُلَّ يَوْمٍ سَبْعُونَ أَلْفَ مَلَكٍ ثُمَّ لَا يَعُودُونَ إِلَيْهِ، ثُمَّ ذَهَبَ بِي إِلَى سِدْرَةِ الْمُنْتَهَى فَإِذَا وَرَقُهَا كَآذَانِ الْفِيَلَةِ، وَإِذَا ثَمَرُهَا كَالْقِلَالِ، فَلَمَّا غَشِيَهَا مِنْ أَمْرِ اللهِ مَا غَشِيَهَا تَغَيَّرَتْ فَمَا أَحَدٌ مِنْ خَلْقِ اللهِ تَعَالَى يَسْتَطِيعُ أَنْ يَصِفَهَا مِنْ حُسْنِهَا. قَالَ: فَأَوْحَى اللهُ إِلَيَّ مَا أَوْحَى، وَقَدْ فَرَضَ عَلَيَّ فِي كُلِّ يَوْمٍ وَلَيْلَةٍ خَمْسِينَ صَلَاةً فَنَزَلَتُ حَتَّى انْتَهَيْتُ إِلَى مُوسَى، قَالَ: مَا فَرَضَ رَبُّك عَلَى أُمَّتِكَ؟\nقُلْتُ: خَمْسِينَ صَلَاةً فِي كُلِّ يَوْمٍ وَلَيْلَةٍ، قَالَ: ارْجِعْ إِلَى رَبِّكَ فَاسْأَلْهُ التَّخْفِيفَ لِأُمَّتِكَ، فَإِنَّ أُمَّتَكَ لَا تُطِيقُ ذَلِكَ وَإِنِّي قَدْ بَلَوْتُ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ وَخَبَرْتُهُمْ، قَالَ: فَرَجَعْتُ إِلَى رَبِّي فَقُلْتُ أَيْ رَبِّ خَفِّفْ عَنْ أُمَّتِي فَحَطَّ عَنِّي خَمْسًا، فَنَزَلَتُ حَتَّى انْتَهَيْتُ إِلَى مُوسَى فَقَالَ: مَا فَعَلْتَ؟ فَقُلْتُ: قَدْ حَطَّ عَنِّي خَمْسًا فَقَالَ: إِنَّ أُمَّتَكَ لَا تُطِيقُ ذَلِكَ فَارْجِعْ إِلَى رَبِّكَ فَاسْأَلْهُ التَّخْفِيفَ لِأُمَّتِكَ، قَالَ: فَلَمْ أَزَلْ أَرْجِعُ بَيْنَ رَبِّي وَبَيْنَ مُوسَى وَيَحُطُّ عَنِّي خَمْسًا خَمْسًا حَتَّى قَالَ: يَا مُحَمَّدُ هُنَّ خَمْسُ صَلَوَاتٍ فِي كُلِّ يَوْمٍ وَلَيْلَةٍ بِكُلِّ صَلَاةٍ عَشْرٌ، فَتِلْكَ خَمْسُونَ صَلَاةً وَمَنْ هَمَّ بِحَسَنَةٍ فَلَمْ يَعْمَلْهَا كُتِبَتْ لَهُ حَسَنَةً، فَإِنْ عَمِلَهَا كُتِبَتْ عَشْرًا، وَمَنْ هَمَّ بِسَيِّئَةٍ فَلَمْ يَعْمَلْهَا لَمْ تُكْتَبْ شَيْئًا، فَإِنْ عَمِلَهَا كُتِبَتْ سَيِّئَةً وَاحِدَةً، فَنَزَلَتُ حَتَّى انْتَهَيْتُ إِلَى مُوسَى فَأَخْبَرْتُهُ، فَقَالَ: ارْجِعْ إِلَى رَبِّكَ فَاسْأَلْهُ التَّخْفِيفَ لِأُمَّتِكَ فَإِنَّ أُمَّتَكَ لَا تُطِيقُ ذَلِكَ، فَقَالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ صلّى الله عليه وسلّم:\nلَقَدْ رَجَعْتُ إِلى رَبِّي حَتَّى اسْتَحْيَيْتُ\n(Then he resumed his narrative:)(Then I was taken up to the fifth heaven and Jibril asked for it to be opened. It was said, 'Who are you?' He said, 'Jibril.' It was said, 'Who is with you?' He said, 'Muhammad.' It was asked, 'Has his Mission started?' He said, 'His Mission has started.' So it was opened for us, and there I saw Harun, who welcomed me and prayed for good for me. Then I was taken up to the sixth heaven and Jibril asked for it to be opened. It was said, 'Who are you?' He said, 'Jibril.’ It was said, 'Who is with you?' He said, 'Muhammad.' It was asked, 'Has his Mission started?' He said, 'His Mission has started.' So it was opened for us, and there I saw Musa, who welcomed me and prayed for good for me. Then I was taken up to the seventh heaven and Jibril asked for it to be opened. It was said, 'Who are you?' He said, 'Jibril.' It was said, 'Who is with you?' He said, 'Muhammad.' It was asked, 'Has his Mission started?' He said, 'His Mission has started.' So it was opened for us, and there I saw Ibrahim, who was leaning back against the Much-Frequented House (Al-Bayt Al-Ma'mur). Every day seventy thousand angels enter it, then they never come back to it again. Then I was taken to Sidrat Al-Muntaha (the Lote tree beyond which none may pass), and its leaves were like the leaves [ears] of elephants and its fruits were like jugs, and when it was veiled with whatever it was veiled with by the command of Allah, it changed, and none of the creatures of Allah can describe it because it is so beautiful.\nThen Allah revealed that which He revealed to me. He enjoined on me fifty prayers every day and night. I came down until I reached Musa, and he said, 'What did your Lord enjoin on your Ummah?' I said, 'Fifty prayers everyday and night.' He said, 'Go back to your Lord and ask Him to reduce (the burden) for your Ummah, for your Ummah will not be able to do that. I tested the Children of Israel and found out how they were.' So I went back to my Lord and said, 'O Lord, reduce (the burden) for my Ummah for they will never be able to do that.' So He reduced it by five. I came back down until I met Musa and he asked me, 'What did you do?' I said, '(My Lord) reduced (my burden) by five.' He said, 'Go back to your Lord and ask Him to reduce (the burden) for your Ummah.' I kept going back between my Lord and Musa, and (my Lord) reduced it by five each time, until He said, 'O Muhammad, these are five prayers every day and night, and for every prayer there is (the reward of) ten, so they are (like) fifty prayers. Whoever wants to do something good then does not do it, one good deed will be recorded for him, and if he does it, ten good deeds will be recorded for him. Whoever wants to do something evil and does not do it, no evil deed will be recorded for him, and if he does it, one evil deed will be recorded for him.' I came down until I reached Musa, and told him about this. He said: 'Go back to your Lord and ask him to reduce (the burden) for your Ummah, for they will never be able to do that.' I had kept going back to my Lord until I felt too shy.) This version was also recorded by Muslim.\nImam Ahmad recorded Anas saying that Al-Buraq was brought to the Prophet ﷺ on the Night of the Isra' with his saddle and reins ready for riding. The animal shied, and Jibril said to him: \"Why are you doing this? By Allah, no one has ever ridden you who is more honored by Allah than him.\" At this, Al-Buraq started to sweat. This was also recorded by At-Tirmidhi, who said it is Gharib.\nAhmad also recorded that Anas said: \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nلَمَّا عَرَجَ بِي رَبِّي عَزَّ وَجَلَّ مَرَرْتُ بِقَوْمٍ لَهُمْ أَظْفَارٌ مِنْ نُحَاسٍ يَخْمِشُونَ بِهَا وُجُوهَهُمْ وَصُدُورَهُمْ، فَقُلْتُ: مَنْ هؤُلَاءِ يَا جِبْرِيلُ؟ قَالَ: هَؤُلَاءِ الَّذِينَ يَأْكُلُونَ لُحُومَ النَّاسِ وَيَقَعُونَ فِي أَعْرَاضِهِم\n(When I was taken up to my Lord (during Al-Mi'raj), I passed by people who had nails of copper with which they were scratching their faces and chests. I asked, 'Who are these, O Jibril?' He said, 'These are those who ate the flesh of the people [i.e., backbiting] and slandered their honor.')\nThis was also recorded by Abu Dawud. Anas also said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nمَرَرْتُ لَيْلَةَ أُسْرِيَ بِي عَلَى مُوسَى عَلَيْهِ السَّلَامُ قَائِمًا يُصَلِّي فِي قَبْرِهِ\n(On the night when I was taken on my Night Journey (Al-Isra'), I passed by Musa, who was standing, praying in his grave.) This was also recorded by Muslim.\n\n## The Report of Anas bin Malik from Malik bin Sa'sa'ah\n\nImam Ahmad recorded that Anas bin Malik said that Malik bin Sa'sa'ah told him that the Prophet of Allah ﷺ told them about the night in which he was taken on the Night Journey (Al-Isra'). He said:\nبَيْنَمَا أَنَا فِي الْحَطِيمِ - وَرُبَّمَا قَالَ قَتَادَةُ: فِي الْحِجْرِ - مُضْطَجِعًا إِذْ أَتَانِي آتٍ، فَجَعَلَ يَقُولُ لِصَاحِبِهِ الْأَوْسَطِ بَيْنَ الثَّلَاثَةِ - قَالَ - فَأَتَانِي فَقَدَّ - سَمِعْتُ قَتَادَةَ يَقُولُ: فَشَقَّ - مَا بَيْنَ هَذِهِ إِلَى هَذِهِ\n(While I was lying down in Al-Hatim (or maybe, Qatadah said, in Al-Hijr) 'someone came to me and said to his companion, 'The one who is in the middle of these three.' He came to me and opened me.)\nI [one of the narrators] heard Qatadah say, 'split me - from here to here.' Qatadah said: \"I said to Al-Jarud, who was beside me, 'What does that mean?' He said, 'From the top of his chest to below his navel', and I heard him say, 'from his throat to below his navel'. The Prophet ﷺ said:\nفَاسْتُخْرِجَ قَلْبِي - قَالَ - فَأُتِيتُ بِطَسْتٍ مِنْ ذَهَبٍ مَمْلُوءَةٍ إِيمَانًا وَحِكْمَةً فَغُسِلَ قَلْبِي ثُمَّ حُشِيَ ثُمَّ أُعِيدَ ثُمَّ أُتِيتُ بِدَابَّةٍ دُونَ الْبَغْلِ وَفَوْقَ الْحِمَارِ أَبْيَضَ\n(He took out my heart and brought a golden vessel filled with faith and wisdom. He washed my heart then filled it up and put it back, then a white animal was brought to me that was smaller than a mule and larger than a donkey.)\nAl-Jarud said, 'Was this Al-Buraq, O Abu Hamzah?' He said, 'Yes, and its stride covered a distance as far as it could see.' The Prophet ﷺ said:\nفَحُمِلْتُ عَلَيْهِ فَانْطَلَقَ بِي جِبْرِيلُ عَلَيْهِ السَّلَامُ حَتَّى أَتَى بِي إِلَى السَّمَاءِ الدُّنْيَا فَاسْتَفْتَحَ، فَقِيلَ: مَنْ هَذَا؟ قَالَ: جِبْرِيلُ، قِيلَ: وَمَنْ مَعَكَ؟ قَالَ: مُحَمَّدٌ، قِيلَ: أَوَ قَدْ أُرْسِلَ إِلَيْهِ؟ قَالَ: نَعَمْ فَقِيلَ: مَرْحَبًا بِهِ وَلَنِعْمَ الْمَجِيءُ جَاءَ - قَالَ - فَفُتِحَ لَنَا فَلَمَّا خَلَصْتُ فَإِذَا فِيهَا آدَمُ عَلَيهِ السَّلَامُ، قَالَ: هَذَا أَبُوكَ آدَمُ فَسَلِّمْ عَلَيْهِ، فَسَلَّمْتُ عَلَيْهِ فَرَدَّ السَّلَامَ ثُمَّ قَالَ: مَرْحَبًا بِالْابْنِ الصَّالِحِ وَالنَّبِيِّ الصَّالِحِ، قَالَ فَلَمَّا تَجَاوَزْتُهُ بَكَى قِيلَ لَهُ: مَا يُبْكِيكَ؟ قَالَ: أَبْكِي لأَنَّ غُلَامًا بُعِثَ بَعْدِي يَدْخُلُ الْجَنَّةَ مِنْ أُمَّتِهِ أَكْثَرُ مِمَّا يَدْخُلُهَا مِنْ أُمَّتِي\nقَالَ: ثُمَّ صَعِدَ حَتَّى أَتَى السَّمَاءَ السَّابِعَةَ فَاسْتَفْتَحَ قِيلَ: مَنْ هَذَا؟ قَالَ: جبْرِيلُ، قِيلَ: وَمَنْ مَعَكَ؟ قَالَ: مُحَمَّدٌ، قِيلَ: أَوَ قَدْ بُعِثَ إِلَيْهِ؟ قَالَ: نَعَمْ، قِيلَ: مَرْحَبًا بِهِ وَلَنِعْمَ الْمَجِيءُ جَاءَ، قَالَ: فَفُتِحَ لَنَا فَلَمَّا خَلَصْتُ فَإِذَا إِبْرَاهِيمُ عَلَيْهِ السَّلَامُ فَقَالَ: هَذَا إبْرَاهِيمُ فَسَلِّمْ عَلَيْهِ قَالَ: فَسَلَّمْتُ عَلَيْهِ فَرَدَّ السَّلَامَ، ثُمَّ قَالَ: مَرْحَبًا بِالْابْنِ الصَّالِحِ وَالنَّبِيِّ الصَّالِحِ - قَالَ - ثُمَّ رُفِعَتْ إِلَيَّ سِدْرَةُ الْمُنْتَهَى فَإِذَا نَبْقُهَا مِثْلُ قِلَالِ هَجَرَ، وَإِذَا وَرَقُهَا مِثْلُ آذَانِ الْفِيَلةِ، فَقَالَ: هَذِهِ سِدْرَةُ الْمُنْتَهَى،\nقَالَ: وَإِذَا أَرْبَعَةُ أَنْهَارٍ: نَهْرَانِ بَاطِنَانِ وَنَهْرَانِ ظَاهِرَانِ، فَقُلْتُ: مَا هَذَا يَا جِبْرِيلُ؟ قَالَ: أَمَّا الْبَاطِنَانِ فَنَهْرَانِ فِي الْجَنَّةِ، وَأَمَّا الظَّاهِرَانِ فَالنِّيلُ وَالْفُرَاتُ - قَالَ - ثُمَّ رُفِعَ إِلَيَّ الْبَيْتُ الْمَعْمُورُ\n(I was mounted upon it and Jibril brought me to the first heaven, and asked for it to be opened. It was said, 'Who is this?' He said, 'Jibril.' It was said, 'Who is with you?' He said, 'Muhammad.' It was said, 'Has his Mission started?' He said, 'Yes.' It was said, 'Welcome to him, blessed is the one who comes.' So it was opened for us and when I entered, I saw Adam. (Jibril) said, 'This is your father Adam, greet him.' So I greeted him, and he returned the greeting then said, 'Welcome to the righteous son and righteous Prophet.' Then I was taken up to the fifth heaven, and (Jibril) asked for it to be opened. It was said, 'Who is this?' He said, 'Jibril.' It was said, 'Who is with you?' He said, 'Muhammad.' It was said, 'Has his Mission started?' He said, 'Yes.' It was said, 'Welcome to him, blessed is the one who comes.' So it was opened for us and when I entered, I saw Harun. (Jibril) said, 'This is Harun, greet him.' So I greeted him, and he returned the greeting then said, 'Welcome to the righteous brother and righteous Prophet.' Then I was taken up to the sixth heaven, and (Jibril) asked for it to be opened. It was said, 'Who is this?' He said, 'Jibril.' It was said, 'Who is with you?' He said, 'Muhammad.' It was said, 'Has his Mission started?' He said, 'Yes.' It was said, 'Welcome to him, blessed is the one who comes.' So it was opened for us and when I entered, I saw Musa. (Jibril) said, 'This is Musa, greet him.' So I greeted him, and he returned the greeting then said, 'Welcome to the righteous brother and righteous Prophet.' When I passed by him, he wept, and it was said to him, 'Why are you weeping?' He said, 'I am weeping because a young man was sent after me and more people from his Ummah than from mine will enter Paradise.' Then I was taken up to the seventh heaven, and (Jibril) asked for it to be opened. It was said, 'Who is this?' He said, 'Jibril.' It was said, 'Who is with you?' He said, 'Muhammad'. It was said, 'Has his Mission started?' He said, 'Yes.' It was said, 'Welcome to him, blessed is the one who comes.' So it was opened for us and when I entered, I saw Ibrahim. (Jibril) said, 'This is Ibrahim, greet him. 'So I greeted him, and he returned the greeting then said, 'Welcome to the righteous son and righteous Prophet.' Then I was taken up to Sidrat Al-Muntaha, whose fruits like the clay jugs of Hajar (a region in Arabia) and its leaves were like the ears of elephants. (Jibril) said: 'This is Sidrat Al-Muntaha.' And there were four rivers, two hidden and two visible. I said, 'What is this, O Jibril?' He said, 'The two hidden rivers are rivers in Paradise, and the two visible rivers are the Nile and the Euphrates.' Then I was shown Al-Bayt Al-Ma'mur.)\nQatadah said: Al-Hasan told us narrating from Abu Hurayrah that the Prophet ﷺ saw Al-Bayt Al-Ma'mur. Each day seventy thousand angels enter it, then they never return from it. Then he continued to narrate the Hadith of Anas;\nثُمَّ أُتِيتُ بِإِنَاءٍ مِنْ خَمْرٍ وَإِنَاءٍ مِنْ لَبَنٍ وَإِنَاءٍ مِنْ عسَلٍ. - قَالَ - فَأَخَذْتُ اللَّبَنَ قَالَ: هَذِهِ الْفِطْرَةُ أَنْتَ عَلَيْهَا وَأُمَّتُكَ - قَالَ - ثُمَّ فُرِضَتْ عَلَيَّ الصَّلَاةُ خَمْسِينَ صَلَاةً كُلَّ يَوْمٍ - قَالَ - فَنَزَلْتُ حَتَّى أَتَيْتُ مُوسَى، فَقَالَ: مَا فَرَضَ رَبُّكَ عَلَى أُمَّتِكَ؟ قَالَ: فَقُلْتُ: خَمْسِينَ صَلَاةً كُلَّ يَوْمٍ، قَالَ: إِنَّ أُمَّتَكَ لَا تَسْتَطِيعُ خَمْسِينَ صَلَاةً وَإِنِّي قَدْ خَبَرْتُ النَّاسَ قَبْلَكَ، وَعَالَجْتُ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ أَشَدَّ الْمُعَالَجَةِ، فَارْجِعْ إِلَى رَبِّكَ فَاسْأَلْهُ التَّخْفِيفَ لِأُمَّتِكَ - قَالَ - فَرَجَعْتُ فَوَضَعَ عَنِّي عَشْرًا - قَالَ - فَرَجَعْتُ إِلَى مُوسَى فَقَالَ: بِمَ أُمِرْتَ؟\nقُلْتُ: بِأَرْبَعِينَ صَلَاةً كُلَّ يَوْمٍ، قَالَ: إِنَّ أُمَّتَكَ لَا تَسْتَطِيعُ أَرْبَعِينَ صَلَاةً كُلَّ يَوْمٍ، وَإِنِّي قَدْ خَبَرْتُ النَّاسَ قَبْلَكَ وَعَالَجْتُ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ أَشَدَّ الْمُعَالَجَةِ، فَارْجِعْ إِلَى رَبِّكَ فَاسْأَلْهُ التَّخْفِيفَ لِأُمَّتِكَ - قَالَ - فَرَجَعْتُ فَوَضَعَ عَنِّي عَشْرًا أُخَرَ، فَرَجَعْتُ إِلَى مُوسَى فَقَالَ: بِمَ أُمِرْتَ؟ قُلْتُ: بِثَلَاثِينَ صَلَاةً، قَالَ: إِنَّ أُمَّتَكَ لَا تَسْتَطِيعُ ثَلَاثِينَ صَلَاةً كُلَّ يَوْمٍ، وَإِنِّي قَدْ خَبَرْتُ النَّاسَ قَبْلَكَ وَعَالَجْتُ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ أَشَدَّ الْمُعَالَجَةِ، فَارْجِعْ إِلَى رَبِّكَ فَاسْأَلْهُ التَّخْفِيفَ لِأُمَّتِكَ - قَالَ - فَرَجَعْتُ فَوَضَعَ عَنِّي عَشْرًا أُخَرَ،\nفَرَجَعْتُ إِلَى مُوسَى فَقَالَ: بِمَ أُمِرْتَ؟ قُلْتُ: أُمِرْتُ بِعِشْرِينَ صَلَاةً كُلَّ يَوْمٍ، قَالَ: إِنَّ أُمَّتَكَ لَا تَسْتَطِيعُ عِشْرِينَ صَلَاةً كُلَّ يَوْمٍ، وَإِنِّي قَدْ خَبَرْتُ النَّاسَ قَبْلَكَ وَعَالَجْتُ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ أَشَدَّ الْمُعَالَجَةِ، فَارْجِعْ إِلَى رَبِّكَ فَاسْأَلْهُ التَّخْفِيفَ لِأُمَّتِكَ - قَالَ - فَرَجَعْتُ فَوَضَعَ عَنِّي عَشْرًا أُخَرَ،\nفَرَجَعْتُ إِلَى مُوسَى فَقَالَ: بِمَ أُمِرْتَ؟ فَقُلْتُ: أُمِرْتُ بِعَشْرِ صَلَواتٍ كُلَّ يَوْمٍ، فَقَالَ: إِنَّ أُمَّتَكَ لَا تَسْتَطِيعُ لِعَشْرِ صَلَواتٍ كُلَّ يَوْمٍ، وَإِنِّي قَدْ خَبَرْتُ النَّاسَ قَبْلَكَ وَعَالَجْتُ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ أَشَدَّ الْمُعَالَجَةِ، فَارْجِعْ إِلَى رَبِّكَ فَاسْأَلْهُ التَّخْفِيفَ لِأُمَّتِكَ - قَالَ - فَرَجَعْتُ فَأُمِرْتُ بِخَمْسِ صَلَواتٍ كُلَّ يَوْمٍ، فَرَجَعْتُ إِلَى مُوسَى فَقَالَ: بِمَ أُمِرْتَ؟ فَقُلْتُ: أُمِرْتُ بِخَمْسِ صَلَواتٍ كُلَّ يَوْمٍ،\nفَقَالَ: إِنَّ أُمَّتَكَ لَا تَسْتَطِيعُ لِخَمْسِ صَلَواتٍ كُلَّ يَوْمٍ، وَإِنِّي قَدْ خَبَرْتُ النَّاسَ قَبْلَكَ وَعَالَجْتُ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ أَشَدَّ الْمُعَالَجَةِ، فَارْجِعْ إِلَى رَبِّكَ فَاسْأَلْهُ التَّخْفِيفَ لِأُمَّتِكَ - قَالَ - قُلْتُ: قَدْ سَأَلْتُ رَبِّي حَتَّى اسْتَحْيَيْتُ، وَلَكِنْ أَرْضَى وَأُسَلِّمُ، فَنَفَذْتُ فَنَادَى مُنَادٍ: قَدْ أَمْضَيْتُ فَرِيضَتِي وَخَفَّفْتُ عَنْ عِبَادِي\n(Then I was brought a vessel of wine, a vessel of milk and a vessel of honey. I chose the milk, and he [Jibril] said, 'This is the Fitrah (natural instinct) on which you and your Ummah will be. ' Then the prayer was enjoined upon me, fifty prayers each day. I came down until I reached Musa, who said, 'What did your Lord enjoin upon your Ummah?' I said, 'Fifty prayers each day.' He said, 'Your Ummah will not be able to do fifty prayers each day. I tried the people before you, I had to deal with the Children of Israel and it was very difficult for me. Go back to your Lord and ask Him to reduce the burden on your Ummah.' So I went back, and the number was reduced by ten. I came back to Musa and he asked, 'What were you commanded to do?' I said, 'Forty prayers each day.' He said, 'Your Ummah will not be able to do forty prayers each day. I tried the people before you, I had to deal with the Children of Israel and it was very difficult for me. Go back to your Lord and ask Him to reduce the burden on your Ummah.' So I went back, and the number was reduced by ten. I came back to Musa and he asked, 'What were you commanded to do?' I said, 'I was commanded to do thirty prayers each day.' He said, 'Your Ummah will not be able to do thirty prayers each day. I tried the people before you, I had to deal with the Children of Israel and it was very difficult for me. Go back to your Lord and ask Him to reduce the burden on your Ummah.' So I went back, and the number was reduced by ten. I came back to Musa and he asked, 'What were you commanded to do?' I said, 'Twenty prayers each day.' He said, 'Your Ummah will not be able to do twenty prayers each day. I tried the people before you, I had to deal with the Children of Israel and it was very difficult for me. Go back to your Lord and ask Him to reduce the burden on your Ummah.' So I went back, and the number was reduced by ten more. I came back to Musa and he asked, 'What were you commanded to do?' I said, 'Ten prayers each day.' He said, 'Your Ummah will not be able to do ten prayers each day. I tried the people before you, I had to deal with the Children of Israel and it was very difficult for me. Go back to your Lord and ask Him to reduce the burden on your Ummah.' So I went back, and I was commanded to do five prayers every day. I came back to Musa and he asked, 'What were you commanded to do?' I said, 'Five prayers each day.' He said, 'Your Ummah will not be able to do five prayers each day. I tried the people before you, I had to deal with the Children of Israel and it was very difficult for me. Go back to your Lord and ask Him to reduce the burden on your Ummah.' I said, 'I have asked my Lord until I feel too shy. I accept this and submit to Him.' Then a voice called out: 'My order has been decreed and I have reduced the burden on My servants.') Similar narrations were recorded in the Two Sahihs.\n\n## The Report of Anas from Abu Dharr\n\nAl-Bukhari recorded that Anas bin Malik said: Abu Dharr used to tell us that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nفُرِجَ عَنْ سَقْفِ بَيْتِي وَأَنَا بِمَكَّةَ، فَنَزَلَ جِبْرِيلُ فَفَرَجَ صَدْرِي ثُمَّ غَسَلَهُ بِمَاءِ زَمْزَمَ، ثُمَّ جَاءَ بِطَسْتٍ مِنْ ذَهَبٍ مُمْتَلِىءٍ حِكْمَةً وَإِيمَانًا، فَأَفْرَغَهُ فِي صَدْرِي، ثُمَّ أَطْبَقَهُ ثُمَّ أَخَذَ بِيَدِي فَعَرَجَ بِي إِلَى السَّمَاءِ الدُّنْيَا، فَلَمَّا جِئْتُ إِلَى السَّمَاءِ قَالَ جِبْرِيلُ لِخَازِنِ السَّمَاءِ: افْتَحْ قَالَ: مَنْ هَذَا؟ قَالَ: جِبْرِيلُ، قَالَ: هَلْ مَعَكَ أَحَدٌ؟ قَالَ: نَعَمْ مَعِيَ مُحَمَّدٌ صلّى الله عليه وسلّم\nفَقَالَ: أُرْسِلَ إِلَيْهِ؟ قَالَ: نَعَمْ فَلَمَّا فَتَحَ عَلَوْنَا السَّمَاءَ الدُّنْيَا فَإِذَا رَجُلٌ قَاعِدٌ عَلَى يَمِينِهِ أَسْوِدَةٌ وَعَلَى يَسَارِهِ أَسْوِدَةٌ، إِذَا نَظَرَ قِبَلَ يَمِينِهِ ضَحِكَ وَإِذَا نَظَرَ قِبَلَ شِمَالِهِ بَكَى، فَقَالَ: مَرْحَبًا بِالنَّبِيِّ الصَّالِحِ وَالْابْنِ الصَّالِحِ - قَالَ - قُلْتُ لِجِبْرِيلَ: مَنْ هَذَا؟ قَالَ: هَذَا آدَمُ وَهَذِهِ الْأَسْوِدَةُ عَنْ يَمِينِهِ وَعَنْ شِمَالِهِ نَسَمُ بَنِيهِ، فَأَهْلُ الْيَمِينِ مِنْهُمْ أَهْلُ الْجَنَّةِ، وَالْأَسْوِدَةُ الَّتِي عَنْ شِمَالِهِ أَهْلُ النَّارِ، فَإِذَا نَظَرَ عَنْ يَمِينِهِ ضَحِكَ، وَإِذَا نَظَرَ عَنْ شِمَالِهِ بَكَى، ثُمَّ عَرَجَ بِي إِلَى السَّمَاءِ الثَّانِيَةِ\nفذكر الحديث قال:\nثُمَّ مَرَرْتُ بِإِبْرَاهِيمَ فَقَالَ: مَرْحبًا بِالنَّبِيِّ الصَّالِحِ وَالْابْنِ الصَّالِحِ، قُلْتُ: مَنْ هَذَا؟ قَالَ: هَذَا إِبْرَاهِيمُ\n(The roof of my house was opened while I was in Makkah, and Jibril came down and opened my chest, then he washed it with Zamzam water. Then he brought a vessel of gold filled with wisdom and faith, and poured it into my chest, then he closed it up. Then he took me by the hand and took me up to the lowest heaven. When we came to the lowest heaven, Jibril said to its keeper, 'Open up!' He said, 'Who is this?' He said, 'Jibril. ' He said, 'Is there anyone with you?' He said, 'Yes, Muhammad is with me.' He said, 'Has his Mission started?' He said, 'Yes.' When it was opened, we went up into the first heaven, where I saw a man sitting with a multitude to his right and another to his left. When he looked to his right he smiled, and when he looked to his left, he wept. He said, 'Welcome to the righteous Prophet and the righteous son.' I said to Jibril, 'Who is this?' He said, 'This is Adam, and these multitudes to his right and left are the souls of his descendants. The people on his right include the people of Paradise, and the people on his left include the people of Hell, so when he looks to his right he smiles, and when he looks to his left he weeps.' Then he took me up to the second heaven...Then we passed by Ibrahim, who said, 'Welcome to the righteous Prophet and the righteous son.' I said, 'Who is this?' He said, 'This is Ibrahim.')\nAz-Zuhri said: Ibn Hazm told me that Ibn 'Abbas and Abu Habbah Al-Ansari used to say: the Prophet ﷺ narrated here -\nثُمَّ عُرِجَ بِي حَتَّى ظَهَرْتُ لِمُسْتَوًى أَسْمَعُ فِيهِ صَرِيفَ الْأَقْلَامِ\n(Then I was taken up until I reached a level where I could hear the sound of the pens.)\nIbn Hazm and Anas bin Malik said: the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nفَفَرَضَ اللهُ عَلَى أُمَّتِي خَمْسِينَ صَلَاةً، فَرَجَعْتُ بِذَلِكَ حَتَّى مَرَرْتُ عَلَى مُوسَى عَلَيْهِ السَّلَامُ، فَقَالَ: مَا فَرَضَ اللهُ عَلَى أُمَّتِكَ؟ قُلْتُ: فَرَضَ خَمْسِينَ صَلَاةً، قَالَ مُوسَى: فَارْجِعْ إِلَى رَبِّكَ فَإِنَّ أُمَّتَكَ لَا تُطِيقُ ذَلِكَ، فَرَجَعْتُ فَوَضَعَ شَطْرَهَا، فَرَجَعْتُ إِلَى مُوسَى، قُلْتُ: وَضَعَ شَطْرَهَا، فَقَالَ: ارْجِعْ إِلَى رَبِّكَ، فَإِنَّ أُمَّتَكَ لَا تُطِيقُ ذَلِكَ، فَرَجَعْتُ فَوَضَعَ شَطْرَهَا، فَرَجَعْتُ إِلَىْهِ فَقَالَ: ارْجِعْ إِلَى رَبِّكَ فَإِنَّ أُمَّتَكَ لَا تُطِيقُ ذَلِكَ، فَرَاجَعْتُهُ فَقَالَ: هِيَ خَمْسٌ وَهِيَ خَمْسُونَ لَا يُبَدَّلُ الْقَوْلُ لَدَيَّ، فَرَجَعْتُ إِلَى مُوسَى فَقَالَ: ارْجِعْ إِلَى رَبِّكَ، قُلْتُ: قَدِ اسْتَحْيَيْتُ مِنْ رَبِّي، ثُمَّ انْطَلَقَ بِي حَتَّى انْتَهَى إِلَى سِدْرَةِ الْمُنْتَهَى فَغَشِيَهَا أَلْوَانٌ لَا أَدْرِي مَا هِيَ، ثُمَّ أُدْخِلْتُ الْجَنَّةَ، فَإِذَا فِيهَا حَبَائِلُ اللُّؤْلُؤِ، وَإِذَا تُرَابُهَا الْمِسْكُ\n(Allah enjoined upon my Ummah fifty prayers. I came back with this (message) until I passed by Musa, who said, 'What did your Lord enjoin upon your Ummah?' I said, 'He enjoined fifty prayers.' Musa said, 'Go back to your Lord, for your Ummah will not be able to do that.' So I went back, and He reduced it by half. Then I came back to Musa and said, 'It has been reduced by half.' He said, 'Go back to your Lord, for your Ummah will not be able to do that.' So I went back, and it was reduced by half. I came back to him, and he said, 'Go back to your Lord, for your Ummah will not be able to do that.' So I went back, and He said: 'They are five but equal in reward to fifty, for My word does not change.' I came back to Musa and he said, 'Go back to your Lord.' I said, 'I feel too shy before my Lord.' Then I was taken up until I reached Sidrat Al-Muntaha, which was veiled in indescribable colors. Then I entered Paradise, in which I saw nets of pearls and its soil of musk.)\nThis version was recorded by Al-Bukhari in the Book of Prayer. He also reported in the Book of Tafsir, under the discussion of Bani Isra'il (i.e., Surat Al-Isra'), the Book of Hajj and the Stories of the Prophets, via different chains of narration from Yunus. Muslim recorded similar Hadiths in his Sahih in the Book of Faith.\nImam Ahmad recorded that 'Abdullah bin Shaqiq said: I said to Abu Dharr, \"If I had seen the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, I would have asked him.\" He said, \"What would you have asked him?\" He said, \"I would have asked him, if he saw his Lord?\" He said, \"I did ask him that, and he said,\nقَدْ رَأَيْتُهُ نُورًا، أَنَّى أَرَاهُ\n(I saw it as light, how could I see Him?)\"\nThis is how it was narrated in the report of Imam Ahmad. Muslim recorded that 'Abdullah bin Shaqiq said that Abu Dharr said: \"I asked the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, 'Did you see your Lord?' He said,\nنُورٌ أَنَّى أَرَاهُ\n((I saw) a light, how could I see Him?)\" 'Abdullah bin Shaqiq said: I said to Abu Dharr, \"If I had seen the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, I would have asked him.\" He said, \"What would you have asked him?\" He said, \"I would have asked him, 'Did you see your Lord?\" Abu Dharr said, \"I asked him that, and he said,\nرَأَيْتُ نُورًا\n(I saw light.)\n\n## The Report of Jabir bin 'Abdullah\n\nImam Ahmad recorded that Jabir bin 'Abdullah said that he heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ say:\nلَمَّا كَذَّبَتْنِي قُرَيْشٌ حِينَ أُسْرِيَ بِي إِلَى بَيْتِ الْمَقْدِسِ، قُمْتُ فِي الْحِجْرِ فَجَلَى اللهُ لِي بَيْتَ الْمَقْدِسِ، فَطَفِقْتُ أُخْبِرُهُمْ عَنْ آيَاتِهِ وَأَنَا أَنْظُرُ إِلَيْهِ\n(When Quraysh did not believe that I had been taken on the Night Journey to Bayt Al-Maqdis, I stood up in Al-Hijr and Allah displayed Bayt Al-Maqdis before me, so I told them about its features while I was looking at it.)\nThis was also reported in the Two Sahihs with different chains of narration. According to Al-Bayhaqi, Ibn Shihab said: Abu Salamah bin 'Abdur-Rahman said: Some people from Quraish went to Abu Bakr and said, \"Have you heard what your companion is saying? He is claiming that he went to Bayt Al-Maqdis and came back to Makkah in one night!\" Abu Bakr said, \"Did he say that?\" They said, \"Yes.\" Abu Bakr said, \"Then I bear witness that if he said that, he is speaking the truth.\" They said, \"You believe that he went to Ash-Sham [Greater Syria] in one night and came back to Makkah before morning?\" He said, \"Yes, I believe him with regard to something even more than that. I believe him with regard to the revelation that comes to him from heaven.\" Abu Salamah said, from then on Abu Bakr was known as As-Siddiq (the true believer).\n\n## The Report of 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas\n\nImam Ahmad recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said: \"On the night when the Messenger of Allah ﷺ was taken on his Night Journey, he entered Paradise, in some part of which he heard a sound. He said, 'O Jibril, what is this?' He said, 'This is Bilal, the Mu'adhdhin.' When the Prophet ﷺ came back to the people, he said,\nقَدْ أَفْلَحَ بِلَالٌ، رَأَيْتُ لَهُ كَذَا وَكَذَا\n(Bilal has succeeded, I saw that he will have such and such.)\nHe [the Prophet ﷺ] was met by Musa, who welcomed him and said, 'Welcome to the Unlettered Prophet.' He was a tall, dark man with lank hair coming down to his ears or above his ears. He said, 'Who is this, O Jibril?' He said, 'This is Musa.' Then he went on and met a venerable, distinguished old man, who welcomed him and greeted him with Salam, and all of them were greeting him. He said, 'Who is this, O Jibril?' He said, 'This is your father Ibrahim.' Then he looked into Hell and saw some people eating rotten meat. He said, 'Who are these people, O Jibril?' He said, 'They are those who used to eat the flesh of the people [i.e., backbiting].' He saw a man who was very red and dark blue, and said, 'Who is this, O Jibril?' He said, 'This is the one who slaughtered the she-camel (of Salih).' When the Messenger of Allah ﷺ came to Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa, he stood up to pray, and all the Prophets gathered and prayed with him. When he finished, he was brought two cups, one on his right and one on his left, one containing milk and one containing honey. He took the milk and drank it, and the one who was carrying the cup said, 'You have chosen the Fitrah (natural instinct).'\"\nThe chain of narrators is Sahih, although they (Al-Bukhari and Muslim) did not record it.\nImam Ahmad reported that Ibn 'Abbas said: \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ was taken on the Night Journey to Bayt Al-Maqdis, then he came back and told them about his journey and the features of Bayt Al-Maqdis and the caravan (of Quraysh). Some people said, 'We do not believe what Muhammad is saying,' and they left Islam and became disbelievers. Allah destroyed them when He destroyed Abu Jahl. Abu Jahl said: 'Muhammad is trying to scare us with the tree of Zaqqum; bring some dates and butter and let us have some Zaqqum!' The Prophet ﷺ also saw the Dajjal in his true form, in real life, not in a dream, and he saw 'Isa, Musa and Ibrahim. The Prophet ﷺ was asked about the Dajjal, and he said:\nرَأَيْتُهُ فَيلَمَانِيًا أَقْمَرَ هِجَانًا، إِحْدَى عَيْنَيْهِ قَائِمَةٌ كَأَنَّهَا كَوْكَبٌ دُرِّيٌّ، كَأَنَّ شَعْرَ رَأْسِهِ أَغْصَانُ شَجَرَةٍ، وَرَأَيْتُ عِيسَى عَلَيْهِ السَّلَامُ (شابًّا) أَبْيَضَ، جَعْدَ الرَّأْسِ حَدِيدَ الْبَصَرِ، وَمُبَطَّنَ الْخَلْقِ، وَرَأَيْتُ مُوسَى عَلَيْهِ السَّلَامُ أَسْحَمَ آدَمَ، كَثِيرَ الشَّعْرِ، شَدِيدَ الْخَلْقِ، وَنَظَرْتُ إِلَى إِبْرَاهِيمَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلَامُ فَلَمْ أَنْظُرْ إِلَى إِرْبٍ مِنْهُ إِلَّا نَظَرْتُ إِلَيْهِ مِنِّي حَتَّى كَأَنَّهُ صَاحِبُكُمْ، قَالَ جِبْرِيلُ: سَلِّمْ عَلَى أَبِيكَ، فَسَلَّمْتُ عَلَيْهِ\n(I saw him as a tall and huge man, with a whitish complexion. One of his eyes stood out like a shining star. The hair on his head looked like the branches of a tree. And I saw 'Isa, white with curly hair and an intense gaze, of average build. I saw Musa, dark-skinned, with a lot of hair and a strong build. I looked at Ibrahim and did not see anything in him that I do not see in myself; it is as if he were your companion [meaning himself]. Jibril said: 'Greet your father with Salam,' so I greeted him with Salam.)\nThis was also recorded by An-Nasa'i from the Hadith of Abu Zayd Thabit bin Yazid from Hilal, who is Ibn Khabbab, and it is a Sahih chain of narrators.\nAl-Bayhaqi recorded that Abu Al-'Aliyah said: \"The cousin of your Prophet ﷺ, Ibn 'Abbas narrated to us from the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, he said: Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nرَأَيْتُ لَيْلَةَ أُسْرِيَ بِي مُوسَى بْنَ عِمْرَانَ رَجُلًا طُوَالًا جَعْدًا، كَأَنَّهُ مِنْ رِجَالِ شَنُوءَةَ، وَرَأَيْتُ عِيسَى ابْنَ مَرْيَمَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلَامُ مَرْبُوعَ الْخَلْقِ إِلَى الْحُمْرَةِ وَالْبَيَاضِ سَبْطَ الرَّأسِ\n(On the night when I was taken on the Night Journey, I saw Musa bin 'Imran, a tall, curly-haired man, as if he was from the tribe of Shanu'ah. And I saw 'Isa bin Maryam, of medium stature, white with a reddish complexion, with straight hair.)\nAnd he was shown Malik, the keeper of Hell, and the Dajjal, with the signs that Allah revealed to him.' He said,\nفَلَا تَكُن فِي مِرْيَةٍ مِّن لِّقَائِهِ\n(So be not you in doubt of meeting him.)[32:23] Qatadah used to interpret this to mean that the Prophet of Allah ﷺ met Musa.\nوَجَعَلْنَاهُ هُدًى لِّبَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ\n(And We made it [or him] a guide to the Children of Israel)[32:23] Qatadah said: \"(This means) Allah made Musa a guide for the Children of Israel. \" Muslim reported this in his Sahih, and Al-Bukhari and Muslim recorded a shorter version from Qatadah.\nImam Ahmad also recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said: \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nلَمَّا كَانَ لَيْلَةَ أُسْرِيَ بِي، فَأَصْبَحْتُ بِمَكَّةَ فَظِعْتُ وَعَرَفْتُ أَنَّ النَّاسَ مُكَذِّبِيَّ\n(On the night when I was taken on the Night Journey, I woke up in Makkah the next morning having anxiety that, I knew that the people would not believe me.)\nHe kept away from people, feeling anxious and sad, then the enemy of Allah Abu Jahl passed by him and came to sit with him, saying mockingly, 'Is there anything new?' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nنَعَم\n(Yes). He said, 'What is it?' He said,\nإِنِّي أُسْرِيَ بِي اللَّيْلَةَ\n(I was taken on a Journey last night.) He said, 'Where to?' He said,\nإِلَى بَيْتِ الْمَقْدِسِ\n(To Bayt Al-Maqdis.) He said, 'Then this morning you were among us?' He said,\nنَعَم\n(Yes). Abu Jahl did not want to say to his face that he was lying, lest he deny saying it when he called other people to hear him, so he said: 'Do you think that if I call your people, you will tell them about what happened?' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nنَعَم\n(Yes.) Abu Jahl said, 'O people of Bani Ka'b bin Lu'ay!' People got up from where they were sitting and came to join them. Abu Jahl said, 'Tell your people what you told me.' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nإِنِّي أُسْرِيَ بِي اللَّيْلَةَ\n(I was taken on a Journey last night.) They said, 'Where to?' He said,\nإِلَى بَيْتِ الْمَقْدِسِ\n(To Bayt Al-Maqdis.) They said, 'Then this morning you were among us?' He said,\nنَعَم\n(Yes). They began to clap their hands together and put their hands on their heads in astonishment at this \"lie\" - as they claimed it to be. They said, 'Can you describe the sanctuary to us?' Among them were some who had travelled to that land and seen the sanctuary, so the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nفَمَا زِلْتُ أَنْعَتُ حَتَّى الْتَبَسَ عَلَيَّ بَعْضُ النَّعْتِ - قَالَ - فَجِيءَ بِالْمَسْجِدِ وَأَنَا أَنْظُرُ إِلَيْهِ حَتَّى وُضِعَ دُونَ دَارِ عُقَيلٍ - أَوْ عِقَالٍ - فَنَعَتُّهُ وَأَنَا أَنْظُرُ إِلَيْهِ - قَالَ - وَكَانَ مَعَ هَذَا نَعْتٌ لَمْ أَحْفَظْهُ - قَالَ - فَقَالَ الْقَوْمُ: أَمَّا النَّعْتُ فَوَاللهِ لَقَدْ أَصَابَ فِيهِ\n(I started to describe it, until I reached a point where I was not sure about some of the details, but then the sanctuary was brought close and placed near the house of 'Uqayl - or 'Iqal - so I could look at it and describe the details.)\nI could not remember those description. The people said, 'As for the description, by Allah he has got it right.\" This was recorded by An-Nasa'i and Al-Bayhaqi.\n\n## The Report of 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud\n\nAl-Hafiz Abu Bakr Al-Bayhaqi reported that 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud said: \"When the Messenger of Allah ﷺ was taken on the Night Journey, he went as far as Sidrat Al-Muntaha, which is in the sixth heaven. Everything that ascends stops there, until it is taken from that point, and everything that comes down stops there, until it is taken from there.\nإِذْ يَغْشَى السِّدْرَةَ مَا يَغْشَى\n(When that covered As-Sidrat Al-Muntaha which did cover it!)[53:16]\nIbn Mas'ud said: \"It is covered with gold butterflies. The Messenger of Allah ﷺ was given the five prayers and the final Ayat of Surat Al-Baqarah, and forgiveness was granted for major sins to those who do not associate anything in worship with Allah.\" This was recorded by Muslim in his Sahih.\n\n## The Report of Abu Hurayrah\n\nAl-Bukhari and Muslim reported in their Sahihs that Abu Hurayrah said: the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nحِينَ أُسْرِيَ بِي، لَقِيتُ مُوسَى عَلَيهِ السَّلَامُ - فَنَعَتَهُ، فَإِذَا رَجُلٌ حَسِبْتُهُ قَالَ - مُضْطَرِبٌ رَجِلُ الرَّأْسِ كَأَنَّهُ مِنْ رِجَالِ شَنُوءَةَ، قَالَ: وَلَقِيتُ عِيسَى - فَنَعَتَهُ النَّبِيُّ صلّى الله عليه وسلّم قَالَ - رَبْعَةٌ أَحْمَرُ كَأَنَّمَا خَرَجَ مِنْ دِيمَاسٍ - يَعْنِي حَمَّامًا، قَالَ - وَلَقِيتُ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَأَنَا أَشْبَهُ وَلَدِهِ بِهِ، قَالَ: وَأُتِيتُ بِإِنَاءَيْنِ فِي أَحَدِهِمَا لَبَنٌ وَفِي الْآخَرِ خَمْرٌ، قِيلَ لِي: خُذْ أَيَّهُمَا شِئْتَ، فَأَخَذْتُ اللَّبَنَ فَشَرِبْتُ، فَقِيلَ لِي: هُدِيتَ الْفِطْرَةَ - أَوْ أَصَبْتَ الْفِطْرَةَ - أَمَا إِنَّكَ لَوْ أَخَذْتَ الْخَمْرَ غَوَتْ أُمَّتُكَ\n(When I was taken on the Night Journey, I met Musa.) He described him as a man - I think he said - a curly-haired man, as if he were from the tribe of Shanu'ah. (And I met 'Isa.) And the Prophet ﷺ described him as being of average height, with a reddish complexion, as if he had just come out of the bath. (And I met Ibrahim, and I am the one who resembles him most among his children. I was brought two vessels, one containing milk and the other containing wine. It was said to me, 'Take whichever one you want.' So I took the milk and drank it, and it was said to me, 'You have been guided to the Fitrah - or - You have chosen the Fitrah. If you had chosen the wine, your Ummah would have gone astray.')\"\nThey also recorded it with another chain of narrators. Muslim recorded that Abu Hurayrah said: \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nلَقَدْ رَأَيْتُنِي فِي الْحِجْرِ وَقُرَيْشٌ تَسْأَلُنِي عَنْ مَسْرَايَ، فَسَأَلُونِي عَنْ أَشْيَاءَ مِنْ بَيْتِ الْمَقْدِسِ لَمْ أُثْبِتْهَا، فَكُرِبْتُ (كُرْبَةً) مَا كُرِبْتُ مِثْلَهُ قَطُّ، فَرَفَعَهُ اللهُ إِليَّ أَنْظُرُ إِلَيْهِ مَا سَأَلُونِي عَنْ شَيْءٍ إِلَّا أَنْبَأْتُهُمْ بِهِ، وَقَدْ رَأَيْتُنِي فِي جَمَاعَةٍ مِنَ الْأَنْبِيَاءِ، وَإِذَا مُوسَى قَائِمٌ يُصَلِّي، وَإِذَا هُوَ رَجُلٌ جَعْدٌ كَأَنَّهُ مِنْ رِجَالِ شَنُوءَةَ، وَإِذَا عِيسَى ابْنُ مَرْيَمَ قَائِمٌ يُصَلِّي أَقْرَبُ النَّاسِ شَبَهًا بِهِ عَرْوَةُ بْنُ مَسْعُودٍ الثَّقَفِيُّ، وَإِذَا إِبْرَاهِيمُ قَائِمٌ يُصَلِّي أَقْرَبُ النَّاسِ شَبَهًا بِهِ صَاحِبُكُمْ - يَعْنِي نَفْسَهُ - فَحَانَتِ الصَّلَاةُ فَأَمَمْتُهُمْ، فَلَمَّا فَرَغْتُ قَالَ قَائِلٌ: يَا مُحَمَّدُ هَذَا مَالِكُ خَازِنُ جَهَنَّمَ، (فَسَلِّمْ عَلَيْهِ) فَالْتَفَتُّ إِلَيْهِ فَبَدَأَنِي بِالسَّلَامِ\n(I remember being in Al-Hijr, and the Quraysh were asking me about my Night Journey. They asked me things about Bayt Al-Maqdis that I was not sure of, and I felt more anxious and stressed then than I have ever felt. Then Allah raised up Bayt Al-Maqdis for me to see, and there was nothing they asked me about but I told them about it. And I remember being in a gathering of the Prophets. Musa was standing there praying, and he was a man with curly hair, as if he were one of the men of Shanu'ah. I saw 'Isa bin Maryam standing there praying, and the one who most resembles him is 'Urwah bin Mas'ud Ath-Thaqafi. And I saw Ibrahim standing there praying, and the one who most resembles him is your companion (meaning himself). Then the time for prayer came, and I led them in prayer. When I finished, a voice said, 'O Muhammad, this is Malik, the keeper of Hell,' so I turned to him, and he greeted me first.)\"\n\n## The Time that Isra' took place, and the Fact that it included both Body and Soul, when the Prophet (ﷺ) was awake, not in a Dream\n\nMusa bin 'Uqbah said, narrating from Az-Zuhri: “The Isra' happened one year before the Hijrah.” This was also the opinion of 'Urwah. As-Suddi said: “It happened sixteen months before the Hijrah.”\nThe truth is that the Prophet ﷺ was taken on the Night Journey when he was awake, not in a dream, and he went from Makkah to Bayt Al-Maqdis riding on Al-Buraq. When he reached the door of the sanctuary, he tied up his animal by the door and entered, where he prayed two Rak'ahs to 'greet the Masjid'. Then the Mi'raj was brought to him, which is a ladder with steps which one climbs up. So he went up on it to the first heaven, then he went up to the rest of the seven heavens. In each heaven he was welcomed by the most pious of its inhabitants, and he greeted the Prophets who were in the various heavens according to their positions and status. He passed by Musa, the one who spoke with Allah, in the sixth heaven, and Ibrahim, the close friend (Khalil) of Allah in the seventh heaven. Then he surpassed them and all the Prophets in status and reached a level where he could hear the creaking of the pens, i.e., the pens of destiny which write down what is decreed to happen. He saw Sidrat Al-Muntaha, covered by the command of Allah, and its greatness, its butterflies of gold and various colours, surrounded by the angels. There he saw Jibril in his real form, with six hundred wings. He saw green cushions blocking the horizon. He saw Al-Bayt Al-Ma'mur, and Ibrahim Al-Khalil, the builder of the earthly Ka'bah, leaning back against it, the heavenly Ka'bah; every day, seventy thousand angels enter and worship therein, then they do not return to it until the Day of Resurrection. He saw Paradise and Hell, and Allah enjoined upon him fifty prayers, then reduced it to five, as an act of mercy and kindness towards His servants. In this is a strong indication of the greatness and virtue of the prayers.\nThen he came back down to Bayt Al-Maqdis, and the Prophets came down with him and he led them in prayer there when the time for prayer came. It may have been the dawn prayer of that day. Some people claim that he led them in prayer in heaven, but the reports seem to say that it was in Bayt Al-Maqdis. In some reports it says that it happened when he first entered (i.e., before ascending into the heavens), but it is more likely that it was after he came back, because when he passed by them in the places in the heavens, he asked Jibril about them, one by one, and Jibril told him about them. This is more appropriate, because he was first required to come before the Divine Presence, so that what Allah willed could be enjoined upon him and his Ummah. When the matter for which he was required had been dealt with, he and his brother-Prophets gathered, and his virtue and high position in relation to them became apparent when he was asked to come forward to lead them, which was when Jibril indicated to him that he should do so.\nThen he came out of Bayt Al-Maqdis and rode on Al-Buraq back to Makkah in the darkness of the night. And Allah knows best. As for his being presented with the vessels containing milk and honey, or milk and wine, or milk and water, or all of these, some reports say that this happened in Bayt Al-Maqdis, and others say that it happened in the heavens. It is possible that it happened in both places, because it is like offering food or drink to a guest when he arrives, and Allah knows best.\nThe Prophet ﷺ was taken on the Night Journey with body and soul, he was awake, not asleep. The evidence for this is the Ayah:\nسُبْحَانَ الَّذِي أَسْرَىٰ بِعَبْدِهِ لَيْلًا مِّنَ الْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ إِلَى الْمَسْجِدِ الْأَقْصَى الَّذِي بَارَكْنَا حَوْلَهُ\n(Glorified (and Exalted) be He (Allah) Who took His servant for a Journey by Night from Al-Masjid Al-Haram to Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa, the neighborhood whereof We have blessed,)\nThe words \"Subhan Allah\" (Glorified and exalted be Allah) are spoken in the case of serious matters. If it had been a dream, it would have been a significant matter and would not have been so astounding; the disbelievers of the Quraysh would not have hastened to label him a liar and the group of people who had become Muslims would not have deserted the faith. The word 'Abd (servant) refers to both soul and body. Allah says:\nأَسْرَىٰ بِعَبْدِهِ لَيْلًا\n(took His servant for a Journey by Night) and:\nوَمَا جَعَلْنَا الرُّؤْيَا الَّتِي أَرَيْنَاكَ إِلَّا فِتْنَةً لِّلنَّاسِ\n(And We made not the vision which we showed you but a trial for mankind)[17:60] Ibn 'Abbas said: \"This is the vision that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ saw with his own eyes during the Journey by Night, and the cursed tree is the tree of Zaqqum.\" This was recorded by Al-Bukhari. Allah said:\nمَا زَاغَ الْبَصَرُ وَمَا طَغَىٰ\n(The sight (of Prophet Muhammad ﷺ) turned not aside (right or left), nor it transgressed beyond the limit (ordained for it))(53:17)\nSight (Al-Basr) is a physical faculty, not a spiritual one, and he was carried on Al-Buraq, a shining white animal. This too indicates a physical journey, because the soul does not need a means of transportation of this nature. And Allah knows best.\n\n## An Interesting Story\n\nIn his book Dala'il An-Nubuwwah, Al-Hafiz Abu Nu'aym Al-Isbahani recorded via Muhammad bin 'Umar Al-Waqidi who said: Malik bin Abi Ar-Rijjal told me from 'Amr bin 'Abdullah that Muhammad bin Ka'b Al-Qurazi said: \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ sent Dihyah bin Khalifah to Caesar.\" He mentioned how he came to him, and described an incident that showed how wise Caesar was. He sent for the Arab merchants who were in Syria and Abu Sufyan Sakhr bin Harb and his companions were brought to him. He asked them the well-known questions that were recorded by Al-Bukhari and Muslim, as we shall discuss below, and Abu Sufyan tried hard to give the impression that this was an insignificant issue. [The narrator] said that Abu Sufyan [later] said: \"By Allah, nothing stopped me from saying something to Heraclius to make him despise [Muhammad] but the fact that I did not want to tell a lie that would later be found out, and he would never believe me again after that. Then I told him about the night on which he was taken on the Night Journey. I said: 'O King, shall I not tell you of something from which you will know that he is lying?' He said, 'What is it?' I said: 'He claims that he went out of our land, the land of Al-Haram, in one night, and came to your sanctuary in Jerusalem, then came back to us the same night, before morning came.' The Patriarch of Jerusalem was there, standing next to Caesar. The Patriarch of Jerusalem said: 'I know that night.' Caesar looked at him and said, 'How do you know about this?' He said, 'I never used to sleep at night until I closed the doors of the sanctuary. On that night I closed all the doors except for one, which I could not manage to close. I asked my workers and others who were with me to help me deal with it, but we could not move it. It was like trying to move a mountain. So I called the carpenters, and they looked at it and said: The lintel and some part of the structure has fallen onto it. We cannot move it until morning, when we will be able to see what the problem is. So I went back and left those two doors open. The next morning I went back, and saw that the stone at the corner of the sanctuary had a hole in it, and there were traces of an animal having been tethered there. I said to my companions: This door has not been closed last night except for a Prophet, who prayed last night in our sanctuary.'\" And he mentioned the rest of the Hadith.\nIn his book At-Tanwir fi Mawlid As-Siraj Al-Munir, Al-Hafiz Abu Al-Khattab 'Umar bin Dihyah mentioned the Hadith of the Isra' narrated from Anas, and spoke well about it, then he said: \"The reports of the Hadith of the Isra' reach the level of Mutawatir. They were narrated from 'Umar bin Al-Khattab, 'Ali, Ibn Mas'ud, Abu Dharr, Malik bin Sa'sa'ah, Abu Hurayrah, Abu Sa'id, Ibn 'Abbas, Shaddad bin Aws, Ubayy bin Ka'b, 'Abdur-Rahman bin Qarat, Abu Habbah Al-Ansari, Abu Layla Al-Ansari, 'Abdullah bin 'Amr, Jabir, Hudhayfah, Buraydah, Abu Ayyub, Abu Umamah, Samurah bin Jundub, Abu Al-Hamra', Suhayb Ar-Rumi, Umm Hani', and 'A'ishah and 'Asma', the daughters of Abu Bakr As-Siddiq, may Allah be pleased with them all. Some of them narrated the incident at length, and others narrated it more briefly, as was reported in the Musnad collections. Even though some reports do not fulfill the conditions of Sahih, nevertheless the Muslims agreed unanimously on the fact that the Isra' happened, and it was rejected only by the heretics and apostates.\nيُرِيدُونَ لِيُطْفِئُوا نُورَ اللَّهِ بِأَفْوَاهِهِمْ وَاللَّهُ مُتِمُّ نُورِهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْكَافِرُونَ\n(They intend to put out the Light of Allah with their mouths. But Allah will bring His Light to perfection even though the disbelievers hate (it).)(61:8).","href":"/tafsir/17?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:17:2","title":"Ibn Kathir · 17:2–3","text":"And We gave Musa the Scripture and made it a guidance for the Children of Israel (saying): \"Take none other than Me as (your) Wakil. (2)\"O offspring of those whom We carried (in the ship) with Nuh! Verily, he was a grateful servant. (3)\n\n## Musa and how He was given the Tawrah\n\nWhen Allah mentions how He took His servant Muhammad ﷺ, on the Journey by Night, He follows it by mentioning Musa, His servant and Messenger who also spoke with Him. Allah often mentions Muhammad and Musa together, may the peace and blessings of Allah be upon them both, and he mentions the Tawrah and the Qur'an together. So after mentioning the Isra', He says:\nوَآتَيْنَا مُوسَى الْكِتَابَ\n(And We gave Musa the Scripture), meaning the Tawrah.\nوَجَعَلْنَاهُ\n(and made it), meaning the Scripture,\nهُدًى\n(a guidance), meaning a guide,\nلِّبَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ أَلَّا تَتَّخِذُوا\n(for the Children of Israel (saying): \"Take none...\") means, lest they should take,\nمِن دُونِي وَكِيلًا\n(\"... other than Me as (your) Wakil\") means, 'you have no protector, supporter or god besides Me,' because Allah revealed to every Prophet that he should worship Him alone with no partner or associate. Then Allah says:\nذُرِّيَّةَ مَنْ حَمَلْنَا مَعَ نُوحٍ\n(O offspring of those whom We carried (in the ship) with Nuh) by addressing the descendants of those who were carried in the ship with Nuh there is a reminder of the blessings, as if Allah is saying: 'O descendants of those whom We saved and carried in the ship with Nuh, follow in the footsteps of your father,\nإِنَّهُ كَانَ عَبْدًا شَكُورًا\n(Verily, he was a grateful servant). 'Remember the blessing I have granted you by sending Muhammad.' Imam Ahmad reported that Anas bin Malik said: \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nإِنَّ اللهَ لَيَرْضَى عَنِ الْعَبْدِ أَنْ يَأْكُلَ الْأَكْلَةَ أَوْ يَشْرَبَ الشَّرْبَةَ فَيَحْمَدَ اللهَ عَلَيْهَا\n(Allah will be pleased with His servant if, when he eats something or drinks something, he praises Allah for it.)\" This was also recorded by Muslim, At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa'i.\nMalik said about Zayd bin Aslam: \"He used to praise Allah in all circumstances.\" In this context, Al-Bukhari mentioned the Hadith of Abu Zar'ah narrating from Abu Hurayrah, who said that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nأَنَا سَيِّدُ وَلَدِ آدَمَ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ\n(I will be the leader of the sons of Adam on the Day of Resurrection...) He quoted the Hadith at length, and in the Hadith, the Prophet ﷺ said:\nفَيَأْتُونَ نُوحًا فَيَقُولُونَ: يَا نُوحُ إِنَّكَ أَنْتَ أَوَّلُ الرُّسُلِ إِلَى أَهْلِ الْأَرْضِ، وَقَدْ سَمَّاكَ اللهُ عَبْدًا شَكُورًا، فَاشْفَعْ لَنَا إِلَى رَبِّكَ\n(They will come to Nuh and will say, 'O Nuh, you were the first of the Messengers sent to the people of earth, and Allah called you grateful servant, so intercede for us with your Lord.') And he quoted the Hadith in full.","href":"/tafsir/17?verse=2","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:17:4","title":"Ibn Kathir · 17:4–8","text":"And We decreed for the Children of Israel in the Scripture: \"Indeed you would do mischief in the land twice and you will become tyrants and extremely arrogant! (4)So, when the promise came for the first of the two, We sent against you servants of Ours given to terrible warfare. They entered the very innermost parts of your homes. And it was a promise (completely) fulfilled (5)Then We gave you a return of victory over them. And We helped you with wealth and children and made you more numerous in manpower (6)(And We said): \"If you do good, you do good for your own selves, and if you do evil (you do it) against yourselves.\" Then, when the second promise came to pass, (We permitted your enemies) to disgrace your faces and to enter the Masjid as they had entered it before, and to destroy with utter destruction all that fell in their hands (7)It may be that your Lord may show mercy unto you, but if you return (to sins), We shall return (to Our punishment). And We have made Hell a prison for the disbelievers (8)\n\n## It was mentioned in the Tawrah that the Jews would spread Mischief twice\n\nAllah tells us that He made a declaration to the Children of Israel in the Scripture, meaning that He had already told them in the Book which He revealed to them, that they would cause mischief on the earth twice, and would become tyrants and extremely arrogant, meaning they would become shameless oppressors of people, Allah says:\nوَقَضَيْنَا إِلَيْهِ ذَٰلِكَ الْأَمْرَ أَنَّ دَابِرَ هَٰؤُلَاءِ مَقْطُوعٌ مُّصْبِحِينَ\n(And We made known this decree to him, that the root of those (sinners) was to be cut off in the early morning.)(15:66), meaning, We already told him about that and informed him of it.\n\n## The First Episode of Mischief caused by the Jews, and their Punishment for it\n\nفَإِذَا جَاءَ وَعْدُ أُولَاهُمَا\n(So, when the promise came for the first of the two) meaning the first of the two episodes of mischief.\nبَعَثْنَا عَلَيْكُمْ عِبَادًا لَّنَا أُولِي بَأْسٍ شَدِيدٍ\n(We sent against you servants of Ours given to terrible warfare.) means, 'We unleashed soldiers against you from among Our creatures who were given to terrible warfare,' i.e., they had great strength and weapons and power. They entered the very innermost parts of your homes, meaning they took possession of your land and invaded the very innermost parts of your homes, going between and through your houses, coming and going freely with no fear of anyone. This was the promise (completely) fulfilled.\nThe earlier and later commentators differed over the identity of these invaders. Many Isra'iliyyat (reports from Jewish sources) were narrated about this, but I did not want to make this book too long by mentioning them, because some of them are fabricated, concocted by their heretics, and others may be true, but we have no need of them, praise be to Allah. What Allah has told us in His Book (the Qur'an) is sufficient and we have no need of what is in the other books that came before. Neither Allah nor His Messenger required us to refer to them. Allah told His Messenger ﷺ that when (the Jews) committed transgression and aggression, Allah gave their enemies power over them to destroy their country and enter the innermost parts of their homes. Their humiliation and subjugation was a befitting punishment, and your Lord is never unfair or unjust to His servants. They had rebelled and killed many of the Prophets and scholars. Ibn Jarir recorded that Yahya bin Sa'id said: \"I heard Sa'id bin Al-Musayyib saying: 'Nebuchadnezzar conquered Ash-Sham (Greater Syria, including Palestine), destroying Jerusalem and killing them, then he came to Damascus and found blood boiling in a censer. He asked them: What is this blood? They said: We found our forefathers doing this. Because of that blood, he killed seventy thousand of the believers and others, then the blood stopped boiling.\nThis report is Sahih from Sa'id bin Al-Musayyib, and this event is well-known, as he (Nebuchadnezzar) killed their nobles and scholars, and did not leave alive anyone who knew the Tawrah by heart. He took many prisoners from the sons of the Prophets and others, and did many other things that would take too long to mention here. If we had found anything that was correct or close enough, we could have written it and reported it here. And Allah knows best.\nThen Allah says:\nإِنْ أَحْسَنتُمْ أَحْسَنتُمْ لِأَنفُسِكُمْ ۖ وَإِنْ أَسَأْتُمْ فَلَهَا\n((And We said): \"If you do good, you do good for your own selves, and if you do evil (you do it) against yourselves.\") As Allah says elsewhere:\nمَنْ عَمِلَ صَالِحًا فَلِنَفْسِهِ ۖ وَمَنْ أَسَاءَ فَعَلَيْهَا\n(Whosoever does a righteous good deed, it is for (the benefit of) himself; and whosoever does evil, it is against himself.)(45:15)\n\n## The Second Episode of Mischief\n\nThen Allah says:\nفَإِذَا جَاءَ وَعْدُ الْآخِرَةِ\n(Then, when the second promise came to pass,) meaning, the second episode of mischief, when your enemies came again,\nلِيَسُوءُوا وُجُوهَكُمْ\n((We permitted your enemies) to disgrace your faces) meaning, to humiliate you and subdue you,\nوَلِيَدْخُلُوا الْمَسْجِدَ\n(and to enter the Masjid) meaning, Bayt Al-Maqdis (Jerusalem).\nكَمَا دَخَلُوهُ أَوَّلَ مَرَّةٍ\n(as they had entered it before,) when they entered the very innermost parts of your homes.\nوَلِيُتَبِّرُوا\n(and to destroy) wrecking and inflicting ruin upon it.\nمَا عَلَوْا\n(all that fell in their hands.) everything they could get their hands on.\nتَتْبِيرًا - عَسَىٰ رَبُّكُمْ أَن يَرْحَمَكُمْ\n(with utter destruction. It may be that your Lord may show mercy unto you) meaning that He may rid you of them.\nوَإِنْ عُدتُّمْ عُدْنَا\n(but if you return (to sins), We shall return (to Our punishment).) meaning, if you return to causing mischief,\nعُدْنَا\n(We shall return) means, We 'will once again punish you in this world, along with the punishment and torment We save for you in the Hereafter.'\nوَجَعَلْنَا جَهَنَّمَ لِلْكَافِرِينَ حَصِيرًا\n(And We have made Hell a prison [Hasir] for the disbelievers.) meaning, a place of permanent detention, a prison which cannot be avoided or escaped. Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Hasir here means a jail.\" Mujahid said, \"They will be detained in it.\" Others said likewise. Al-Hasan said, \"Hasir means a bed of Fire.\" Qatadah said: \"The Children of Israel returned to aggression, so Allah sent this group against them, Muhammad ﷺ and his companions, who made them pay the Jizyah, with willing submission, and feeling themselves subdued.\"","href":"/tafsir/17?verse=4","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:17:9","title":"Ibn Kathir · 17:9–10","text":"Verily, this Qur'an guides to that which is most just and right and gives good news to those who believe, those who do righteous deeds, that they will have a great reward (Paradise)(9)And that those who do not believe in the Hereafter, for them We have prepared a painful torment (Hell)(10)\n\n## Praising the Qur'an\n\nAllah praises His noble Book, the Qur'an, which He revealed to His Messenger Muhammad ﷺ. It directs people to the best and clearest of ways.\nوَيُبَشِّرُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ\n(gives good news to those who believe,) in it\nالَّذِينَ يَعْمَلُونَ الصَّالِحَاتِ\n(those who do righteous deeds,) in accordance with it, telling them\nأَنَّ لَهُمْ أَجْرًا كَبِيرًا\n(that they will have a great reward,) i.e., on the Day of Resurrection. And He tells\nوَأَنَّ الَّذِينَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالْآخِرَةِ\n(those who do not believe in the Hereafter,) that\nلَهُمْ عَذَابًا أَلِيمًا\n(for them is a painful torment,) i.e. on the Day of Resurrection. As Allah says:\nفَبَشِّرْهُم بِعَذَابٍ أَلِيمٍ\n(...then announce to them a painful torment.)[84:24]","href":"/tafsir/17?verse=9","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:17:11","title":"Ibn Kathir · 17:11","text":"And man invokes (Allah) for evil as he invokes (Allah) for good and man is ever hasty (11)\n\n## Man's Haste and Prayers against Himself\n\nAllah tells us about man's haste and how he sometimes prays against himself or his children or his wealth, praying for something bad to happen for them, or for them to die or be destroyed, invoking curses, etc. If Allah were to answer his prayer, he would be destroyed because of it, as Allah says:\nوَلَوْ يُعَجِّلُ اللَّهُ لِلنَّاسِ الشَّرَّ\n(And were Allah to hasten for mankind the evil...)[10:11] This is how it was interpreted by Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid and Qatadah. We have already discussed the Hadith:\nلَا تَدْعُوا عَلَى أَنْفُسِكُمْ، وَلَا عَلَى أَمْوَالِكُمْ أَنْ تُوَافِقُوا مِنَ اللهِ سَاعَةَ إِجَابَةٍ يَسْتَجِيبُ فِيهَا\n(Do not pray against yourselves or your wealth, for that might coincide with a time when Allah answers prayers.) What makes the son of Adam do that is his anxiety and haste. Allah says:\nوَكَانَ الْإِنسَانُ عَجُولًا\n(And man is ever hasty.) Salman Al-Farisi and Ibn 'Abbas mentioned the story of Adam, when he wanted to get up before his soul reached his feet. When his soul was breathed into him, it entered his body from his head downwards. When it reached his brain he sneezed, and said, \"Al-Hamdu Lillah\" (praise be to Allah), and Allah said, \"May your Lord have mercy on you, O Adam.\" When it reached his eyes, he opened them, and when it reached his body and limbs he started to stare at them in wonder. He wanted to get up before it reached his feet, but he could not. He said, \"O Lord, make it happen before night comes.\"","href":"/tafsir/17?verse=11","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:17:12","title":"Ibn Kathir · 17:12","text":"And We have appointed the night and the day as two Ayat (signs). Then, We have obliterated the sign of the night (with darkness) while We have made the sign of the day illuminating, that you may seek bounty from your Lord, and that you may know the number of the years and to count (periods of time). And We have explained everything (in detail) with full explanation (12)\n\n## The Night and Day are Signs of the Great Power of Allah\n\nAllah reminds us of the great signs that He created, including the alternation of the night and day, so that people may rest at night, and go out and earn a living, do their work, and travel during the day, and so that they may know the number of days, weeks, months and years, so they will know the appointed times for paying debts, doing acts of worship, dealing with transactions, paying rents and so on. Allah says:\nلِّتَبْتَغُوا فَضْلًا مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ\n(that you may seek bounty from your Lord,) meaning, in your living and travels etc.\nوَلِتَعْلَمُوا عَدَدَ السِّنِينَ وَالْحِسَابَ\n(and that you may know the number of the years and to count.) If time stood still and never changed, we would not know any of these things, as Allah says:\nقُلْ أَرَأَيْتُمْ إِن جَعَلَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْكُمُ اللَّيْلَ سَرْمَدًا إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ مَنْ إِلَٰهٌ غَيْرُ اللَّهِ يَأْتِيكُم بِضِيَاءٍ ۖ أَفَلَا تَسْمَعُونَ - قُلْ أَرَأَيْتُمْ إِن جَعَلَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْكُمُ النَّهَارَ سَرْمَدًا إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ مَنْ إِلَٰهٌ غَيْرُ اللَّهِ يَأْتِيكُم بِلَيْلٍ تَسْكُنُونَ فِيهِ ۖ أَفَلَا تُبْصِرُونَ - وَمِن رَّحْمَتِهِ جَعَلَ لَكُمُ اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ لِتَسْكُنُوا فِيهِ وَلِتَبْتَغُوا مِن فَضْلِهِ وَلَعَلَّكُمْ تَشْكُرُونَ\n(Say: \"Tell me! If Allah made the night continuous for you till the Day of Resurrection, which god besides Allah could bring you light? Will you not then hear?\" Say: \"Tell me! If Allah made the day continuous for you till the Day of Resurrection, which god besides Allah could bring you night wherein you rest? Will you not then see?\" It is out of His mercy that He has made for you the night and the day that you may rest therein and that you may seek of His bounty - and in order that you may be grateful.)(28:71-73)\nتَبَارَكَ الَّذِي جَعَلَ فِي السَّمَاءِ بُرُوجًا وَجَعَلَ فِيهَا سِرَاجًا وَقَمَرًا مُّنِيرًا - وَهُوَ الَّذِي جَعَلَ اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ خِلْفَةً لِّمَنْ أَرَادَ أَن يَذَّكَّرَ أَوْ أَرَادَ شُكُورًا\n(Blessed be He Who has placed the big stars in the heaven, and has placed therein a great lamp (sun), and a moon giving light. And He it is Who has put the night and the day in succession, for such who desires to remember or desires to show his gratitude.)(25:61-62)\nوَلَهُ اخْتِلَافُ اللَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ\n(and His is the alternation of night and day.)[23:80]\nيُكَوِّرُ اللَّيْلَ عَلَى النَّهَارِ وَيُكَوِّرُ النَّهَارَ عَلَى اللَّيْلِ ۖ وَسَخَّرَ الشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ ۖ كُلٌّ يَجْرِي لِأَجَلٍ مُّسَمًّى ۗ أَلَا هُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الْغَفَّارُ\n(He makes the night to go in the day and makes the day to go in the night. And He has subjected the sun and the moon. Each running (on a fixed course) for an appointed term. Verily, He is the All-Mighty, the Oft-Forgiving.)[39:5]\nفَالِقُ الْإِصْبَاحِ وَجَعَلَ اللَّيْلَ سَكَنًا وَالشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ حُسْبَانًا ۚ ذَٰلِكَ تَقْدِيرُ الْعَزِيزِ الْعَلِيمِ\n((He is the) Cleaver of the daybreak. He has appointed the night for resting, and the sun and the moon for reckoning. Such is the measuring of the All-Mighty, the All-Knowing.)(6:96),\nوَآيَةٌ لَّهُمُ اللَّيْلُ نَسْلَخُ مِنْهُ النَّهَارَ فَإِذَا هُم مُّظْلِمُونَ - وَالشَّمْسُ تَجْرِي لِمُسْتَقَرٍّ لَّهَا ۚ ذَٰلِكَ تَقْدِيرُ الْعَزِيزِ الْعَلِيمِ\n(And a sign for them is the night. We withdraw therefrom the day, and behold, they are in darkness. And the sun runs on its fixed course for a term (appointed). That is the decree of the All-Mighty, the All-Knowing.)(36:37-38)\nAllah has made the night a sign having distinguishing features by which it is known. These features include the darkness and the appearance of the moon. The day also has distinguishing features by which it is known; the light and the appearance of the shining sun. He made a distinction between the light of the moon and the light of the sun, so that they may be distinguished from one another, as Allah says:\nهُوَ الَّذِي جَعَلَ الشَّمْسَ ضِيَاءً وَالْقَمَرَ نُورًا وَقَدَّرَهُ مَنَازِلَ لِتَعْلَمُوا عَدَدَ السِّنِينَ وَالْحِسَابَ ۚ مَا خَلَقَ اللَّهُ ذَٰلِكَ إِلَّا بِالْحَقِّ\n(It is He Who made the sun a shining thing and the moon a light and measured out for it stages that you might know the number of years and to count (periods of time). Allah did not create this but in truth.)[10:5] until,\nلَآيَاتٍ لِّقَوْمٍ يَتَّقُونَ\n(Ayat for those people who keep their duty to Allah, and fear Him much.)[10:6]\nيَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْأَهِلَّةِ ۖ قُلْ هِيَ مَوَاقِيتُ لِلنَّاسِ وَالْحَجِّ\n(They ask you about the crescent moons. Say: \"These are signs to mark fixed periods of time for mankind and for the pilgrimage.\")[2:189]\nفَمَحَوْنَا آيَةَ اللَّيْلِ وَجَعَلْنَا آيَةَ النَّهَارِ مُبْصِرَةً\n(Then, We have obliterated the sign of the night (with darkness) while We have made the sign of the day illuminating,)\nIbn Jurayj reported that 'Abdullah bin Kathir commented on this Ayah: \"[It means] the darkness of the night and the twilight of the day.\" Ibn Jurayj reported that Mujahid said: \"The sun is the sign of the day and the moon is the sign of the night.\nفَمَحَوْنَا آيَةَ اللَّيْلِ\n(We have obliterated the sign of the night) this refers to the moon's blackness, which is how Allah has created it.\"\nوَجَعَلْنَا اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ آيَتَيْنِ\n(And We have appointed the night and the day as two Ayat.) Ibn Abi Najih reported that Ibn 'Abbas said: \"By night and day, this is how Allah created them, may He be glorified.\"","href":"/tafsir/17?verse=12","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:17:13","title":"Ibn Kathir · 17:13–14","text":"And We have fastened every man's Ta'irah (deeds) to his neck, and on the Day of Resurrection, We shall bring out for him a Book which he will find wide open (13)(It will be said to him): \"Read your Book. You yourself are sufficient as a reckoner against you this Day. (14)\n\n## Every Person will have the Book of his Deeds with Him\n\nAfter mentioning time, and the deeds of the son of Adam that take place therein, Allah says:\nوَكُلَّ إِنسَانٍ أَلْزَمْنَاهُ طَائِرَهُ فِي عُنُقِهِ\n(And We have fastened every man's Ta'irah (deeds) to his neck,) The word Ta'irah (lit. something that flies) refers to man's deeds which fly from him, as Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid and others said. It includes both good deeds and bad deeds, he will be forced to acknowledge them and will be rewarded or punished accordingly.\nفَمَن يَعْمَلْ مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ خَيْرًا يَرَهُ - وَمَن يَعْمَلْ مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ شَرًّا يَرَهُ\n(So whosoever does good equal to the weight of a speck of dust shall see it. And whosoever does evil equal to the weight of a speck of dust shall see it.)(99:7-8). Allah says:\nعَنِ الْيَمِينِ وَعَنِ الشِّمَالِ قَعِيدٌ - مَّا يَلْفِظُ مِن قَوْلٍ إِلَّا لَدَيْهِ رَقِيبٌ عَتِيدٌ\n((Remember) that the two receivers (recording angels) receive (each human being), one sitting on the right and one on the left (to note his or her actions). Not a word does he (or she) utter but there is a watcher by him ready (to record it).)(50:17-18)\nوَإِنَّ عَلَيْكُمْ لَحَافِظِينَ - كِرَامًا كَاتِبِينَ - يَعْلَمُونَ مَا تَفْعَلُونَ\n(But verily, over you (are appointed angels in charge of mankind) to watch you, Kiraman (Honorable) Katibin - writing down (your deeds), they know all that you do.)(82:10-12)\nإِنَّمَا تُجْزَوْنَ مَا كُنتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ\n(You are only being requited for what you used to do.)[52:16]\nمَن يَعْمَلْ سُوءًا يُجْزَ بِهِ\n(whosoever works evil, will have the recompense thereof.)[4:123] The meaning is that the deeds of the sons of Adam are preserved, whether they are great or small, and they are recorded night and day, morning and evening.\nوَنُخْرِجُ لَهُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ كِتَابًا يَلْقَاهُ مَنشُورًا\n(and on the Day of Resurrection, We shall bring out for him a Book which he will find wide open.) meaning, 'We will collect all of his deeds for him in a Book which will be given to him on the Day of Resurrection, either in his right hand, if he is one of the blessed, or in his left hand if he is one of the wretched.'\nمَنشُورًا\n(wide open) means, it will be open for him and others to read all of his deeds, from the beginning of his life until the end.\nيُنَبَّأُ الْإِنسَانُ يَوْمَئِذٍ بِمَا قَدَّمَ وَأَخَّرَ - بَلِ الْإِنسَانُ عَلَىٰ نَفْسِهِ بَصِيرَةٌ - وَلَوْ أَلْقَىٰ مَعَاذِيرَهُ\n(On that Day man will be informed of what (deeds) he sent forward, and what (deeds) he left behind. Nay! Man will be a witness against himself, though he may put forth his excuses.)(75:13-15) Allah says:\nاقْرَأْ كِتَابَكَ كَفَىٰ بِنَفْسِكَ الْيَوْمَ عَلَيْكَ حَسِيبًا\n((It will be said to him): \"Read your Book. You yourself are sufficient as a reckoner against you this Day.\") meaning, you have not been treated unjustly and nothing has been recorded against you except what you have done, because you remember everything that you have done, and no one will forget anything that he did. Everyone will be able to read his Book, whether he is literate or illiterate.\nأَلْزَمْنَاهُ طَائِرَهُ فِي عُنُقِهِ\n(And We have fastened every man's Ta'irah (deeds) to his neck,) The neck is mentioned because it is a part of the body that has no counterpart, and when one is restrained by it, he has no escape. Ma'mar narrated from Qatadah, \"His deeds,\nوَنُخْرِجُ لَهُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ\n(and on the Day of Resurrection, We shall bring out for him) We shall bring forth those deeds.\"\nكِتَابًا يَلْقَاهُ مَنشُورًا\n(a Book which he will find wide open.) Ma'mar said: Al-Hasan recited,\nعَنِ الْيَمِينِ وَعَنِ الشِّمَالِ قَعِيدٌ\n(one sitting on the right and one on the left.)[50:17][And he said;] \"O son of Adam, your Book has been opened for you, and two noble angels have been entrusted to accompany you, one on your right and one on your left. The one who is on your right records your good deeds, and the one who is on your left records your bad deeds. 'So do whatever you want, a lot or a little, until you die, then I will fold up your Book and tie it to your neck with you in your grave. Then when you come out on the Day of Resurrection, you will find the Book wide open, so read your Book.' By Allah, the One Who makes you accountable for your own deeds is being perfectly just.\" These are some of the best words Al-Hasan ever spoke, may Allah have mercy on him.","href":"/tafsir/17?verse=13","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:17:15","title":"Ibn Kathir · 17:15","text":"Whoever goes right, then he goes right only for the benefit of himself. And whoever goes astray, then he goes astray at his own loss. No one laden with burdens can bear another's burden. And We never punish until We have sent a Messenger (to give warning)(15)\n\n## No One will have to bear the Sins of Another\n\nAllah tells us that whoever is guided and follows the truth, walking in the footsteps of the Prophet ﷺ, he will gain the good consequences of that for himself.\nوَمَن ضَلَّ\n(And whoever goes astray,) meaning from the truth, deviating from the way of guidance, he is wronging himself and will have to bear the consequences. Then Allah says:\nوَلَا تَزِرُ وَازِرَةٌ وِزْرَ أُخْرَىٰ\n(No one laden with burdens can bear another's burden.) no one will have to bear the sins of another, and he does not wrong anyone besides himself, as Allah says:\nوَإِن تَدْعُ مُثْقَلَةٌ إِلَىٰ حِمْلِهَا لَا يُحْمَلْ مِنْهُ شَيْءٌ\n(and if one heavily laden calls another to (bear) his load, nothing of it will be lifted)[35:15] There is no contradiction between this and other Ayat:\nوَلَيَحْمِلُنَّ أَثْقَالَهُمْ وَأَثْقَالًا مَّعَ أَثْقَالِهِمْ\n(And verily, they shall bear their own loads, and other loads besides their own.)[29:13] and:\nوَمِنْ أَوْزَارِ الَّذِينَ يُضِلُّونَهُم بِغَيْرِ عِلْمٍ\n(and also of the burdens of those whom they misled without knowledge.)[16:25] For those who called others to do evil will bear the sin of their own deviation as well as the sin of those whom they led astray, without detracting the least amount from the burden of those people, and none of this burden shall be removed from them. This is the justice and mercy of Allah towards His servants. As Allah says:\nوَمَا كُنَّا مُعَذِّبِينَ حَتَّىٰ نَبْعَثَ رَسُولًا\n(And We never punish until We have sent a Messenger (to give warning).)\n\n## No Punishment until a Messenger has been sent\n\nAllah tells us that out of His justice, He does not punish anyone until He has established proof against him by sending a Messenger to him, as He says:\nكُلَّمَا أُلْقِيَ فِيهَا فَوْجٌ سَأَلَهُمْ خَزَنَتُهَا أَلَمْ يَأْتِكُمْ نَذِيرٌ - قَالُوا بَلَىٰ قَدْ جَاءَنَا نَذِيرٌ فَكَذَّبْنَا وَقُلْنَا مَا نَزَّلَ اللَّهُ مِن شَيْءٍ إِنْ أَنتُمْ إِلَّا فِي ضَلَالٍ كَبِيرٍ\n(Every time a group is cast therein, its keeper will ask: \"Did no warner come to you?\" They will say: \"Yes, indeed a warner did come to us, but we belied him and said: 'Allah never sent down anything (of revelation); you are only in great error.'\")(67:8-9) And,\nوَسِيقَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا إِلَىٰ جَهَنَّمَ زُمَرًا ۖ حَتَّىٰ إِذَا جَاءُوهَا فُتِحَتْ أَبْوَابُهَا وَقَالَ لَهُمْ خَزَنَتُهَا أَلَمْ يَأْتِكُمْ رُسُلٌ مِّنكُمْ يَتْلُونَ عَلَيْكُمْ آيَاتِ رَبِّكُمْ وَيُنذِرُونَكُمْ لِقَاءَ يَوْمِكُمْ هَٰذَا ۚ قَالُوا بَلَىٰ وَلَٰكِنْ حَقَّتْ كَلِمَةُ الْعَذَابِ عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ\n(And those who disbelieved will be driven to Hell in groups, till, when they reach it, the gates thereof will be opened. And its keepers will say, \"Did not the Messengers come to you from yourselves - reciting to you the verses of your Lord, and warning you of the meeting of this Day of yours?\" They will say: \"Yes,\" but the Word of torment has been justified against the disbelievers!)(39:71) And,\nوَهُمْ يَصْطَرِخُونَ فِيهَا رَبَّنَا أَخْرِجْنَا نَعْمَلْ صَالِحًا غَيْرَ الَّذِي كُنَّا نَعْمَلُ ۚ أَوَلَمْ نُعَمِّرْكُم مَّا يَتَذَكَّرُ فِيهِ مَن تَذَكَّرَ وَجَاءَكُمُ النَّذِيرُ ۖ فَذُوقُوا فَمَا لِلظَّالِمِينَ مِن نَّصِيرٍ\n(Therein they will cry: \"Our Lord! Bring us out, we shall do righteous good deeds, not (the evil deeds) that we used to do.\" (Allah will reply:) \"Did We not give you lives long enough, so that whosoever would receive admonition could receive it? And the warner came to you. So taste you (the evil of your deeds). For the wrongdoers there is no helper.\")(35:37)\nThere are other Ayat which indicate that Allah will not make anyone enter Hell except after sending a Messenger to them.\n\n## The Issue of Small Children who die\n\nHere there arises an issue over which the scholars in earlier and modern times have disagreed, may Allah have mercy on them. This is the issue of children who die when they are little, and their parents are disbelievers: what happens to them By the same token, what happens to the insane, the deaf, the senile and those who die during the circumstances of Fatrah, when no Message reached them? Several Hadiths have been narrated on this topic, which I will quote here by the help and support of Allah.\nThe First Hadith from Al-Aswad bin Sari\nImam Ahmad reported from Al-Aswad bin Sari' that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nأَرْبَعَةٌ يَحْتَجُّونَ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ: رَجُلٌ أَصَمُّ لَا يَسْمَعُ شَيْئًا، وَرَجُلٌ أَحْمَقُ، وَرَجُلٌ هَرِمٌ، وَرَجُلٌ مَاتَ فِي فَتْرَةٍ، فَأَمَّا الْأَصَمُّ فَيَقُولُ: رَبِّ قَدْ جَاءَ الْإِسْلَامُ وَمَا أَسْمَعُ شَيْئًا، وَأَمَّا الْأَحْمَقُ فَيَقُولُ: رَبِّ قَدْ جَاءَ الْإِسْلَامُ وَالصِّبْيَانُ يَحْذِفُونِي بِالْبَعْرِ، وَأَمَّا الْهَرِمُ فَيَقُولُ: رَبِّ لَقَدْ جَاءَ الْإِسْلَامُ وَمَا أَعْقِلُ شَيْئًا، وَأَمَّا الَّذِي مَاتَ فِي الْفَتْرَةِ فَيَقُولُ: رَبِّ مَا أَتَانِي لَكَ رَسُولٌ. فَيَأْخُذُ مَوَاثِيقَهُمْ لِيُطِيعَنَّهُ، فَيُرْسِلُ إِلَيْهِمْ أَنِ ادْخُلُوا النَّارَ، فَوَالَّذِي نَفْسُ مُحَمَّدٍ بِيَدِهِ، لَوْ دَخَلُوهَا لَكَانَتْ عَلَيْهِمْ بَرْدًا وَسَلَامًا\n(There are four who will present their case on the Day of Resurrection: a deaf man who never heard anything, an insane man, a very old and senile man, and a man who died during the Fatrah. As for the deaf man, he will say, \"O Lord, Islam came but I never heard anything.\" As for the insane man, he will say, \"O Lord, Islam came and the young boys were throwing camel dung at me.\" As for the senile man, he will say, \"O Lord, Islam came and I did not understand anything.\" As for the one who died during the Fatrah, he will say, \"O Lord, no Messenger from You came to me.\" Allah will accept their pledge of obedience to Him, then He will send word to them that they should enter the Fire. By the One in Whose Hand is the soul of Muhammad, if they enter it, it will be cool and safe for them.)\nThere is a similar report with a chain from Qatadah from Al-Hasan from Abu Rafi' from Abu Hurayrah, but at the end it says:\nفَمَنْ دَخَلَهَا كَانَتْ عَلَيْهِ بَرْدًا وَسَلَامًا، وَمَنْ لَمْ يَدْخُلْهَا يُسْحَبُ إِلَيْهَا\n(Whoever enters it will find it cool and safe, and whoever does not enter it will be dragged into it.) This was also recorded by Ishaq bin Rahwayh from Mu'adh bin Hisham, and by Al-Bayhaqi in Al-I'tiqad. He said: \"This is a Sahih chain.\"\nIt was reported by Ibn Jarir from the Hadith of Ma'mar from Hammam from Abu Hurayrah, who attributed it to the Prophet ﷺ. Then Abu Hurayrah said: \"Recite, if you wish:\nوَمَا كُنَّا مُعَذِّبِينَ حَتَّىٰ نَبْعَثَ رَسُولًا\n(And We never punish until We have sent a Messenger (to give warning)).\" This was also narrated by Ma'mar from 'Abdullah bin Tawus from his father, from Abu Hurayrah, but it is Mauquf (it was not attributed directly to the Prophet ﷺ).\n\n## The Second Hadith from Abu Hurayrah\n\nHe said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nكُلُّ مَوْلُودٍ يُولَدُ عَلَى الْفِطْرَةِ، فَأَبَوَاهُ يُهَوِّدَانِهِ أَوْ يُنَصِّرَانِهِ أَوْ يُمَجِّسَانِهِ، كَمَا تُنْتِجُ الْبَهِيمَةُ بَهِيمَةً جَمْعَاءَ، هَلْ تُحِسُّونَ فِيهَا مِنْ جَدْعَاءَ؟\n(Every newborn is born in a state of Fitrah (the natural state of man), then his parents make him into a Jew or Christian or Zoroastrian, as animals produce whole animals - do you see any that is born mutilated (with something missing)?)\nAccording to one report they said: \"O Messenger of Allah, what about those who die when they are little\" He said,\nاللهُ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا كَانُوا عَامِلِينَ\n(Allah knows best what they would have done.) Imam Ahmad reported from Abu Hurayrah that the Prophet ﷺ as far as I know - the narrator was not sure if it was attributed to Musa - said:\nذَرَارِيُّ الْمُسْلِمِينَ فِي الْجَنَّةِ يَكْفُلُهُمْ إِبْرَاهِيمُ عَلَيْهِ السَّلَامُ\n(The children of the Muslims are in Paradise, being taken care of by Ibrahim.) In Sahih Muslim it is reported from 'Iyyad bin Hammad that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said that Allah said:\nإِنِّي خَلَقْتُ عِبَادِي حُنَفَاءَ\n(I have created My servants as Hunafa.) According to another version, the wording is \"as Muslims.\"\n\n## The Third Hadith from Samurah\n\nIn his book Al-Mustakhraj 'Ala Al-Bukhari, Al-Hafiz Abu Bakr Al-Barqani recorded the Hadith of 'Awf Al-A'rabi, from Abu Raja' Al-'Utardi from Samurah that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nكُلُّ مَوْلُودٍ يُولَدُ عَلَى الْفِطْرَةِ\n(Every newborn is born in a state of Fitrah.) The people called out to him: \"O Messenger of Allah! What about the children of the idolators?\" He said,\nوَأَوْلَادُ الْمُشْرِكِينَ\n(And the children of the idolators too.) At-Tabarani reported that Samurah said: \"We asked the Messenger of Allah ﷺ about the children of the idolators, and he said,\nهُمْ خَدَمُ أَهْلِ الْجَنَّةِ\n(They are the servants of the people of Paradise.)\n\n## The Fourth Hadith from the Paternal Uncle of Hasna\n\nAhmad reported that Hasna' bint Mu'awiyah, from Bani Suraym, said that his paternal uncle said to him: \"I said, 'O Messenger of Allah, who is in Paradise?' He said,\nالنَّبِيُّ فِي الْجَنَّةِ، وَالشَّهِيدُ فِي الْجَنَّةِ، وَالْمَوْلُودُ فِي الْجَنَّةِ، وَالْوَئِيدُ فِي الْجَنَّةِ\n(Prophets are in Paradise, martyrs are in Paradise, infants are in Paradise and baby girls who were buried alive are in Paradise.)\n\n## It is Makruh to discuss this Matter\n\nIn order to discuss this issue we need good, sound proof, but people who have no knowledge of Shari'ah may try to speak about it. For this reason some of the scholars did not like to discuss it. This view has been narrated from Ibn 'Abbas, Al-Qasim bin Muhammad bin Abi Bakr As-Siddiq, Muhammad bin Al-Hanafiyyah and others.\nIbn Hibban recorded in his Sahih that Jarir bin Hazim said: I heard Abu Raja' Al-'Utardi saying that he heard Ibn 'Abbas (may Allah be pleased with them both) saying, \"While he was on the Minbar, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nلَا يَزَالُ أَمْرُ هَذِهِ الْأُمَّةِ مُوَاتِيًا - أَوْ مُقَارِبَا - مَالَمْ يَتَكَلَّمُوا فِي الْوِلْدَانِ وَالْقَدَرِ\n(This Ummah will be fine so long as they do not talk about children and the divine decree.)\" Ibn Hibban said: \"This means talking about the children of the idolators.\" Abu Bakr Al-Bazzar also recorded it via Jarir bin Hazim, then he said, \"A group narrated it from Abu Raja' from Ibn 'Abbas, but it is Mauquf\".","href":"/tafsir/17?verse=15","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:17:16","title":"Ibn Kathir · 17:16","text":"And when We decide to destroy a town (population), Amarna those who live luxuriously. Then, they transgress therein, and thus the word (of torment) is justified against it (them). Then We destroy it with complete destruction (16)\n\n## Meanings of Amarna\n\nThe commentators differed over the meaning of this word. It was said that the phrase translated here as \"Amarna those who live luxuriously. Then, they transgress therein\" means, \"We send Our decree upon them\" as Allah says elsewhere:\nأَتَاهَآ أَمْرُنَا لَيْلاً أَوْ نَهَارًا\n(Our decree reaches it by night or by day) For [Amarna cannot mean \"Our command\"] because Allah does not command or enjoin immorality.\nOr, they said it means that Allah subjugated them to commit immoral deeds, so they deserved the punishment. Or it was said that it means: \"We commanded them to obey Us, but they committed immoral sins, so they deserved punishment.\" This was reported from Ibn Jurayj from Ibn 'Abbas, and it is also the view of Sa'id bin Jubayr.\nأَمَرْنَا مُتْرَفِيهَا فَفَسَقُوا فِيهَا\n(Amarna those who live luxuriously. Then, they transgress therein,) 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas said: [this means] \"We gave power to the evil people, so they committed sin therein (in the town), and because they did that, Allah destroyed them with the punishment.\" This is similar to the Ayah:\nوَكَذَٰلِكَ جَعَلْنَا فِي كُلِّ قَرْيَةٍ أَكَابِرَ مُجْرِمِيهَا\n(And thus We have set up in every town great ones of its wicked people)[6:133] This was also the view of Abu Al-'Aliyah, Mujahid and Ar-Rabi' bin Anas.\nوَإِذَا أَرَدْنَا أَن نُّهْلِكَ قَرْيَةً أَمَرْنَا مُتْرَفِيهَا فَفَسَقُوا فِيهَا\n(And when We decide to distroy a town (populaton), Amarna those who live luxuriously. Then, they transgress therein,) Al-'Awfi reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, (it means) \"We increase their numbers. This was also the view of 'Ikrimah, Al-Hasan, Ad-Dahhak and Qatadah, and it was reported from Malik and Az-Zuhri.","href":"/tafsir/17?verse=16","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:17:17","title":"Ibn Kathir · 17:17","text":"And how many generations have We destroyed after Nuh! And sufficient is your Lord as All-Knower and Seer of the sins of His servants (17)\n\n## A Threat to Quraysh\n\nWarning the disbelievers of the Quraysh for rejecting His Messenger Muhammad ﷺ, Allah says that He destroyed other nations who rejected the Messengers after Nuh. This indicates that during the centuries between Adam and Nuh, humans were following Islam, as Ibn 'Abbas said: \"Between Adam and Nuh there were ten generations, during all of which humans were following Islam.\" The meaning (of the Ayah) is: \"You disbelievers are not more dear to Allah than they were, and you have rejected the most noble of the Messengers and the best of creation, so you are more deserving of punishment.\"\nوَكَفَىٰ بِرَبِّكَ بِذُنُوبِ عِبَادِهِ خَبِيرًا بَصِيرًا\n(And sufficient is your Lord as All-Knower and Seer of the sins of His servants.) means, He knows everything they do, good and evil, and nothing at all is hidden from Him, may He be glorified and exalted.","href":"/tafsir/17?verse=17","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:17:18","title":"Ibn Kathir · 17:18–19","text":"Whoever desires the quick-passing (transitory enjoyment of this world), We readily grant him what We will for whom We like. Then, afterwards, We have appointed for him Hell; he will burn therein disgraced and rejected (18)And whoever desires the Hereafter and strives for it, with the necessary effort due for it while he is a believer, then such are the ones whose striving shall be appreciated, (rewarded by Allah)(19)\n\n## The Reward of Those who desire this World and Those who desire the Hereafter\n\nAllah tells us that not everyone who desires this world and its luxuries gets what he wants. That is attained by those whom Allah wants to have it, and they get what He wills that they should get. This Ayah narrows down the general statements made in other Ayat. Allah says:\nعَجَّلْنَا لَهُ فِيهَا مَا نَشَاءُ لِمَن نُّرِيدُ ثُمَّ جَعَلْنَا لَهُ جَهَنَّمَ\n(We readily grant him what We will for whom We like. Then, afterwards, We have appointed for him Hell) meaning, in the Hereafter,\nيَصْلَاهَا\n(he will burn therein) means, he will enter it until it covers him on all sides,\nمَذْمُومًا\n(disgraced) means, blamed for his bad behaviour and evil deeds, because he chose the transient over the eternal,\nمَّدْحُورًا\n(rejected.) means, far away (from Allah's mercy), humiliated and put to shame.\nوَمَنْ أَرَادَ الْآخِرَةَ\n(And whoever desires the Hereafter) wanting the Hereafter and its blessings and delights,\nوَسَعَىٰ لَهَا سَعْيَهَا\n(and strives for it, with the necessary effort due for it) seeking it in the right way, which is following the Messenger ﷺ.\nوَهُوَ مُؤْمِنٌ\n(while he is a believer,) means, his heart has faith, i.e., he believes in the reward and punishment,\nفَأُولَٰئِكَ كَانَ سَعْيُهُم مَّشْكُورًا\n(then such are the ones whose striving shall be appreciated, (rewarded by Allah).)","href":"/tafsir/17?verse=18","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:17:20","title":"Ibn Kathir · 17:20–21","text":"On each these as well as those We bestow from the bounties of your Lord. And the bounties of your Lord can never be forbidden (20)See how We prefer one above another (in this world), and verily, the Hereafter will be greater in degrees and greater in preferment.) Allah say (21)\nكُلًّا\nOn each meaning, on each of the two groups, those who desire this world and those who desire the Hereafter, We bestow what they want\nمِنْ عَطَاءِ رَبِّكَ\n(from the bounties of your Lord.) means, He is the One Who is in control of all things, and He is never unjust. He gives to each what he deserves, whether it is eternal happiness or doom. His decree is unstoppable, no one can withhold what He gives or change what He wants. Allah says:\nوَمَا كَانَ عَطَاءُ رَبِّكَ مَحْظُورًا\n(And the bounties of your Lord can never be forbidden.) meaning, no one can withhold or prevent them. Qatadah said,\nوَمَا كَانَ عَطَاءُ رَبِّكَ مَحْظُورًا\n(And the bounties of your Lord can never be forbidden.) \"(It means) they can never decrease\".\nوَمَا كَانَ عَطَاءُ رَبِّكَ مَحْظُورًا\n(And the Bounties of your Lord can never be forbidden) Al-Hasan and others said, \"(It means) they can never be prevented.\" Then Allah says:\nانظُرْ كَيْفَ فَضَّلْنَا بَعْضَهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ\n(See how We prefer one above another,) meaning in this world, so that some are rich and some are poor, and others are in between; some are beautiful, some are ugly and others are in between; some die young while others live to a great age, and some die in between.\nوَلَلْآخِرَةُ أَكْبَرُ دَرَجَاتٍ وَأَكْبَرُ تَفْضِيلًا\n(and verily, the Hereafter will be greater in degrees and greater in preferment.) means, the differences between them in the Hereafter will be greater than the differences between them in this world. Some of them will be in varying levels of Hell, in chains and fetters, while others will be in the lofty degrees of Paradise, with its blessings and delights. The people of Hell will vary in their positions and levels, just as the people of Paradise will. In Paradise there are one hundred levels, and the distance between one level and another is like the distance between heaven and earth. It is recorded in the Two Sahihs that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nإِنَّ أَهْلَ الدَّرَجَاتِ الْعُلَى لَيَرَوْنَ أَهْلَ عِلِّيِّينَ كَمَا تَرَوْنَ الْكَوْكَبَ الْغَابِرَ فِي أُفُقِ السَّمَاءِ\n(The people of the highest levels (of Paradise) will see the people of 'Illiyin as if they are looking at distant stars on the horizon.) Allah says:\nوَلَلْآخِرَةُ أَكْبَرُ دَرَجَاتٍ وَأَكْبَرُ تَفْضِيلًا\n(and verily, the Hereafter will be greater in degrees and greater in preferment.)","href":"/tafsir/17?verse=20","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:17:22","title":"Ibn Kathir · 17:22","text":"Set not up with Allah any other ilah (god), or you will sit down reproved, forsaken (in the Hellfire)(22)\n\n## Do not associate Anything in Worship with Allah\n\nAddressing those who are responsible among this Ummah, Allah says, \"Do not admit any partner into your worship of your Lord.\"\nفَتَقْعُدَ مَذْمُومًا\n(or you will sit down reproved,) meaning, because of associating others with Him.\nمَّخْذُولًا\n(forsaken.) means, because the Lord, may He be exalted, will not help you; He will leave you to the one whom you worshipped, and he has no power either to benefit or to harm, because the Only One Who has the power to benefit or to harm is Allah alone, with no partner or associate. Imam Ahmad reported that 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud said: \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nمَنْ أَصَابَتْهُ فَاقَةٌ فَأَنْزَلَهَا بِالنَّاسِ لَمْ تُسَدَّ فَاقَتُهُ، وَمَنْ أَنْزَلَهَا بِاللهِ أَرْسَلَ اللهُ لَهُ بِالْغِنَى إِمَّا آجِلًا وَإِمَّا غِنىً عَاجِلًا\n(Whoever is afflicted with poverty and goes and asks people for help, will never get rid of his poverty, but if he asks Allah for help, then Allah will grant him the means of independence sooner or later.) This was also recorded by Abu Dawud and At-Tirmidhi, who said, \"Hasan Sahih Gharib\".","href":"/tafsir/17?verse=22","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:17:23","title":"Ibn Kathir · 17:23–24","text":"And your Lord has Qada [decreed] that you worship none but Him. And that you be dutiful to your parents. If one of them or both of them attain old age in your life, say not to them a word of disrespect, nor reprimand them but address them in terms of honor (23)And lower unto them the wing of submission and humility through mercy, and say: \"My Lord! Bestow on them Your mercy as they did bring me up when I was young. (24)\n\n## The Command to Worship Allah Alone and to be Dutiful to One's Parents\n\nAllah commands us to worship Him alone, with no partner or associate. The word Qada [normally having the meaning of decree] here means \"commanded\". Mujahid said that\nوَقَضَىٰ\n(And He has Qada) means enjoined. This is also how Ubayy bin Ka'b, Ibn Mas'ud and Ad-Dahhak bin Muzahim recited the Ayah as:\nوَوَصَّى رَبُّكَ أَلَّا تَعْبُدُوا إِلَّا إِيَّاهُ\n\"And your Lord has Wassa [enjoined] that you worship none but Him.\" The idea of worshipping Allah is connected to the idea of honoring one's parents. Allah says:\nوَبِالْوَالِدَيْنِ إِحْسَانًا\n(And that you be dutiful to your parents.) Here He commands good treatment of parents, as He says elsewhere:\nأَنِ اشْكُرْ لِي وَلِوَالِدَيْكَ إِلَيَّ الْمَصِيرُ\n(give thanks to Me and to your parents. Unto Me is the final destination)[31:14]\nإِمَّا يَبْلُغَنَّ عِندَكَ الْكِبَرَ أَحَدُهُمَا أَوْ كِلَاهُمَا فَلَا تَقُل لَّهُمَا أُفٍّ\n(If one of them or both of them attain old age in your life, say not to them a word of disrespect,) means, do not let them hear anything offensive from you, not even say \"Uff!\" which is the mildest word of disrespect,\nوَلَا تَنْهَرْهُمَا\n(and do not reprimand them) means, do not do anything horrible to them.\nوَلَا تَنْهَرْهُمَا\n(and do not reprimand them) 'Ata' bin Rabah said that it meant, \"Do not raise your hand against them.\" When Allah forbids speaking and behaving in an obnoxious manner, He commands speaking and behaving in a good manner, so He says:\nوَقُل لَّهُمَا قَوْلًا كَرِيمًا\n(but address them in terms of honor.) meaning gently, kindly, politely, and with respect and appreciation.\nوَاخْفِضْ لَهُمَا جَنَاحَ الذُّلِّ مِنَ الرَّحْمَةِ\n(And lower unto them the wing of submission and humility through mercy,) means, be humble towards them in your actions.\nوَقُل رَّبِّ ارْحَمْهُمَا كَمَا رَبَّيَانِي صَغِيرًا\n(and say: \"My Lord! Bestow on them Your Mercy as they did bring me up when I was young.\") means, say this when they grow old and when they die. Ibn 'Abbas said: \"But then Allah revealed:\nمَا كَانَ لِلنَّبِيِّ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَن يَسْتَغْفِرُوا لِلْمُشْرِكِينَ\n(It is not (proper) for the Prophet and those who believe to ask Allah's forgiveness for the idolators...)\" [9:13] There are many Hadiths which speak about honoring one's parents, such as the Hadith narrated through a number of chains of narration from Anas and others, which states that the Prophet ﷺ climbed up on the Minbar, and then said, ((Āmīn, Āmīn, Āmīn.)) It was said, \"O Messenger of Allah, why did you say Āmīn?\" He said:\nأَتَانِي جِبْرِيلُ فَقَالَ: يَا مُحَمَّدُ رَغِمَ أَنْفُ رَجُلٍ ذُكِرْتَ عِنْدَهُ فَلَمْ يُصَلِّ عَلَيْكَ، قُلْ: آمِينَ، فَقُلْتُ: آمِينَ، ثُمَّ قَالَ: رَغِمَ أَنْفُ رَجُلٍ دَخَلَ عَلَيْهِ شَهْرُ رَمَضَانَ ثُمَّ خَرَجَ فَلَمْ يُغْفَرْ لَهُ، قُلْ: آمِينَ، فَقُلْتُ: آمِينَ، ثُمَّ قَالَ: رَغِمَ أَنْفُ رَجُلٍ أَدْرَكَ وَالِدَيْهِ أَوْ أَحَدَهُمَا فَلَمْ يُدْخِلَاهُ الْجَنَّةَ، قُلْ: آمِينَ، فَقُلْتُ: آمِينَ\n(Jibril came to me and said, \"O Muhammad, he is doomed who hears you mentioned and does not say Salla upon you.\" He said, \"Say Āmīn,\" so I said Āmīn. Then he said, \"He is doomed who sees the month of Ramadan come and go, and he has not been forgiven.\" He said, \"Say Āmīn,\" so I said Āmīn. Then he said, \"He is doomed who grows up and both his parents or one of them are still alive, and they do not cause him to enter Paradise.\" He said, \"Say Āmīn,\" so I said Āmīn.)\n\n## Another Hadith\n\nImam Ahmad reported from Abu Hurayrah that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nرَغِمَ أَنْفُ، ثُمَّ رَغِمَ أَنْفُ ثُمَّ رَغِمَ أَنْفُ رَجُلٍ أَدْرَكَ أَحَدَ أَبَوَيْهِ أَوْ (كِلَيْهِمَا) عِنْدَ الْكِبَرِ وَلَمْ يَدْخُلِ الْجَنَّةَ\n(He is doomed, he is doomed, he is doomed, the man whose parents, one or both of them, reach old age while he is alive and he does not enter Paradise.) This version is Sahih although no one recorded it other than Muslim.\n\n## Another Hadith\n\nImam Ahmad recorded Mu'awiyah bin Jahimah As-Salami saying that Jahimah came to the Prophet ﷺ and said: \"O Messenger of Allah, I want to go out to fight and I have come to seek your advice.\" He said,\nفَهَلْ لَكَ مِنْ أُمِّ\n(Do you have a mother?) He said, \"Yes.\" The Prophet ﷺ said,\nفَالْزَمْهَا فَإِنَّ الْجَنَّةَ عِنْدَ رِجْلَيْهَا\n(Then stay with her, for Paradise is at her feet.) Similar incidents were also recorded by others. This was recorded by An-Nasa'i and Ibn Majah.\n\n## Another Hadith\n\nImam Ahmad recorded that Al-Miqdam bin Ma'dikarib said that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nإِنَّ اللهَ يُوصِيكُمْ بِآبَائِكُمْ إِنَّ اللهَ يُوصِيكُمْ بِأُمَّهَاتِكُمْ إِنَّ اللهَ يُوصِيكُمْ بِأُمَّهَاتِكُمْ إِنَّ اللهَ يُوصِيكُمْ بِأُمَّهَاتِكُمْ إِنَّ اللهَ يُوصِيكُمْ بِالْأَقْرَبِ فَالْأَقْرَبِ\n(Allah enjoins you concerning your fathers, Allah enjoins you concerning your mothers, Allah enjoins you concerning your mothers, Allah enjoins you concerning your mothers, Allah enjoins you concerning your close relatives then the next in closeness.) This was recorded by Ibn Majah from the Hadith of 'Abdullah bin 'Ayyash.\n\n## Another Hadith\n\nAhmad recorded that a man from Banu Yarbu' said: \"I came to the Prophet ﷺ while he was talking to the people, and I heard him saying,\nيَدُ الْمُعْطِي الْعُلْيَا، أُمَّكَ وَأَبَاكَ، وَأُخْتَكَ وَأَخَاكَ، ثُمَّ أَدْنَاكَ أَدْنَاكَ\n(The hand of the one who gives is superior. (Give to) your mother and your father, your sister and your brother, then the closest and next closest.)\"","href":"/tafsir/17?verse=23","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:17:25","title":"Ibn Kathir · 17:25","text":"Your Lord knows best what is in your souls. If you are righteous, then, verily, He is Ever Most Forgiving to those who turn to Him in repentance (25)\n\n## Omissions comitted against Parents are pardoned with Good Relations and Repentance\n\nSa'id bin Jubayr said: \"This refers to a man who said something that he did not think would be offensive to his parents.\" According to another report: \"He did not mean anything bad by that.\" So Allah said:\nرَّبُّكُمْ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا فِي نُفُوسِكُمْ ۚ إِن تَكُونُوا صَالِحِينَ\n(Your Lord knows best what is in your souls. If you are righteous,)\nفَإِنَّهُ كَانَ لِلْأَوَّابِينَ غَفُورًا\n(He is Ever Most Forgiving to those who turn to Him in repentance.) Qatadah said: \"To the obedient who pray.\"\nفَإِنَّهُ كَانَ لِلْأَوَّابِينَ غَفُورًا\n(He is Ever Most Forgiving to those who turn to Him in repentance.)\nShu'bah narrated from Yahya bin Sa'id from Sa'id bin Al-Musayyib; \"This refers to those who commit sin then repent, and commit sin then repent.\"\nAta' bin Yasar, Sa'id bin Jubayr and Mujahid said: \"They are the ones who return to goodness.\" Mujahid narrated from 'Ubayd bin 'Umayr, concerning this Ayah: \"This is the one who, when he remembers his sin when he is alone, he seeks the forgiveness of Allah.\" Mujahid agreed with him on that.\nIbn Jarir said: \"The best view on this matter is of those who said that it refers to the one who repents after committing sin, who comes back from disobedience to obedience and who leaves that which Allah hates for that which He loves and is pleased with.\" What he said is correct, for Allah says,\nإِنَّ إِلَيْنَا إِيَابَهُمْ\n(Verily, to Us will be their return)(88:25). And according to a Sahih Hadith, the Messenger of Allah would say when he ﷺ returned from a journey,\nآيِبُونَ تَائِبُونَ، عَابِدُونَ لِرَبِّنَا حَامِدُونَ\n(We have returned repenting, worshipping and praising our Lord.)","href":"/tafsir/17?verse=25","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:17:26","title":"Ibn Kathir · 17:26–28","text":"And give to the kinsman his due, and to the Miskin (poor), and to the wayfarer. But spend not wastefully (your wealth) in the manner of a spendthrift (26)Verily, the spendthrifts are brothers of the Shayatin (devils), and the Shaytan is ever ungrateful to his Lord (27)And if you turn away from them and you are awaiting a mercy from your Lord for which you hope, then, speak unto them a soft, kind word (28)\n\n## The Command to maintain the Ties of Kinship and the Prohibition of Extravagance\n\nWhen Allah mentions honoring one's parents, He follows this with the command to treat one's relatives well and to maintain the ties of kinship. According to the Hadith:\nأُمَّكَ وَأَبَاكَ، ثُمَّ أَدْنَاكَ أَدْنَاكَ\nوفي رواية\nثُمَّ الْأَقْرَبَ فَالْأَقْرَبَ\n(Your mother and your father, then your closest relatives and the next closest.) According to another Hadith:\nمَنْ أَحَبَّ أَنْ يُبْسَطَ لَهُ فِي رِزْقِهِ وَيُنْسَأَ لَهُ فِي أَجَلِهِ، فَلْيَصِلْ رَحِمَهُ\n(Whoever would like to see his provision expanded and his life extended, let him maintain his ties of kinship.)\nوَلَا تُبَذِّرْ تَبْذِيرًا\n(But spend not wastefully (your wealth) in the manner of a spendthrift.) When Allah commands spending, He forbids extravagance. Spending should be moderate, as stated in another Ayah:\nوَالَّذِينَ إِذَا أَنفَقُوا لَمْ يُسْرِفُوا وَلَمْ يَقْتُرُوا\n(And those who, when they spend, are neither extravagant nor stingy). [25:67] Then He says, to discourage extravagance:\nإِنَّ الْمُبَذِّرِينَ كَانُوا إِخْوَانَ الشَّيَاطِينِ\n(Verily, the spendthrifts are brothers of the Shayatin,)\nThey have this trait in common. Ibn Mas'ud said: \"This refers spending extravagantly when it is not appropriate.\" Ibn 'Abbas said likewise. Mujahid said: \"If a man spends all his wealth on appropriate things, then he is not a spendthrift, but if he spends a little inappropriately, then he is a spendthrift.\" Qatadah said: \"Extravagance means spending money on sin in disobeying Allah, and on wrongful and corrupt things.\"\nImam Ahmad recorded that Anas bin Malik said: \"A man came from Banu Tamim to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and said: 'O Messenger of Allah, I have a lot of wealth, I have a family, children, and the refinements of city life, so tell me how I should spend and what I should do.' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nتُخْرِجُ الزَّكَاةَ مِنْ مَالِكَ إِنْ كَانَ، فَإِنَّهَا طُهْرَةٌ تُطَهِّرُكَ، وَتَصِلُ أَقْرِبَاءَكَ، وَتَعْرِفُ حَقَّ السَّائِلِ وَالْجَارِ وَالْمِسْكِينِ\n(Pay the Zakah on your wealth if any is due, for it is purification that will make you pure, maintain your ties of kinship, pay attention to the rights of beggars, neighbors and the poor.) He said: 'O Messenger of Allah, make it less for me.' He [recited]:\nوَآتِ ذَا الْقُرْبَىٰ حَقَّهُ وَالْمِسْكِينَ وَابْنَ السَّبِيلِ وَلَا تُبَذِّرْ تَبْذِيرًا\n(And give to the kinsman his due, and to the Miskin (poor) and to the wayfarer. But spend not wastefully in the manner of a spendthrift.)\nThe man said, 'That is enough for me, O Messenger of Allah. If I pay Zakah to your messenger, will I be absolved of that duty before Allah and His Messenger?' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nنَعَمْ، إِذَا أَدَّيْتَهَا إِلَى رَسُولِي فَقَدْ بَرِئْتَ مِنْهَا وَلَكَ أَجْرُهَا، وَإِثْمُهَا عَلَى مَنْ بَدَّلَهَا\n(Yes, if you give it to my messenger, you will have fulfilled it, and you will have the reward for it, and the sin is on the one who changes it.)\"\nإِنَّ الْمُبَذِّرِينَ كَانُوا إِخْوَانَ الشَّيَاطِينِ\n(Verily, the spendthrifts are brothers of the Shayatin,) meaning, they are their brothers in extravagance, foolishness, failing to obey Allah and committing sin. Allah said:\nوَكَانَ الشَّيْطَانُ لِرَبِّهِ كَفُورًا\n(and the Shaytan is ever ungrateful to his Lord.) meaning, he is an ingrate, because he denied the blessings of Allah and did not obey Him, turning instead to disobedience and rebellion.\nوَإِمَّا تُعْرِضَنَّ عَنْهُمُ ابْتِغَاءَ رَحْمَةٍ مِّن رَّبِّكَ\n(And if you turn away from them and you are awaiting a mercy from your Lord) 'If your relatives and those to whom We have commanded you to give, ask you for something, and you do not have anything, and you turn away from them because you have nothing to give,\nفَقُل لَّهُمْ قَوْلًا مَّيْسُورًا\n(then, speak unto them a soft, kind word.) meaning, with a promise. This was the opinion of Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Al-Hasan, Qatadah and others.","href":"/tafsir/17?verse=26","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:17:29","title":"Ibn Kathir · 17:29–30","text":"And let not your hand be tied (like a miser) to your neck, nor overextend it (like a spendthrift), so that you become blameworthy and in severe poverty (29)Truly, your Lord expands the provision for whom He wills and straitens (for whom He wills). Verily, He is Ever All-Knower, All-Seer of His servants (30)\n\n## Moderation in Spending\n\nAllah enjoins moderation in living. He condemns miserliness and forbids extravagance.\nوَلَا تَجْعَلْ يَدَكَ مَغْلُولَةً إِلَىٰ عُنُقِكَ\n(And let not your hand be tied (like a miser) to your neck,) this means, do not be miserly and stingy, never giving anything to anyone, as the Jews - may the curses of Allah be upon them - said, \"Allah's Hand is tied up (i.e., He does not give and spend of His bounty)\". They attributed miserliness to Him, Exalted and Sanctified be the Most Generous Bestower!\nوَلَا تَبْسُطْهَا كُلَّ الْبَسْطِ\n(nor overextend it (like a spendthrift)) means, nor be extravagant in spending and giving more than you can afford, or paying more than you earn, lest you become blameworthy and find yourself in severe poverty. If you are a miser, people will blame you and condemn you, and no longer rely on you. When you spend more than you can afford, you will find yourself without anything to spend, so you will be worn out, like an animal that cannot walk, so it becomes weak and incapable. It is described as worn out, which is similar in meaning to exhausted. As Allah says:\nفَارْجِعِ الْبَصَرَ هَلْ تَرَىٰ مِن فُطُورٍ - ثُمَّ ارْجِعِ الْبَصَرَ كَرَّتَيْنِ يَنقَلِبْ إِلَيْكَ الْبَصَرُ خَاسِئًا وَهُوَ حَسِيرٌ\n(Then look again: \"Can you see any rifts?\" Then look again and yet again, your sight will return to you in a state of humiliation and worn out.)(67:3-4) meaning, unable to see any faults. Similarly, Ibn 'Abbas, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ibn Jurayj, Ibn Zayd and others understood this Ayah as miserliness and extravagance. It was reported in the Two Sahihs from the Hadith of Abu Az-Zinad from Al-A'raj that Abu Hurayrah heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ say:\nمَثَلُ الْبَخِيلِ وَالْمُنْفِقِ كَمَثَلِ رَجُلَيْنِ عَلَيْهِمَا جُبَّتَانِ مِنْ حَدِيدٍ مِنْ ثُدِيِّهِمَا إِلَى تَرَاقِيهِمَا، فَأَمَّا الْمُنْفِقُ فَلَا يُنْفِقُ إِلَّا سَبَغَتْ - أَوْ وَفَرَتْ - عَلَى جِلْدِهِ حَتَّى تُخْفِيَ بَنَانَهُ وَتَعْفُوَ أَثَرَهُ، وَأَمَّا الْبَخِيلُ فَلَا يُرِيدُ أَنْ يُنْفِقَ شَيْئًا إِلَّا لَزِقَتْ كُلُّ حَلْقَةٍ مِنْهَا مَكَانَهَا، فَهُوَ يُوَسِّعُهَا فَلَا تَتَّسِعُ\n(The parable of the miser and the almsgiver is that of two persons wearing iron cloaks from their chests to their collar-bones. When the almsgiver gives in charity, the cloak becomes spacious until it covers his whole body to such an extent that it hides his fingertips and covers his tracks (obliterates his tracks - or, his sins will be forgiven). And when the miser wants to spend, it (the iron cloak) sticks and (its) every ring gets stuck to its place, and he tries to widen it, but it does not become wide.)\nThis version was recorded by Al-Bukhari in the Book of Zakah.\nIn the Two Sahihs it is recorded that Mu'awiyah bin Abi Muzarrid narrated from Sa'id bin Yasar that Abu Hurayrah said: \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nمَا مِنْ يَوْمٍ يُصْبِحُ الْعِبَادُ فِيهِ إِلَّا وَمَلَكَانِ يَنْزِلَانِ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ يَقُولُ أَحَدُهُمَا: اللَّهُمَّ أَعْطِ مُنْفِقًا خَلَفًا، وَيَقُولُ الْآخَرُ: اللَّهُمَّ أَعْطِ مُمْسِكًا تَلَفًا\n(There is no day when a person wakes up but two angels come down from heaven. One of them says, 'O Allah, compensate the one who gives (in charity),' and the other one says, 'O Allah, destroy the one who withholds.')\" Muslim recorded from Abu Hurayrah that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nمَا نَقَصَ مَالٌ مِنْ صَدَقَةٍ، وَمَا زَادَ اللهُ عَبْدًا أَنْفَقَ إِلَّا عِزًّا، وَمَنْ تَوَاضَعَ للهِ رَفَعَهُ اللهُ\n(Wealth never decreases because of Sadaqah (charity). Allah never increases a servant who gives in charity except in honor, and whoever is humble for the sake of Allah, Allah will raise him in status.)\nAccording to a Hadith narrated by Abu Kathir from 'Abdullah bin 'Amr, who attributed it to the Prophet ﷺ:\nإِيَّاكُمْ وَالشُّحَّ فَإِنَّهُ أَهْلَكَ مَنْ كَانَ قَبْلَكُمْ، أَمَرَهُمْ بِالْبُخْلِ فَبَخِلُوا، وَأَمَرَهُمْ بِالْقَطِيعَةِ فَقَطَعُوا، وَأَمَرَهُمْ بِالْفُجُورِ فَفَجَرُوا\n(Beware of stinginess for it destroyed the people who came before you. It commanded them to be miserly, so they were miserly; and it commanded them to cut the ties of kinship, so they cut them; and it commanded them to commit immoral actions, so they did so.)\nإِنَّ رَبَّكَ يَبْسُطُ الرِّزْقَ لِمَن يَشَاءُ وَيَقْدِرُ\n(Truly, your Lord expands the provision for whom He wills and straitens (for whom He wills).) This Ayah is telling us that Allah is the One Who provides or withholds, the Bestower Who is running the affairs of His creation as He wills. He makes rich whomever He wills, and He makes poor whomever He wills, by the wisdom that is His. He said:\nإِنَّهُ كَانَ بِعِبَادِهِ خَبِيرًا بَصِيرًا\n(Verily, He is Ever All-Knower, All-Seer of His servants.) meaning, He knows and sees who deserves to be rich and who deserves to be poor.\nIn some cases, richness may be decreed so that a person gets carried away, leading to his own doom. In other cases, poverty may be a punishment. We seek refuge with Allah from both.","href":"/tafsir/17?verse=29","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:17:31","title":"Ibn Kathir · 17:31","text":"And kill not your children for fear of poverty. We shall provide for them as well as for you. Surely, the killing of them is a great sin (31)\n\n## Prohibition of killing Children\n\nThis Ayah indicates that Allah is more compassionate towards His servants than a father to his child, because He forbids killing children just as He enjoins parents to take care of their children in matters of inheritance. The people of Jahiliyyah would not allow their daughters to inherit from them, and some would even kill their daughters lest they make them more poor. Allah forbade that and said:\nوَلَا تَقْتُلُوا أَوْلَادَكُمْ خَشْيَةَ إِمْلَاقٍ\n(And kill not your children for fear of poverty.) meaning, lest they may make you poor in the future. This is why Allah mentions the children's provision first:\nنَّحْنُ نَرْزُقُهُمْ وَإِيَّاكُمْ\n(We shall provide for them as well as for you.) In Surat Al-An'am, Allah says:\nوَلَا تَقْتُلُوا أَوْلَادَكُم مِّنْ إِمْلَاقٍ\n(kill not your children because of poverty.)[6:151]\nنَّحْنُ نَرْزُقُكُمْ وَإِيَّاهُمْ\n(We provide sustenance for you and for them)[6:151] and,\nإِنَّ قَتْلَهُمْ كَانَ خِطْئًا كَبِيرًا\n(Surely, the killing of them is a great sin.) means, a major sin. In Two Sahihs it is recorded that 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud said: \"I said, 'O Messenger of Allah, which sin is the worst?' He said,\nأَنْ تَجْعَلَ لِلّهِ نِدًّا وَهُوَ خَلَقَكَ. قُلْتُ: ثُمَّ أَيٌّ؟ قَالَ: أَنْ تَقْتُلَ وَلَدَكَ خَشْيَةَ أَنْ يَطْعَمَ مَعَكَ. قُلْتُ: ثُمَّ أَيٌّ؟ قَالَ: أَنْ تُزَانِيَ بِحَلِيلَةِ جَارِكَ\n(To appoint rivals of Allah when He has created you.) I asked, 'Then what?' He said, (To kill your child lest he should eat with you.) I asked, 'Then what?' He said, (To commit adultery with your neighbor's wife.)\"","href":"/tafsir/17?verse=31","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:17:32","title":"Ibn Kathir · 17:32","text":"And come not near to unlawful sex. Verily, it is Fahishah (immoral sin) and an evil way (32)\n\n## The Command to avoid Zina (Unlawful Sex) and Everything that leads to it\n\nAllah says, forbidding His servants to commit Zina or to approach it or to do anything that may lead to it:\nوَلَا تَقْرَبُوا الزِّنَا ۖ إِنَّهُ كَانَ فَاحِشَةً\n(And come not near to unlawful sex. Verily, it is a Fahishah (immoral sin)) meaning a major sin,\nوَسَاءَ سَبِيلًا\n(and an evil way.) meaning, a terrible way to behave. Imam Ahmad recorded Abu Umamah saying that a young man came to the Prophet ﷺ and said, \"O Messenger of Allah! Give me permission to commit Zina (unlawful sex).\" The people surrounded him and rebuked him, saying, \"Stop! Stop!\" But the Prophet ﷺ said,\nادْنُهُ\n(Come close) The young man came to him, and he said,\nاجْلِس\n(Sit down) so he sat down. The Prophet ﷺ said,\nأَتُحِبُّهُ لِأُمِّكَ\n(Would you like it (unlawful sex) for your mother?) He said, \"No, by Allah, may I be ransomed for you.\" The Prophet ﷺ said,\nوَلَا النَّاسُ يُحِبُّونَهُ لِأُمَّهَاتِهِم\n(Neither do the people like it for their mothers.) The Prophet ﷺ said,\nأَفَتُحِبُّهُ لِابْنَتِكَ؟\n(Would you like it for your daughter?) He said, \"No, by Allah, may I be ransomed for you.\" The Prophet ﷺ said,\nوَلَا النَّاسُ يُحِبُّونَهُ لِبَنَاتِهِم\n(Neither do the people like it for their daughters.) The Prophet ﷺ said,\nأَفَتُحِبُّهُ لِأُخْتِكَ؟\n(Would you like it for your sister?) He said, \"No, by Allah, may I be ransomed for you.\" The Prophet ﷺ said,\nوَلَا النَّاسُ يُحِبُّونَهُ لِأَخَوَاتِهِم\n(Neither do the people like it for their sisters.) The Prophet ﷺ said,\nأَفَتُحِبُّهُ لِعَمَّتِكَ؟\n(Would you like it for your paternal aunt?) He said, \"No, by Allah, O Allah's Messenger! may I be ransomed for you.\" The Prophet ﷺ said,\nوَلَا النَّاسُ يُحِبُّونَهُ لِعَمَّاتِهِم\n(Neither do the people like it for their paternal aunts.) The Prophet ﷺ said,\nأَفَتُحِبُّهُ لِخَالَتِكَ؟\n(Would you like it for your maternal aunt?) He said, \"No, by Allah, 