َى يُقَالَ لِلرَّجُلِ مَا أَجْلَدَهُ وَأَظْرَفَهُ وَأَعْقَلَهُ! وَمَا فِي قَلْبِهِ حَبَّةُ خَرْدَلٍ مِنْ إِيمَانٍ\n(Then the people will start buying and selling, and hardly anyone will be paying attention to Al-Amanah, until it will be said that among the tribe of so-and-so there is a trustworthy man, and it will said of a man, 'how strong he is, how nice and how wise,' and there is not even a mustard seed of faith in his heart.)\nNo doubt, there came upon me a time when I did not mind dealing (bargaining) with anyone of you, for if he was a Muslim, his Islam would compel him to pay me what is due to me, and if he was a Christian, or Jew, the Muslim official would compel him to pay me what is due to me, but today, I do not deal except with such and such person among you.\" It was also recorded in the Two Sahihs from the Hadith of Al-A'mash.\nImam Ahmad recorded that 'Abdullah bin 'Amr, may Allah be pleased with him, said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nأَرْبَعٌ إِذَا كُنَّ فِيكَ فَلَا عَلَيْكَ مَا فَاتَكَ مِنَ الدُّنْيَا: حِفْظُ أَمَانَةٍ، وَصِدْقُ حَدِيثٍ، وَحُسْنُ خَلِيقَةٍ، وَعِفَّةُ طُعْمَةٍ\n(There are four things, if you attain them, then whatever you miss in this world will not matter: preserving trust, speaking the truth, being of good character and moderation in eating.)\nThe Result of taking on the Amanah\nلِيُعَذِّبَ اللَّهُ الْمُنَافِقِينَ وَالْمُنَافِقَاتِ وَالْمُشْرِكِينَ وَالْمُشْرِكَاتِ\n(So that Allah will punish the hypocrites, men and women, and the men and women who are idolators.) means, because the sons of Adam have undertaken to fulfill the Amanah, which means duties, Allah will punish the men and women among them who are hypocrites, who are those who make an outward display of faith because they fear the believers, but in their hearts they conceal disbelief and in fact are followers of the disbelievers.\nوَالْمُشْرِكِينَ وَالْمُشْرِكَاتِ\n(and the men and women who are idolators.) these are the ones who both outwardly and inwardly associate others in worship with Allah and go against His Messengers.\nوَيَتُوبَ اللَّهُ عَلَى الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتِ\n(And Allah will pardon the believers, men and women.) means, He will show mercy to the believers among mankind, who believe in Allah and in His angels, Books and Messengers, and who obey Him.\nوَكَانَ اللَّهُ غَفُورًا رَحِيمًا\n(And Allah is Ever Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.)\nThis is end of the Tafsir of Surat Al-Ahzab. Allah's is the praise and thanks.","href":"/tafsir/33?verse=72","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:34:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 34:1–2","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nالْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي لَهُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ وَلَهُ الْحَمْدُ فِي الْآخِرَةِ ۚ وَهُوَ الْحَكِيمُ الْخَبِيرُ - يَعْلَمُ مَا يَلِجُ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَمَا يَخْرُجُ مِنْهَا وَمَا يَنْزِلُ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ وَمَا يَعْرُجُ فِيهَا ۚ وَهُوَ الرَّحِيمُ الْغَفُورُ\n(1. All praise is due to Allah, to Whom belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is on the earth. His is all praise in the Hereafter, and He is the All-Wise, the All-Aware.)(2. He knows that which goes into the earth and that which comes forth from it, and that which descends from the heaven and that which ascends to it. And He is the Most Merciful, the Oft-Forgiving.)\nAll Praise and the Knowledge of the Unseen belong to Allah Alone\nAllah tells us that all praise belongs to Him alone in this world and in the Hereafter, because He is the Giver and Bestower who gives to the people of this world and the Hereafter, the Sovereign and Controller of all. Allah says:\nوَهُوَ اللَّهُ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ ۖ لَهُ الْحَمْدُ فِي الْأُولَىٰ وَالْآخِرَةِ ۖ وَلَهُ الْحُكْمُ وَإِلَيْهِ تُرْجَعُونَ\n(And He is Allah; none has the right to be worshipped but He, all praise is due to Him (both) in the first (i.e., in this world) and in the last (the Hereafter). And for Him is the decision, and to Him shall you (all) be returned.)(28:70). Allah says:\nالْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي لَهُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ\n(All praise is due to Allah, to Whom belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth.) meaning, all of it is His dominion and is enslaved by Him and subject to His control, as Allah says:\nوَإِنَّ لَنَا لَلْآخِرَةَ وَالْأُولَىٰ\n(And truly, unto Us (belong) the last (Hereafter) and the first (this world))(92:13). Then Allah says:\nوَلَهُ الْحَمْدُ فِي الْآخِرَةِ\n(His is all praise in the Hereafter,) for He is the One Who will be worshipped forever and praised for eternity.\nوَهُوَ الْحَكِيمُ\nand He is the All-Wise, means, in all that He says and does, legislates and decrees.\nالْخَبِيرُ\nthe All-Aware. from Whom nothing at all is hidden or concealed. Malik narrated that Az-Zuhri said, He is All-Aware of His creation, All-Wise in His commands. Allah says:\nيَعْلَمُ مَا يَلِجُ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَمَا يَخْرُجُ مِنْهَا\n(He knows that which goes into the earth and that which comes forth from it,) meaning, He knows the number of raindrops that sink into the depths of the earth, and the seeds that have been sown, and the things that are hidden in it, and He knows what comes forth from that, how many they are, how they grow and what they look like.\nوَمَا يَنْزِلُ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ\n(and that which descends from the heaven) means, of raindrops and provision, and what ascends into it, i.e., righteous deeds and other things.\nوَهُوَ الرَّحِيمُ الْغَفُورُ\n(And He is the Most Merciful, the Oft-Forgiving.) means, He is Most Merciful to His servants; He does not hasten to punish them, and He forgives the sins of those who repent to Him and put their trust in Him.","href":"/tafsir/34?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:34:3","title":"Ibn Kathir · 34:3–6","text":"Those who disbelieve say: \"The Hour will not come to us.\" Say: \"Yes, by my Lord, the All-Knower of the Unseen, it will come to you; not even the weight of a speck of dust or less than that or greater escapes His knowledge in the heavens or in the earth but it is in a Clear Book. (3)That He may recompense those who believe and do righteous good deeds. Those, theirs is forgiveness and generous provision (4)But those who strive against Our Ayat to frustrate them – those, for them will be a severe painful torment (5)And those who have been given knowledge see that what is revealed to you from your Lord is the truth, and that it guides to the path of the Exalted in might, Owner of all praise (6)\nThe Hour will come so that each Person will be rewarded or punished in accordance with His Deeds\nThis is one of three Ayat – there is no fourth – where Allah commands His Messenger ﷺ to swear by His Almighty Lord that the resurrection will surely come, because the stubborn followers of disbelief denied that it would happen. One of these Ayat is in Surah Yunus, where Allah says:\nوَيَسْتَنْبِئُونَكَ أَحَقٌّ هُوَ ۖ قُلْ إِي وَرَبِّي إِنَّهُ لَحَقٌّ ۖ وَمَا أَنْتُمْ بِمُعْجِزِينَ\n(And they ask you to inform them (saying): \"Is it true?\" Say: \"Yes! By my Lord! It is the very truth! and you cannot escape it!\")(10:53). The second of these Ayat is this one:\nوَقَالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَا تَأْتِينَا السَّاعَةُ ۖ قُلْ بَلَىٰ وَرَبِّي لَتَأْتِيَنَّكُمْ\n(Those who disbelieve say: \"The Hour will not come to us.\" Say: \"Yes, by my Lord, it will come to you...\"). And the third of them appears in Surat At-Taghabun, where Allah says:\nزَعَمَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا أَنْ لَنْ يُبْعَثُوا ۚ قُلْ بَلَىٰ وَرَبِّي لَتُبْعَثُنَّ ثُمَّ لَتُنَبَّؤُنَّ بِمَا عَمِلْتُمْ ۚ وَذَٰلِكَ عَلَى اللَّهِ يَسِيرٌ\n(The disbelievers pretend that they will never be resurrected (for reckoning). Say: \"Yes! By my Lord, you will certainly be resurrected, then you will be informed of what you did; and that is easy for Allah\")(64:7). And Allah says here:\nقُلْ بَلَىٰ وَرَبِّي لَتَأْتِيَنَّكُمْ\n(Say: \"Yes, by my Lord, it will come to you...\") Then Allah is described in a manner that affirms that:\nعَالِمِ الْغَيْبِ ۖ لَا يَعْزُبُ عَنْهُ مِثْقَالُ ذَرَّةٍ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَلَا فِي الْأَرْضِ وَلَا أَصْغَرُ مِنْ ذَٰلِكَ وَلَا أَكْبَرُ إِلَّا فِي كِتَابٍ مُبِينٍ\n(the All-Knower of the Unseen, not even the weight of a speck of dust or less than that or greater escapes His knowledge in the heavens or in the earth but it is in a Clear Book.) Mujahid and Qatadah said, \"Nothing is hidden or concealed from Him.\" In other words, everything is encompassed by His knowledge, and nothing is hidden from Him. Even though bones may be scattered and disintegrate, He knows where they have gone and where they have dispersed, then He will bring them back just as He created them in the first place, because He has knowledge of all things.\nThen Allah tells us of His wisdom in re-creating bodies and bringing about the Hour, as He says:\nلِيَجْزِيَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ ۚ أُولَٰئِكَ لَهُمْ مَغْفِرَةٌ وَرِزْقٌ كَرِيمٌ - وَالَّذِينَ سَعَوْا فِي آيَاتِنَا مُعَاجِزِينَ\n(That He may recompense those who believe and do righteous good deeds. Those, theirs is forgiveness and generous provision. But those who strive against Our Ayat to frustrate them) meaning, those who try to turn others away from the path of Allah and who disbelieve His Messengers,\nأُولَٰئِكَ لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ مِنْ رِجْزٍ أَلِيمٌ\n(those, for them will be a severe painful torment.) This means, He will bestow His favor upon the blessed, who are the believers, and will punish the doomed, who are the disbelievers. This is like the Ayah:\nلَا يَسْتَوِي أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ وَأَصْحَابُ الْجَنَّةِ ۚ أَصْحَابُ الْجَنَّةِ هُمُ الْفَائِزُونَ\n(Not equal are the dwellers of the Fire and the dwellers of the Paradise. It is the dwellers of Paradise that will be successful.)(59:20)\nأَمْ نَجْعَلُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ كَالْمُفْسِدِينَ فِي الْأَرْضِ أَمْ نَجْعَلُ الْمُتَّقِينَ كَالْفُجَّارِ\n(Shall We treat those who believe and do righteous good deeds like those who cause mischief on the earth? Or shall We treat those who have Taqwa as the evildoers?)(38:28)\nوَيَرَى الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْعِلْمَ الَّذِي أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْكَ مِنْ رَبِّكَ هُوَ الْحَقَّ\n(And those who have been given knowledge see that what is revealed to you from your Lord is the truth,)\nThis is another kind of wisdom, following on from the one before, which is that when those who believed in what was revealed to the Messengers see the onset of the Hour and how the righteous and the wicked will be rewarded and punished respectively, which they knew of beforehand in this world from the Books of Allah and which they are now seeing with their own eyes, they will say:\nلَقَدْ جَاءَتْ رُسُلُ رَبِّنَا بِالْحَقِّ ۖ\n(Indeed, the Messengers of our Lord did come with the truth)(7:43). And it will be said:\nهَٰذَا مَا وَعَدَ الرَّحْمَٰنُ وَصَدَقَ الْمُرْسَلُونَ\n(This is what the Most Gracious had promised, and the Messengers spoke truth!)[36:52]\nلَقَدْ لَبِثْتُمْ فِي كِتَابِ اللَّهِ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الْبَعْثِ ۖ فَهَٰذَا يَوْمُ الْبَعْثِ\n(Indeed you have stayed according to the decree of Allah, until the Day of Resurrection; so this is the Day of Resurrection)(30:56),\nوَيَرَى الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْعِلْمَ الَّذِي أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْكَ مِنْ رَبِّكَ هُوَ الْحَقَّ وَيَهْدِي إِلَىٰ صِرَاطِ الْعَزِيزِ الْحَمِيدِ\n(And those who have been given knowledge see that what is revealed to you from your Lord is the truth, and that it guides to the path of the Exalted in might, Owner of all praise.)\nThe Exalted in might is the One Who is All-Powerful, Whom none can overwhelm or resist, but He subjugates and controls all things. The Owner of All praise is the One Who, in all His words, deeds, laws and decrees, is deserving of praise, may He be glorified and exalted.","href":"/tafsir/34?verse=3","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:34:7","title":"Ibn Kathir · 34:7–9","text":"Those who disbelieve say: \"Shall we direct you to a man who will tell you (that) when you have become fully disintegrated into dust with full dispersion, then you will be created (again) anew? (7)Has he invented a lie against Allah, or is there a madness in him? Nay, but those who disbelieve in the Hereafter are (themselves) in a torment, and in far error (8)See they not what is before them and what is behind them, of the heaven and the earth? If We will, We shall sink the earth with them, or cause a piece of the heaven to fall upon them. Verily, in this is a sign for every servant who turns (to Allah) in repentance (9)\nThe Disbelievers' Denial of Life after Death, and the Refutation of Their View\nHere Allah tells us how the disbelievers and heretics denied that the Hour will come, and mocked the Messenger ﷺ for speaking of it.\nوَقَالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا هَلْ نَدُلُّكُمْ عَلَىٰ رَجُلٍ يُنَبِّئُكُمْ إِذَا مُزِّقْتُمْ كُلَّ مُمَزَّقٍ\n(Those who disbelieve say: \"Shall we direct you to a man who will tell you (that) when you have become fully disintegrated into dust with full dispersion…?\") means, when your bodies have disintegrated into the earth and dispersed without a trace,\nإِنَّكُمْ\n(then you) means, after this has happened,\nلَفِي خَلْقٍ جَدِيدٍ\n(will be created (again) anew) means, you will be restored to life and will receive provision anew. 'By telling us this, he is doing one of two things: either he is deliberately fabricating something and saying that Allah has revealed it to him, or he is not doing it deliberately, but he is deluded as crazy and insane people are.' They said:\nأَفْتَرَىٰ عَلَى اللَّهِ كَذِبًا أَمْ بِهِ جِنَّةٌ ۗ\n(Has he invented a lie against Allah, or is there a madness in him?) Allah said, refuting their words:\nبَلِ الَّذِينَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالْآخِرَةِ فِي الْعَذَابِ وَالضَّلَالِ الْبَعِيدِ\n(Nay, but those who disbelieve in the Hereafter are (themselves) in a torment, and in far error.) meaning, the matter is not as they claim or as they think; on the contrary, Muhammad ﷺ is the one who is telling the truth, and is righteous and wise; he is the one who has brought the truth, and they are the foolish and ignorant liars.\nفِي الْعَذَابِ\n(are (themselves) in a torment,) means, their disbelief, which will lead them to the torment of Allah.\nوَالضَّلَالِ الْبَعِيدِ\n(and in far error.) far from the truth in this world. Then Allah warns them of His power in the creation of heavens and earth, as He says:\nأَفَلَمْ يَرَوْا إِلَىٰ مَا بَيْنَ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَمَا خَلْفَهُمْ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ وَالْأَرْضِ ۚ\n(See they not what is before them and what is behind them, of the heaven and the earth?) meaning, wherever they go, in whatever direction, the heavens are above them and the earth is beneath them. This is like the Ayah:\nوَالسَّمَاءَ بَنَيْنَاهَا بِأَيْدٍ وَإِنَّا لَمُوسِعُونَ - وَالْأَرْضَ فَرَشْنَاهَا فَنِعْمَ الْمَاهِدُونَ\n(With Hands did We construct the heaven. Verily, We are Able to extend the vastness of space thereof. And We have spread out the earth; how Excellent Spreader (thereof) are We!)(51:47-48)\nإِنْ نَشَأْ نَخْسِفْ بِهِمُ الْأَرْضَ أَوْ نُسْقِطْ عَلَيْهِمْ كِسَفًا مِنَ السَّمَاءِ ۚ\n(If We will, We shall sink the earth with them, or cause a piece of the heaven to fall upon them.) means, 'if We wished, We could do that to them because of their wrongdoing and Our power over them, but We delay it because We are Patient and Forgiving.' Then Allah says:\nإِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً لِكُلِّ عَبْدٍ مُنِيبٍ\n(Verily, in this is a sign for every Munib servant.) Ma'mar narrating from Qatadah, said that Al-Munib means every one who repents. Sufyan narrated from Qatadah, that Al-Munib is the one who turns to Allah. This means that in looking at the creation of the heavens and the earth, there is a sign for every servant who is intelligent and wise and who turns towards Allah. There is a sign of the Allah's ability to recreate bodies and bring about the Resurrection, because the One Who was able to create these heavens – with their vast reaches of space, and this earth, as deep and vast as it is – is able to recreate bodies and revive decayed bones. This is like the Ayat:\nأَوَلَيْسَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ بِقَادِرٍ عَلَىٰ أَنْ يَخْلُقَ مِثْلَهُمْ ۚ بَلَىٰ\n(Is not He Who created the heavens and the earth, Able to create the like of them? Yes, indeed!)(36:81)\nلَخَلْقُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ أَكْبَرُ مِنْ خَلْقِ النَّاسِ وَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ\n(The creation of the heavens and the earth is indeed greater than the creation of mankind; yet, most of mankind know not.)(40:57)","href":"/tafsir/34?verse=7","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:34:10","title":"Ibn Kathir · 34:10–11","text":"And indeed We bestowed grace on Dawud from Us (saying): \"O you mountains! Glorify with him! And you birds (also)! And We made the iron soft for him. (10)Saying: \"Make you perfect coats of mail, and balance well the rings of chain armor [Sard], and work you (men) righteousness. Truly, I am All-Seer of what you do. (11)\nThe Favors which Allah bestowed upon Dawud\nHere Allah tells us how He blessed His servant and Messenger Dawud (David), peace be upon him, and what He gave him of His great bounty, giving him both prophethood and kingship, and huge numbers of troops. And he blessed him with a mighty voice. Such that when he glorified Allah, the firm, solid, high mountains joined him in glorifying Allah, and the free-roaming birds, who go out in the morning and come back in the evening, stopped for him, and he was able to speak all languages.\nIn the Sahih it is recorded that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ heard the voice of Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari, may Allah be pleased with him, reciting at night, and he stopped and listened to his recitation, then he said:\nلَقَدْ أُوتِيَ هٰذَا مِزْمَارًا مِنْ مَزَامِيرِ آلِ دَاوُدَ\n(This man has been given one of the sweet melodious voices of the Prophet Dawud.) Abu 'Uthman An-Nahdi said, \"I never heard any cymbal, stringed instrument or chord that was more beautiful than the voice of Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari, may Allah be pleased with him.\"\nأَوِّبِي\n(Glorify) means, glorify Allah. This was the view of Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid and others. The root of this word [Ta'wib] means to repeat or respond, so the mountains and birds were commanded to repeat after him.\nوَأَلَنَّا لَهُ الْحَدِيدَ\n(And We made the iron soft for him.) Al-Hasan Al-Basri, Qatadah, Al-A'mash and others said, \"He did not need to heat it in the fire or beat it with a hammer; he could simply twist it in his hands, like a thread.\" Allah said:\nأَنِ اعْمَلْ سَابِغَاتٍ\n(Saying: \"Make you perfect coats of mail...\"), which means chain mail. Qatadah said, \"He was the first person ever to make chain mail; before that, they used to wear plated armor.\"\nوَقَدِّرْ فِي السَّرْدِ\n(and balance well the rings of chain armor [Sard],) This is how Allah taught His Prophet Dawud, peace be upon him, to make coats of mail. Mujahid said concerning the Ayah:\nوَقَدِّرْ فِي السَّرْدِ\n(and balance well the rings of chain armor [Sard],) \"Do not make the rivets too loose that the rings (of chain mail) will shake, or make them too tight that they will not be able to move at all, but make it just right.\" 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that 'Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Sard refers to a ring of iron.\" Some of them said, \"Chain mail is called Masrud if it is held together with rivets.\"\nوَاعْمَلُوا صَالِحًا ۖ\nand work you (men) righteousness. means, with regard to what Allah has given you of blessings.\nإِنِّي بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ بَصِيرٌ\n(Truly, I am All-Seer of what you do.) means, watching you and seeing all that you do and say; nothing of that is hidden at all.","href":"/tafsir/34?verse=10","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:34:12","title":"Ibn Kathir · 34:12–13","text":"And to Sulayman (We subjected) the wind, its morning was a month's (journey), and its afternoon was a month's (journey). And We caused a fount of Qitr to flow for him, and there were Jinn that worked in front of him, by the leave of his Lord. And whosoever of them turned aside from Our command, We shall cause him to taste of the torment of the blazing Fire (12)They worked for him as he desired on Maharib, Tamathil, large basins like Jawab and Qudur Rasiyat. \"Work you, O family of Dawud, with thanks!\" But few of My servants are grateful (13)\nThe Favors which Allah bestowed upon Sulayman\nHaving mentioned the blessings with which He favored Dawud, Allah follows this by mentioning what He gave to Dawud's son Sulayman (Solomon), may peace be upon them both. He subjugated the wind to him, so that it would carry his carpet one way for a month, then back again the next month. Al-Hasan Al-Basri said, \"He set out from Damascus in the morning, landed in Istakhar where he ate a meal, then flew on from Istakhar and spent the night in Kabil.\" Between Damascus and Istakhar is an entire month's travel for a swift rider, and between Istakhar and Kabul is an entire month's travel for a swift rider.\nوَأَسَلْنَا لَهُ عَيْنَ الْقِطْرِ ۖ\n(And We caused a fount Qitr to flow for him,) Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be plased with him, Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, 'Ata' Al-Khurasani, Qatadah, As-Suddi, Malik from Zayd bin Aslam, 'Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam and others said, \"Qitr means copper.\" Qatadah said, \"It was in Yemen.\" Allah brought forth all the things that people make for Sulayman, peace be upon him.\nوَمِنَ الْجِنِّ مَنْ يَعْمَلُ بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ بِإِذْنِ رَبِّهِ ۖ\n(and there were Jinn that worked in front of him, by the leave of his Lord.) means, 'We subjugated the Jinn to work in front of him,' by the permission of his Lord, i.e., by Allah's decree and subjugation, they built whatever constructions he wanted, and did other work as well.\nوَمَنْ يَزِغْ مِنْهُمْ عَنْ أَمْرِنَا\n(And whosoever of them turned aside from Our command,) means, whoever among them tried to rebel and disobey,\nنُذِقْهُ مِنْ عَذَابِ السَّعِيرِ\n(We shall cause him to taste of the torment of the blazing Fire.) which means, burning.\nيَعْمَلُونَ لَهُ مَا يَشَاءُ مِنْ مَحَارِيبَ وَتَمَاثِيلَ\n(They worked for him as he desired on Maharib, Tamathil,) Maharib refers to beautiful structures, the best and innermost part of a dwelling. Ibn Zayd said, \"This means dwellings.\" With regard to \"Tamathil,\" 'Atiyah Al-'Awfi, Ad-Dahhak and As-Suddi said that Tamathil means pictures.\nوَجِفَانٍ كَالْجَوَابِ وَقُدُورٍ رَاسِيَاتٍ\n(large basins like Jawab and Qudur Rasiyat.) Jawab, the plural form of Jabiyah, refers to cisterns or tanks in which water is held, and Qudur Rasiyat are cauldrons that stay in one place and are not moved around because of their great size. This was the view of Mujahid, Ad-Dahhak and others.\nاعْمَلُوا آلَ دَاوُودَ شُكْرًا ۚ\n(Work you, O family of Dawud, with thanks!) means, 'We said to them: Work with thanks for the blessings that We have bestowed upon you in this world and the Hereafter.' This indicates that thanks may be expressed by actions as much as by words and intentions.\nAbu 'Abdur-Rahman Al-Hubuli said, \"Prayer is thanks, fasting is thanks, every good deed that you do for the sake of Allah is thanks, and the best of thanks is praise.\" This was recorded by Ibn Jarir. In the Two Sahihs, it is reported that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nإِنَّ أَحَبَّ الصَّلَاةِ إِلَى اللهِ تَعَالَىٰ صَلَاةُ دَاوُدَ، كَانَ يَنَامُ نِصْفَ اللَّيْلِ، وَيَقُومُ ثُلُثَهُ، وَيَنَامُ سُدُسَهُ، وَأَحَبَّ الصِّيَامِ إِلَى اللهِ تَعَالَىٰ صِيَامُ دَاوُدَ، كَانَ يَصُومُ يَوْمًا وَيُفْطِرُ يَوْمًا، وَلَا يَفِرُّ إِذَا لَاقَى\n(The most beloved of prayer to Allah is the prayer of Dawud. He used to sleep for half the night, stand in prayer for a third of it and sleep for a sixth of it. The most beloved of fasting to Allah is the fasting of Dawud. He used to fast for a day then not fast for a day, and he never fled the battlefield.)\nIbn Abi Hatim narrated that Fudayl said concerning the Ayah:\nاعْمَلُوا آلَ دَاوُودَ شُكْرًا ۚ\n(Work you, O family of Dawud, with thanks!) Dawud said, \"O Lord! How can I thank you when thanks itself is a blessing from You?\" He said: \"Now you have truly given thanks to Me, for you have realized that it is a blessing from Me.\"\nوَقَلِيلٌ مِنْ عِبَادِيَ الشَّكُورُ\nBut few of My servants are grateful. This is a reflection of reality.","href":"/tafsir/34?verse=12","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:34:14","title":"Ibn Kathir · 34:14","text":"Then when We decreed death for him, nothing informed them (Jinn) of his death except a little worm of the earth which kept (slowly) gnawing away at his stick. So when he fell down, the Jinn saw clearly that if they had known the Unseen, they would not have stayed in the humiliating torment (14)\nThe Death of Sulayman\nAllah tells us how Sulayman, peace be upon him, died and how Allah concealed his death from the Jinn who were subjugated to him to do hard labor. He remained leaning on his stick, which was his staff, as Ibn 'Abbas may Allah be pleased with him, Mujahid, Al-Hasan, Qatadah and others said. He stayed like that for a long time, nearly a year. When a creature of the earth, which was a kind of worm, ate through the stick, it became weak and fell to the ground. Then it became apparent that he had died a long time before. It also became clear to Jinn and men alike that the Jinn do not know the Unseen as they (the Jinn) used to imagine and tried to deceive people. This is what Allah says:\nمَا دَلَّهُمْ عَلَىٰ مَوْتِهِ إِلَّا دَابَّةُ الْأَرْضِ تَأْكُلُ مِنْسَأَتَهُ ۖ فَلَمَّا خَرَّ تَبَيَّنَتِ الْجِنُّ أَنْ لَوْ كَانُوا يَعْلَمُونَ الْغَيْبَ مَا لَبِثُوا فِي الْعَذَابِ الْمُهِينِ\n(nothing informed them (Jinn) of his death except a little worm of the earth which kept (slowly) gnawing away at his stick. So when he fell down, the Jinn saw clearly that if they had known the Unseen, they would not have stayed in the humiliating torment.) meaning, it became clear to the people that they (the Jinn) were lying.","href":"/tafsir/34?verse=14","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:34:15","title":"Ibn Kathir · 34:15–17","text":"Indeed there was for Saba' a sign in their dwelling place – two gardens on the right and on the left; (and it was said to them:) \"Eat of the provision of your Lord, and be grateful to Him.\" A fair land and an Oft-Forgiving Lord (15)But they turned away, so We sent against them flood released from the dam, and We converted their two gardens into gardens producing bitter bad fruit, and Athl, and some few lote trees (16)Like this We requited them because they were ungrateful disbelievers. And never do We requite in such a way except those who are ungrateful (disbelievers)(17)\nThe Disbelief of Saba' (Sheba) and Their Punishment\nSaba' refers to the kings and people of the Yemen. At-Tababa'ah (Tubba')[surname of the ancient kings of Yemen] were part of them, and Bilqis, the queen who met Sulayman, peace be upon him, was also one of them. They lived a life of enviable luxury in their land with plentiful provision, crops and fruits. Allah sent them messengers telling them to eat of His provision and give thanks to Him by worshipping Him alone, and they followed that for as long as Allah willed, then they turned away from that which they had been commanded to do. So they were punished with a flood which scattered them throughout the lands around Saba' in all directions, as we will see in detail below, if Allah wills. In Him we put our trust.\nIbn Jarir recorded that Farwah bin Musayk Al-Ghutayfi, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"A man said, 'O Messenger of Allah! Tell me about Saba' – what was it, a land or a woman?' He ﷺ said:\nلَيْسَ بِأَرْضٍ وَلَا امْرَأَةٍ، وَلَكِنَّهُ رَجُلٌ وُلِدَ لَهُ عَشَرَةٌ مِنَ الْوَلَدِ، فَتَيَامَنَ سِتَّةٌ وَتَشَاءَمَ أَرْبَعَةٌ، فَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ تَشَاءَمُوا: فَلَخْمٌ وَجُذَامٌ وَعَامِلَةُ وَغَسَّانُ، وَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ تَيَامَنُوا: فَكِنْدَةُ وَالْأَشْعَرِيُّونَ وَالْأَزْدُ وَمَذْحِجٌ وَحِمْيَرُ وَأَنْمَارُ\n(It was neither a land nor a woman. It was a man who had ten children, six of whom went Yemen and four of whom went Ash-Sham. Those who went Ash-Sham were Lakhm, Judham, 'Amilah and Ghassan. Those who went south were Kindah, Al-Ash'ariyyun, Al-Azd, Madhhij, Himyar and Anmar.) A man asked, 'Who are Anmar?' He ﷺ said:\nالَّذِينَ مِنْهُمْ خَثْعَمُ وَبَجِيلَةُ\n(Those among whom are Khath'am and Bajilah.)\"\nThis was recorded by At-Tirmidhi in his Jami' [Sunan] in more detail than this; then he said, \"This is a Hasan Gharib Hadith.\"\nThe genealogists – including Muhammad bin Ishaq – said, \"The name of Saba' was 'Abd Shams bin Yashjub bin Ya'rub bin Qahtan; he was called Saba' because he was the first Arab tribe to disperse. He was also known as Ar-Ra'ish, because he was the first one to take booty in war and give it to his people, so he was called Ar-Ra'ish; because the Arabs call wealth Rish or Riyash.\nThey differ over Qahtan, about whom there were three views. (The first) he descended from the line of Iram bin Sam bin Nuh, then there were three different views over how he descended from him. (The second) was that he was descended from 'Abir, another name for Hud, peace be upon him, then there were also three different views over exactly how he descended from him. (The third) was that he was descended from Isma'il bin Ibrahim Al-Khalil, peace be upon him, then there were also three different views over exactly how he descended from him. This was discussed in full detail by Imam Al-Hafiz Abu 'Umar bin 'Abdul-Barr An-Namari, may Allah have mercy on him, in his book Al-Musamma Al-Inbah 'Ala Dhikr Usul Al-Qaba'il Ar-Ruwat.\nThe meaning of the Prophet's words,\nكَانَ رَجُلًا مِنَ الْعَرَبِ\n(He was a man among the Arabs.) means that he was one of the original Arabs, who were before Ibrahim, peace be upon him, and were descendants of Sam bin Nuh (Shem, the son of Noah). According to the third view mentioned above, he descended from Ibrahim, peace be upon him, but this was not a well-known view among them. And Allah knows best. But in Sahih Al-Bukhari, it is reported that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ passed by a group of people from (the tribe of) Aslam who were practicing archery, and he said,\nارْمُوا بَنِي إِسْمَاعِيلَ فَإِنَّ أَبَاكُمْ كَانَ رَامِيًا\n(Shoot, O sons of Isma'il, for your father was an archer.) Aslam was a tribe of the Ansar, and the Ansar – both Aws and Khazraj – were from Ghassan, from the Arabs of Yemen from Saba', who settled in Yathrib when Saba' was scattered throughout the land when Allah sent against them the flood released from the dam. A group of them also settled in Syria, and they were called Ghassan for the name of the water beside which they camped – it was said that it was in the Yemen, or that it was near Al-Mushallal, as Hassan bin Thabit, may Allah be pleased with him, said in one of his poems. The meaning of his words: \"If you ask, then we are the community of the noble descendants, our lineage is Al-Azd and our water is Ghassan.\"\nوُلِدَ لَهُ عَشْرَةٌ مِنَ الْعَرَبِ\n(He had ten sons among the Arabs.) means that these ten were of his lineage, and that the origins of the Arab tribes of the Yemen go back to him, not that they were his sons born of his loins. There may have been two or three generations between him and some of them, or more or less, as is explained in detail in the books of genealogy. The meaning of the words,\nفَتَيَامَنَ مِنْهُمْ سِتَّةٌ وَتَشَاءَمَ مِنْهُمْ أَرْبَعَةٌ\n(Six of whom went south and four of whom went north.) is that after Allah sent against them the flood released from the dam, some of them stayed in their homeland, whilst others left to go elsewhere.\nThe Dam of Ma'arib and the Flood\nThe story of the dam is about the water which used to come to them from between two mountains, combined with the floods from rainfall and their valleys. Their ancient kings built a huge, strong dam and the water reached a high level between these two mountains. Then they planted trees and got the best fruits that could ever be harvested, plentiful and beautiful. A number of the Salaf, including Qatadah, mentioned that a woman could walk beneath the trees, carrying a basket or vessel – such as is used for gathering fruit – on her head. And that the fruit would fall from the trees and fill the basket without any need for her to make the effort to pick the fruit, because it was so plentiful and ripe.\nThis was the dam of Ma'arib, a land between which and San'a' was a journey of three days. Others said that in their land there were no flies, mosquitoes or fleas, or any kind of vermin. This was because the weather was good and the people were healthy, and Allah took care of them so that they would single out and worship Him alone, as He says:\nلَقَدْ كَانَ لِسَبَإٍ فِي مَسْكَنِهِمْ آيَةٌ ۖ\n(Indeed there was for Saba' (Sheba) a sign in their dwelling place) Then He explains this by saying:\nجَنَّتَانِ عَنْ يَمِينٍ وَشِمَالٍ ۖ\n(two gardens on the right and on the left;) meaning, the two sides where the mountains were, and their land was in between them.\nكُلُوا مِنْ رِزْقِ رَبِّكُمْ وَاشْكُرُوا لَهُ ۚ بَلْدَةٌ طَيِّبَةٌ وَرَبٌّ غَفُورٌ\n((and it was said to them: ) \"Eat of the provision of your Lord, and be grateful to Him.\" A fair land and an Oft-Forgiving Lord!) means, 'He would forgive you if you continue to worship Him alone.'\nفَأَعْرَضُوا\n(But they turned away,) means, from worshipping Allah alone and from giving thanks to Him for the blessings that He had bestowed upon them, and they started to worship the sun instead of Allah, as the hoopoe told Sulayman, peace be upon him:\nوَجِئْتُكَ مِنْ سَبَإٍ بِنَبَإٍ يَقِينٍ - إِنِّي وَجَدْتُ امْرَأَةً تَمْلِكُهُمْ وَأُوتِيَتْ مِنْ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ وَلَهَا عَرْشٌ عَظِيمٌ - وَجَدْتُهَا وَقَوْمَهَا يَسْجُدُونَ لِلشَّمْسِ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ وَزَيَّنَ لَهُمُ الشَّيْطَانُ أَعْمَالَهُمْ فَصَدَّهُمْ عَنِ السَّبِيلِ فَهُمْ لَا يَهْتَدُونَ\n(\"I have come to you from Saba' (Sheba) with true news. I found a woman ruling over them, she has been given all things, and she has a great throne. I found her and her people worshipping the sun instead of Allah, and Shaytan has made their deeds fair seeming to them, and has barred them from the way, so they have no guidance.\")(27:22-24)\nفَأَرْسَلْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ سَيْلَ الْعَرِمِ\n(so We sent against them flood released from the dam,) Some, including Ibn 'Abbas, Wahb bin Munabbih, Qatadah and Ad-Dahhak said that when Allah wanted to punish them by sending the flood upon them, he sent beasts from the earth to the dam, large rats, which made a hole in it. Wahb bin Munabbih said, \"They found it written in their Scriptures that the dam would be destroyed because of these large rats. So they brought cats for a while, but when the decree came to pass, the rats overran the cats and went into the dam, making a hole in it, and it collapsed.\" Qatadah and others said, \"The large rat is the desert rat. They gnawed at the bottom of the dam until it became weak, then the time of the floods came and the waters hit the structure and it collapsed. The waters rushed through the bottom of the valley and destroyed everything in their path – buildings, trees, etc.\"\nAs the water drained from the trees that were on the mountains, to the right and the left, those trees dried up and were destroyed. Those beautiful, fruit-bearing trees were replaced with something altogether different, as Allah says:\nوَبَدَّلْنَاهُمْ بِجَنَّتَيْهِمْ جَنَّتَيْنِ ذَوَاتَيْ أُكُلٍ خَمْطٍ\n(and We converted their two gardens into gardens producing bitter bad fruit (ukul khamt),) Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, 'Ata' Al-Khurasani, Qatadah and As-Suddi said, \"It refers to Arak (Zingiber officinale) and bitter bad fruit.\"\nوَأَثْلٍ\n(and Athl,) Al-Awfi and Ibn Abbas said that this means tamarisk. Others said that it means a tree that resembles a tamarisk, and it was said that it was the gum acacia or mimosa. And Allah knows best.\nوَشَيْءٍ مِنْ سِدْرٍ قَلِيلٍ\nand some few lote trees. Because the lote trees were the best of the trees with which the garden was replaced, there were only a few of them.\nوَشَيْءٍ مِنْ سِدْرٍ قَلِيلٍ\nand some few lote trees. This is what happened to those two gardens after they had been so fruitful and productive, offering beautiful scenes, deep shade and flowing rivers: they were replaced with thorny trees, tamarisks and lote trees with huge thorns and little fruit. This was because of their disbelief and their sin of associating others with Allah, and because they denied the truth and turned towards falsehood. Allah said:\nذَٰلِكَ جَزَيْنَاهُمْ بِمَا كَفَرُوا ۖ وَهَلْ نُجَازِي إِلَّا الْكَفُورَ\n(Like this We requited them because they were ungrateful disbelievers. And never do We requite in such a way except those who are ungrateful.) meaning, 'We punished them for their disbelief.' Mujahid said, \"He does not punish anyone except the disbelievers.\"\nAl-Hasan Al-Basri said, \"Allah the Almighty has spoken the truth: no one will be punished in a manner that befits the sin except the ungrateful disbelievers.\"","href":"/tafsir/34?verse=15","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:34:18","title":"Ibn Kathir · 34:18–19","text":"And We placed, between them and the towns which We had blessed, towns easy to be seen, and We made the stages (of journey) between them easy (saying): \"Travel in them safely both by night and day. (18)But they said: \"Our Lord! Make the stages between our journey longer,\" and they wronged themselves; so We made them as tales (in the land), and We dispersed them all totally. Verily, in this are indeed signs for every steadfast, grateful (person)(19)\nThe Trade of Saba' and Their Destruction\nAllah tells us about the blessings which the people of Saba' enjoyed, and the luxuries and plentiful provision which was theirs in their land, with its secure dwellings and towns which were joined to one another, with many trees, crops and fruits. When they traveled, they had no need to carry provisions or water with them; wherever they stopped, they would find water and fruits, so they could take their noontime rest in one town, and stay overnight in another, according to their needs on their journey. Allah says:\nوَجَعَلْنَا بَيْنَهُمْ وَبَيْنَ الْقُرَى الَّتِي بَارَكْنَا فِيهَا\n(And We placed, between them and the towns which We had blessed,) Mujahid, Al-Hasan, Sa'id bin Jubayr and Malik, who narrated it from Zayd bin Aslam, and Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak, As-Suddi, Ibn Zayd and others – all said that this means the towns of Syria. It means they used to travel from Yemen to Syria via towns easy to be seen and connected to one another. Al-'Awfi reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"The towns which We had blessed by putting Jerusalem among them.\"\nقُرًى ظَاهِرَةً\ntowns easy to be seen, meaning, clear and visible, known to travelers, so they could take their noontime rest in one town and stay overnight in another. Allah says:\nوَقَدَّرْنَا فِيهَا السَّيْرَ\n(and We made the stages (of journey) between them easy) meaning, 'We made it in a way that met the needs of the travelers.'\nسِيرُوا فِيهَا لَيَالِيَ وَأَيَّامًا آمِنِينَ\n(Travel in them safely both by night and day.) means, those who travel in them will be safe both by night and by day.\nفَقَالُوا رَبَّنَا بَاعِدْ بَيْنَ أَسْفَارِنَا وَظَلَمُوا أَنْفُسَهُمْ\n(But they said: \"Our Lord! Make the stages between our journey longer,\" and they wronged themselves;) They failed to appreciate this blessing, as Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, Al-Hasan and others said: \"They wanted to travel long distances through empty wilderness where they would need to carry provisions with them and would have to travel through intense heat in a state of fear.\"\nفَجَعَلْنَاهُمْ أَحَادِيثَ وَمَزَّقْنَاهُمْ كُلَّ مُمَزَّقٍ\n(so We made them as tales (in the land), and We dispersed them all totally.) means, 'We made them something for people to talk about when they converse in the evening, how Allah plotted against them and dispersed them after they had been together living a life of luxury, and they were scattered here and there throughout the land.' So, the Arabs say of a people when they are dispersed, \"They have been scattered like Saba',\" in all directions.\nإِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِكُلِّ صَبَّارٍ شَكُورٍ\n(Verily, in this are indeed signs for every steadfast, grateful.) In the punishment which these people suffered, the way in which their blessings and good health were turned into vengeance for their disbelief and sins, is a lesson and an indication for every person who is steadfast in the face of adversity and grateful for blessings. Imam Ahmad recorded that Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nعَجِبْتُ مِنْ قَضَاءِ اللهِ تَعَالَى لِلْمُؤْمِنِ إِنْ أَصَابَهُ خَيْرٌ حَمِدَ رَبَّهُ وَشَكَرَ، وَإِنْ أَصَابَتْهُ مُصِيبَةٌ حَمِدَ رَبَّهُ وَصَبَرَ، يُؤْجَرُ الْمُؤْمِنُ فِي كُلِّ شَيْءٍ حتّٰى فِي اللُّقْمَةِ يَرْفَعُهَا إِلَى فِي امْرَأَتِهِ\n(I am amazed at what Allah has decreed for the believer; if something good befalls him, He praises his Lord and gives thanks, and if something bad befalls him, he praises his Lord and has patience. The believer will be rewarded for everything, even the morsel of food which he lifts to his wife's mouth.)\"\nThis was also recorded by An-Nasa'i in Al-Yawm wal-Laylah. There is a corroborating report in the Two Sahihs, where a Hadith narrated by Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, says:\nعَجَبًا لِلْمُؤْمِنِ لَا يَقْضِي اللهُ تَعَالَى لَهُ قَضَاءً إِلَّا كَانَ خَيْرًا لَهُ، إِنْ أَصَابَتْهُ سَرَّاءُ شَكَرَ فَكَانَ خَيْرًا لَهُ، وَإِنْ أَصَابَتْهُ ضَرَّاءُ صَبَرَ فَكَانَ خَيْرًا لَهُ، وَلَيْسَ ذَلِكَ لِأَحَدٍ إِلَّا لِلْمُؤْمِنِ\n(How amazing is the affair of the believer! Allah does not decree anything for him but it is good for him. If something good happens to him, he gives thanks, and that is good for him; if something bad happens to him, he bears it with patience, and that is good for him. This is not for anyone except the believer.)\" It was reported that Qatadah said:\nإِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِكُلِّ صَبَّارٍ شَكُورٍ\n(Verily, in this are indeed signs for every steadfast, grateful.) It was Mutarrif who used to say: \"How blessed is the grateful, patient servant. If he is given something, he gives thanks, and if he is tested, he bears it with patience.\"","href":"/tafsir/34?verse=18","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:34:20","title":"Ibn Kathir · 34:20–21","text":"And indeed Iblis did prove true his thought about them, and they followed him, all except a group of true believers (20)And he had no authority over them, – except that We might test him who believes in the Hereafter, from him who is in doubt about it. And your Lord is Watchful over everything (21)\nHow Iblis' thought about the Disbeliever proved True\nHaving mentioned Saba' and how they followed their desires, and the Shaytan, Allah tells us about their counterparts among those who follow Iblis and their own desires, and who go against wisdom and true guidance. Allah says:\nوَلَقَدْ صَدَّقَ عَلَيْهِمْ إِبْلِيسُ ظَنَّهُ\n(And indeed Iblis did prove true his thought about them,) Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, and others said that this Ayah is like the Ayah where Allah tells us about how Iblis refused to prostrate to Adam, peace be upon him, then said:\nأَرَأَيْتَكَ هَٰذَا الَّذِي كَرَّمْتَ عَلَيَّ لَئِنْ أَخَّرْتَنِ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ لَأَحْتَنِكَنَّ ذُرِّيَّتَهُ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا\n(See this one whom You have honored above me, if You give me respite to the Day of Resurrection, I will surely seize and mislead his offspring all but a few!)(17:62)\nثُمَّ لَآتِيَنَّهُمْ مِنْ بَيْنِ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَمِنْ خَلْفِهِمْ وَعَنْ أَيْمَانِهِمْ وَعَنْ شَمَائِلِهِمْ ۖ وَلَا تَجِدُ أَكْثَرَهُمْ شَاكِرِينَ\n(Then I will come to them from before them and behind them, from their right and from their left, and You will not find most of them as thankful ones.)(7:17) And there are many Ayat which refer to this matter.\nوَمَا كَانَ لَهُ عَلَيْهِمْ مِنْ سُلْطَانٍ\n(And he (Iblis) had no authority over them,) Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him said, \"This means, he had no proof.\"\nإِلَّا لِنَعْلَمَ مَنْ يُؤْمِنُ بِالْآخِرَةِ مِمَّنْ هُوَ مِنْهَا فِي شَكٍّ\n(except that We might test him who believes in the Hereafter, from him who is in doubt about it.) means, 'We gave him power over them only to show who believes in the Hereafter and that it will come to pass.' The people will be brought to account and rewarded or punished accordingly, so that he will worship his Lord properly in this world – and to distinguish these believers from those who are in doubt about the Hereafter.\nوَرَبُّكَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ حَفِيظٌ\n(And your Lord is a Watchful over everything.) means, despite His watching, those who follow Iblis go astray, but by His watching and care, the believers who follow the Messengers are saved.","href":"/tafsir/34?verse=20","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:34:22","title":"Ibn Kathir · 34:22–23","text":"Say: \"Call upon those whom you assert besides Allah, they possess not even the weight of a speck of dust, either in the heavens or on the earth, nor have they any share in either, nor there is for Him any supporter from among them. (22)Intercession with Him profits not except for him whom He permits. So much so that when fear is banished from their hearts, they say: \"What is it that your Lord has said?\" They say the truth. And He is the Most High, the Most Great (23)\nThe Helplessness of the gods of the Idolators\nHere Allah states clearly that He is the One and Only God, the Self-Sufficient Master, Who has no peer or partner; He is independent in His command and there is no one who can share or dispute with Him in that, or overturn His command. So, He says:\nقُلِ ادْعُوا الَّذِينَ زَعَمْتُمْ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ ۖ\n(Say: \"Call upon those whom you assert besides Allah...\") meaning, the gods who are worshipped besides Allah.\nلَا يَمْلِكُونَ مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَلَا فِي الْأَرْضِ\n(they possess not even the weight of a speck of dust, either in the heavens or on the earth,) This is like the Ayah:\nوَالَّذِينَ تَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِهِ مَا يَمْلِكُونَ مِنْ قِطْمِيرٍ\n(And those, whom you invoke or call upon instead of Him, own not even a Qitmir)(35:13).\nوَمَا لَهُمْ فِيهِمَا مِنْ شِرْكٍ\n(nor have they any share in either,) means, they do not possess anything, either independently or as partners.\nوَمَا لَهُ مِنْهُمْ مِنْ ظَهِيرٍ\n(nor there is for Him any supporter from among them.) means, nor does Allah have among these rivals any whose support He seeks in any matter; on the contrary, all of creation is in need of Him and is enslaved by Him. Then Allah says:\nوَلَا تَنْفَعُ الشَّفَاعَةُ عِنْدَهُ إِلَّا لِمَنْ أَذِنَ لَهُ ۚ\n(Intercession with Him profits not except for him whom He permits.) meaning, because of His might, majesty and pride, no one would dare to intercede with Him in any matter, except after being granted His permission to intercede. As Allah says:\nمَنْ ذَا الَّذِي يَشْفَعُ عِنْدَهُ إِلَّا بِإِذْنِهِ ۚ\n(Who is he that can intercede with Him except with His permission?)(2:255),\nوَكَمْ مِنْ مَلَكٍ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ لَا تُغْنِي شَفَاعَتُهُمْ شَيْئًا إِلَّا مِنْ بَعْدِ أَنْ يَأْذَنَ اللَّهُ لِمَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَرْضَىٰ\n(And there are many angels in the heavens, whose intercession will avail nothing except after Allah has given leave for whom He wills and is pleased with.)(53:26)\nوَلَا يَشْفَعُونَ إِلَّا لِمَنِ ارْتَضَىٰ وَهُمْ مِنْ خَشْيَتِهِ مُشْفِقُونَ\n(and they cannot intercede except for him with whom He is pleased. And they stand in awe for fear of Him)(21:28). It was reported in the Two Sahihs through more than one chain of narration that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, who is the leader of the sons of Adam and the greatest intercessor before Allah, will go to stand in Al-Maqam Al-Mahmud (the praised position) to intercede for all of mankind when their Lord comes to pass judgement upon them. He ﷺ said:\nفَأَسْجُدُ للهِ تَعَالَى فَيَدَعُنِي مَا شاءَ اللهُ أَنْ يَدَعَنِي، وَيَفْتَحُ عَلَيَّ بِمَحَامِدَ لَا أُحْصِيهَا الْآنَ، ثُمَّ يُقَالُ: يَامُحَمَّدُ! ارْفَعْ رَأْسَكَ وَقُلْ تُسْمَعْ، وَسَلْ تُعْطَهُ، وَاشْفَعْ تُشَفَّعْ\n(Then I will prostrate to Allah, may He be exalted, and He will leave me (in that position), as long as Allah wills, and He will inspire me to speak words of praise which I cannot mention now. Then it will be said, \"O Muhammad, raise your head. Speak, you will be heard; ask, you will be given; intercede, your intercession will be accepted...\")\nحَتَّىٰ إِذَا فُزِّعَ عَنْ قُلُوبِهِمْ قَالُوا مَاذَا قَالَ رَبُّكُمْ ۖ قَالُوا الْحَقَّ ۖ\n(So much so that when fear is banished from their hearts, they say: \"What is it that your Lord has said?\" They say the truth.) This also refers to the great degree of His might and power. When He speaks words of revelation, the inhabitants of the heavens hear what He says, and they tremble with fear (of Allah) so much that they swoon. This was the view of Ibn Mas'ud, may Allah be pleased with him, Masruq and others.\nحَتَّىٰ إِذَا فُزِّعَ عَنْ قُلُوبِهِمْ\n(So much so that when fear is banished from their hearts,) means, when the fear leaves their hearts. Ibn 'Abbas, Ibn 'Umar, Abu 'Abdur-Rahman As-Sulami, Ash-Sha'bi, Ibrahim An-Nakha'i, Ad-Dhahhak, Al-Hasan and Qatadah said concerning the Ayah,\nحَتَّىٰ إِذَا فُزِّعَ عَنْ قُلُوبِهِمْ قَالُوا مَاذَا قَالَ رَبُّكُمْ ۖ قَالُوا الْحَقَّ ۖ\n(So much so that when fear is banished from their hearts, they say: \"What is it that your Lord has said?\" They say the truth.)\n\"When the fear is lifted from their hearts.\" When this happens, some of them say to others, \"What did your Lord say?\" Those (angels) who are carrying the Throne tell those who are next to them, then they in turn pass it on to those who are next to them, and so on, until the news reaches the inhabitants of the lowest heaven. Allah says,\nقَالُوا الْحَقَّ ۖ\nThey say the truth. meaning, they report what He said, without adding or taking away anything.\nوَهُوَ الْعَلِيُّ الْكَبِيرُ\n(And He is the Most High, the Most Great.) In his Tafsir of this Ayah in his Sahih, Al-Bukhari recorded that Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him said, \"The Prophet of Allah ﷺ said:\nإِذَا قَضَى اللهُ تَعَالَى الْأَمْرَ فِي السَّمَاءِ ضَرَبَتِ الْمَلَائِكَةُ بِأَجْنِحَتِهَا خُضْعَانًا لِقَوْلِهِ،كَأَنَّهُ سِلْسِلَةٌ عَلَىٰ صَفْوَانٍ، فَإِذَا فُزِّعَ عَنْ قُلُوبِهِمْ قَالُوا: مَاذَا قَالَ رَبُّكُمْ؟ قَالُوا لِلَّذِي قَالَ: الْحَقَّ، وَهُوَ الْعَلِيُّ الْكَبِيرُ، فَيَسْمَعُهَا مُسْتَرِقُ السَّمْعِ، وَمُسْتَرِقُ السَّمْعِ هَكَذَا بَعْضُهُ فَوْقَ بَعْضٍ - وَوَصَفَ سُفْيَانُ بِيَدِهِ فَحَرَّفَهَا، وَنَشَرَ بَيْنَ أَصَابِعِهِ - فَيَسْمَعُ الْكَلِمَةَ فَيُلْقِيهَا إِلَى مَنْ تَحْتَهُ، ثُمَّ يُلْقِيهَا الْآخَرُ إِلَى مَنْ تَحْتَهُ، حتّٰى يُلْقِيَهَا عَلَى لِسَانِ السَّاحِرِ أَوِ الْكَاهِنِ، فَرُبَّمَا أَدْرَكَهُ الشِّهَابُ قَبْلَ أَنْ يُلْقِيَهَا، وَرُبَّمَا أَلْقَاهَا قَبْلَ أَنْ يُدْرِكَهُ، فَيَكْذِبُ مَعَهَا مِائَةَ كَذْبَةٍ فَيُقَالُ: أَلَيْسَ قَدْ قَالَ لَنَا يَوْمَ كَذَا وَكَذَا، كَذَا وَكَذَا؟ فَيُصَدَّقُ بِتِلْكَ الْكَلِمَةِ الَّتِي سُمِعَتْ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ\n(When Allah decrees a matter in heaven, the angels beat their wings in submission to His Words, making a sound like a chain striking a smooth rock. When the fear is banished from their hearts, they say, \"What is it that your Lord has said?\" They say the truth, and He is the Most High, the Most Great. Then the one who is listening out hears that, and those who are listening out are standing one above the other) – Sufyan [one of the narrators] demonstrated with his hand, holding it vertically with the fingers outspread. (So he hears what is said and passes it on to the one below him, and that one passes it to the one who is below him, and so on until it reaches the lips of the soothsayer or fortune-teller. Maybe a meteor will hit him before he can pass anything on, or maybe he will pass it on before he is hit. He tells a hundred lies alongside it, but it will be said, \"Did he not tell us that on such and such a day, such and such would happen?\" So they believe him because of the one thing which was heard from heaven.)\"\nThis was recorded by Al-Bukhari, not by Muslim. Abu Dawud, At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah also recorded it. And Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/34?verse=22","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:34:24","title":"Ibn Kathir · 34:24–27","text":"Say: \"Who gives you provision from the heavens and the earth?\" Say: \"Allah. And verily, (either) we or you are rightly guided or in plain error. (24)Say: \"You will not be asked about our sins, nor shall we be asked of what you do. (25)Say: \"Our Lord will assemble us all together, then He will judge between us with truth. And He is the Just Judge, the All-Knower of the true state of affairs. (26)Say: \"Show me those whom you have joined with Him as partners. Nay! But He is Allah, the Almighty, the All-Wise. (27)\nAllah has no partner in anything whatsoever\nAllah tells us that He is unique in His power of creation and His giving of provision, and that He is unique in His divinity also. As they used to admit that no one in heaven or on earth except Allah gave them provision, i.e., by sending down water and causing crops to grow, so they should also realize that there is no god worthy of worship besides Him.\nوَإِنَّا أَوْ إِيَّاكُمْ لَعَلَىٰ هُدًى أَوْ فِي ضَلَالٍ مُبِينٍ\n(And verily, (either) we or you are rightly guided or in plain error.) 'One of the two sides must be speaking falsehood, and one must be telling the truth. There is no way that you and we could both be following true guidance, or could both be misguided. Only one of us can be correct, and we have produced the proof of Tawhid which indicates that your Shirk must be false.' Allah says:\nوَإِنَّا أَوْ إِيَّاكُمْ لَعَلَىٰ هُدًى أَوْ فِي ضَلَالٍ مُبِينٍ\n(And verily, (either) we or you are rightly guided or in plain error.) Qatadah said, \"The Companions of Muhammad ﷺ said this to the idolators: 'By Allah, we and you cannot be following the same thing, only one of us can be truly guided.'\" 'Ikrimah and Ziyad bin Abi Maryam said, \"It means: we are rightly guided and you are in plain error.\"\nقُلْ لَا تُسْأَلُونَ عَمَّا أَجْرَمْنَا وَلَا نُسْأَلُ عَمَّا تَعْمَلُونَ\n(Say: \"You will not be asked about our sins, nor shall we be asked of what you do.\") This indicates disowning them, saying, 'you do not belong to us and we do not belong to you, because we call people to Allah, to believe that He is the Only God and to worship Him alone. If you respond, then you will belong to us and we to you, but if you reject our call, then we have nothing to do with you and you have nothing to do with us.' This is like the Ayat:\nوَإِنْ كَذَّبُوكَ فَقُلْ لِي عَمَلِي وَلَكُمْ عَمَلُكُمْ ۖ أَنْتُمْ بَرِيئُونَ مِمَّا أَعْمَلُ وَأَنَا بَرِيءٌ مِمَّا تَعْمَلُونَ\n(And if they deny you, say: \"For me are my deeds and for you are your deeds! You are innocent of what I do, and I am innocent of what you do!\")(10:41)\nقُلْ يَا أَيُّهَا الْكَافِرُونَ - لَا أَعْبُدُ مَا تَعْبُدُونَ - وَلَا أَنْتُمْ عَابِدُونَ مَا أَعْبُدُ - وَلَا أَنَا عَابِدٌ مَا عَبَدْتُمْ - وَلَا أَنْتُمْ عَابِدُونَ مَا أَعْبُدُ - لَكُمْ دِينُكُمْ وَلِيَ دِينِ\n(Say: \"O disbelievers! I worship not that which you worship, Nor will you worship that which I worship. And I shall not worship that which you are worshipping. Nor will you worship that which I worship. To you be your religion, and to me my religion.\")(109:1-6).\nقُلْ يَجْمَعُ بَيْنَنَا رَبُّنَا\n(Say: \"Our Lord will assemble us all together...\") means, 'on the Day of Resurrection, He will bring all of creation together in one arena, then He will judge between us with truth, i.e., with justice.' Each person will be rewarded or punished according to his deeds; if they are good, then his end will be good, and if they are bad, then his end will be bad. On that Day they will know who has attained victory, glory and eternal happiness, as Allah says:\nوَيَوْمَ تَقُومُ السَّاعَةُ يَوْمَئِذٍ يَتَفَرَّقُونَ - فَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ فَهُمْ فِي رَوْضَةٍ يُحْبَرُونَ - وَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَكَذَّبُوا بِآيَاتِنَا وَلِقَاءِ الْآخِرَةِ فَأُولَٰئِكَ فِي الْعَذَابِ مُحْضَرُونَ\n(And on the Day when the Hour will be established – that Day shall (all men) be separated. Then as for those who believed and did righteous good deeds, such shall be honored and made to enjoy luxurious life (forever) in a Garden of Delight. And as for those who disbelieved and denied Our Ayat, and the meeting of the Hereafter, such shall be brought forth to the torment.)(30:14-16). Allah says:\nوَهُوَ الْفَتَّاحُ الْعَلِيمُ\n(And He is the Just Judge, the All-Knower of the true state of affairs.)\nقُلْ أَرُونِيَ الَّذِينَ أَلْحَقْتُمْ بِهِ شُرَكَاءَ ۖ\n(Say: \"Show me those whom you have joined with Him as partners...\") means, 'show me those gods whom you made as rivals and equals to Allah.'\nكَلَّا ۚ\n(Nay) means, He has no peer, rival, partner or equal. Allah says:\nبَلْ هُوَ اللَّهُ\n(But He is Allah,) meaning, the One and Only God Who has no partner.\nالْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ\n(the Almighty, the All-Wise.) means, the Owner of might with which He subjugates and controls all things, the One Who is Wise in all His Words and deeds, Laws and decrees. Blessed and exalted and sanctified be He far above all that they say. And Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/34?verse=24","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:34:28","title":"Ibn Kathir · 34:28–30","text":"And We have not sent you except as a giver of glad tidings and a warner to all mankind, and most of men know not (28)And they say: \"When is this promise if you are truthful? (29)Say: \"The appointment to you is for a Day, which you cannot put back for an hour nor put forward. (30)\nThe Prophet (صلی اللہ علیہ وسلم)  was sent to all of Mankind\nAllah says to His servant and Messenger Muhammad ﷺ:\nوَمَا أَرْسَلْنَاكَ إِلَّا كَافَّةً لِلنَّاسِ بَشِيرًا وَنَذِيرًا\n(And We have not sent you except as a giver of glad tidings and a warner to all mankind,) i.e., to all of creation among those who are accountable for their deeds. This is like the Ayah:\nقُلْ يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنِّي رَسُولُ اللَّهِ إِلَيْكُمْ جَمِيعًا\n(Say: \"O mankind! Verily, I am sent to you all as the Messenger of Allah.\")(7:158)\nتَبَارَكَ الَّذِي نَزَّلَ الْفُرْقَانَ عَلَىٰ عَبْدِهِ لِيَكُونَ لِلْعَالَمِينَ نَذِيرًا\n(Blessed be He Who sent down the Criterion to His servant that he may be a warner to the all creatures.)(25:1)\nبَشِيرًا وَنَذِيرًا\na giver of glad tidings and a warner means, to bring the glad tidings of Paradise to those who obey you and to warn of the fire of Hell to those who disobey you. This is like the Ayat:\nوَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ\n(and most of men know not.)\nوَمَا أَكْثَرُ النَّاسِ وَلَوْ حَرَصْتَ بِمُؤْمِنِينَ\n(And most of mankind will not believe even if you desire it eagerly.)(12:103)\nوَإِنْ تُطِعْ أَكْثَرَ مَنْ فِي الْأَرْضِ يُضِلُّوكَ عَنْ سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ ۚ\n(And if you obey most of those on the earth, they will mislead you far away from Allah's path)(6:116). Muhammad bin Ka'b said concerning the Ayah:\nوَمَا أَرْسَلْنَاكَ إِلَّا كَافَّةً لِلنَّاسِ\n(And We have not sent you except to all mankind) meaning, to all the people. Qatadah said concerning this Ayah, \"Allah, may He be exalted, sent Muhammad ﷺ to both the Arabs and the non-Arabs, so the most honored of them with Allah is the one who is most obedient to Allah.\" In the Two Sahihs it was reported that Jabir, may Allah be pleased with him said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nأُعْطِيتُ خَمْسًا لَمْ يُعْطَهُنَّ أَحَدٌ مِنَ الْأَنْبِيَاءِ قَبْلِي: نُصِرْتُ بِالرُّعْبِ مَسِيرَةَ شَهْرٍ، وَجُعِلَتْ لِيَ الْأَرْضُ مَسْجِدًا وَطَهُورًا، فَأَيُّمَا رَجُلٍ مِنْ أُمَّتِي أَدْرَكَتْهُ الصَّلَاةُ فَلْيُصَلِّ، وَأُحِلَّتْ لِيَ الْغَنَائِمُ وَلَمْ تَحِلَّ لِأَحَدٍ قَبْلِي، وَأُعْطِيتُ الشَّفَاعَةَ، وَكَانَ النَّبِيُّ يُبْعَثُ إِلَى قَوْمِهِ خَاصَّةً وَبُعِثْتُ إِلَى النَّاسِ عَامَّةً\n(I have been given five things which were not given to any of the Prophets before me. I have been aided by fear (the distance of ) a month's journey. The entire earth has been made a Masjid and a means of purification for me, so that when the time for prayer comes, any man of my Ummah should pray. The spoils of war have been made permissible for me, whereas they were not permitted for any before me. I have been given the power of intercession; and the Prophets before me were sent to their own people, but I have been sent to all of mankind.)\" It was also recorded in the Sahih that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nبُعِثْتُ إِلَى الْأَسْوَدِ وَالْأَحْمَرِ\n(I have been sent to the black and the red.) Mujahid said, \"This means to the Jinn and to mankind.\" Others said that it meant the Arabs and the non-Arabs. Both meanings are correct.\nHow the Disbelievers asked about when the Resurrection would happen, and the Response to Them\nAllah tells us how the disbelievers believed it unlikely that the Hour would ever come to pass:\nوَيَقُولُونَ مَتَىٰ هَٰذَا الْوَعْدُ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ صَادِقِينَ\n(And they say: \"When is this promise if you are truthful?\") This is like the Ayah:\nيَسْتَعْجِلُ بِهَا الَّذِينَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِهَا ۖ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مُشْفِقُونَ مِنْهَا وَيَعْلَمُونَ أَنَّهَا الْحَقُّ ۗ\n(Those who believe not therein seek to hasten it, while those who believe are fearful of it, and know that it is the very truth...)(42:18) Then Allah says:\nقُلْ لَكُمْ مِيعَادُ يَوْمٍ لَا تَسْتَأْخِرُونَ عَنْهُ سَاعَةً وَلَا تَسْتَقْدِمُونَ\n(Say: \"The appointment to you is for a Day, which you cannot for an hour move back nor forward.\") meaning, 'you have an appointed time which is fixed and cannot be changed or altered. When it comes, you will not be able to put it back or bring it forward,' as Allah says:\nإِنَّ أَجَلَ اللَّهِ إِذَا جَاءَ لَا يُؤَخَّرُ ۖ\n(Verily, the term of Allah when it comes, cannot be delayed)(71:4).\nوَمَا نُؤَخِّرُهُ إِلَّا لِأَجَلٍ مَعْدُودٍ - يَوْمَ يَأْتِ لَا تَكَلَّمُ نَفْسٌ إِلَّا بِإِذْنِهِ ۚ فَمِنْهُمْ شَقِيٌّ وَسَعِيدٌ\n(And We delay it only for a term (already) fixed. On the Day when it comes, no person shall speak except by His leave. Some among them will be wretched and (others) blessed.)(11:104-105).","href":"/tafsir/34?verse=28","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:34:31","title":"Ibn Kathir · 34:31–33","text":"And those who disbelieve say: \"We believe not in this Qur'an nor in that which was before it.\" But if you could see when the wrongdoers are made to stand before their Lord, how they will cast the (blaming) word one to another! Those who were deemed weak will say to those who were arrogant: \"Had it not been for you, we should certainly have been believers! (31)And those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed weak: \"Did we keep you back from guidance after it had come to you? Nay, but you were criminals. (32)Those who were deemed weak will say to those who were arrogant: \"Nay, but it was your plotting by night and day, when you ordered us to disbelieve in Allah and set up rivals to Him!\" And each of them (parties) will conceal their own regrets, when they behold the torment. And We shall put iron collars round the necks of those who disbelieved. Are they requited aught except what they used to do (33)\nHow the Disbelievers have agreed in this World to deny the Truth, and how They will dispute with One Another on the Day of Ressurection\nAllah tells us about the excessive wrongdoing and stubbornness of the disbelievers, and their insistence on not believing in the Holy Qur'an and what it tells them about the Resurrection. Allah says:\nوَقَالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَنْ نُؤْمِنَ بِهَٰذَا الْقُرْآنِ وَلَا بِالَّذِي بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ ۗ\n(And those who disbelieve say: \"We believe not in this Qur'an nor in that which was before it.\") Allah threatens them and warns them of the humiliating position they will be in before Him, arguing and disputing with one another:\nيَرْجِعُ بَعْضُهُمْ إِلَىٰ بَعْضٍ الْقَوْلَ يَقُولُ الَّذِينَ اسْتُضْعِفُوا\n(how they will cast the (blaming) word one to another! Those who were deemed weak) this refers to the followers –\nلِلَّذِينَ اسْتَكْبَرُوا\n(to those who were arrogant) – this refers to the leaders and masters –\nلَوْلَا أَنْتُمْ لَكُنَّا مُؤْمِنِينَ\n(Had it not been for you, we should certainly have been believers!) meaning, 'if you had not stopped us, we would have followed the Messengers and believed in what they brought.' Their leaders and masters, those who were arrogant, will say to them:\nأَنَحْنُ صَدَدْنَاكُمْ عَنِ الْهُدَىٰ بَعْدَ إِذْ جَاءَكُمْ\n(Did we keep you back from guidance after it had come to you?) meaning, 'we did nothing more to you than to call you, and you followed us without any evidence or proof, and you went against the evidence and proof which the Messengers brought because of your own desires; it was your own choice.' They will say:\nبَلْ كُنْتُمْ مُجْرِمِينَ - وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ اسْتُضْعِفُوا لِلَّذِينَ اسْتَكْبَرُوا بَلْ مَكْرُ اللَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ\n(\"...Nay, but you were criminals.\" Those who were deemed weak will say to those who were arrogant: \"Nay, but it was your plotting by night and day...\") meaning, 'you used to plot against us night and day, tempting us with promises and false hopes, and telling us that we were truly guided and that we were following something, but all of that was falsehood and manifest lies.' Qatadah and Ibn Zayd said:\nبَلْ مَكْرُ اللَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ\n(Nay, but it was your plotting by night and day,) means, \"You plotted by night and day.\" Malik narrated something similar from Zayd bin Aslam.\nإِذْ تَأْمُرُونَنَا أَنْ نَكْفُرَ بِاللَّهِ وَنَجْعَلَ لَهُ أَنْدَادًا\n(when you ordered us to disbelieve in Allah and set up rivals to Him!) means, 'to set up gods as equal to Him, and you created doubts and confusion in our minds, and you fabricated far-fetched ideas with which to lead us astray.'\nوَأَسَرُّوا النَّدَامَةَ لَمَّا رَأَوُا الْعَذَابَ\n(And each of them (parties) will conceal their own regrets, when they behold the torment.) means, both the leaders and the followers will feel regret for what they did previously.\nوَجَعَلْنَا الْأَغْلَالَ فِي أَعْنَاقِ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا\n(And We shall put iron collars round the necks of those who disbelieved.) This is a chain which will tie their hands to their necks.\nهَلْ يُجْزَوْنَ إِلَّا مَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ\n(Are they requited aught except what they used to do?) means, they will be punished according to their deeds: the leaders will be punished according to what they did, and the followers will be punished according to what they did.\nقَالَ لِكُلٍّ ضِعْفٌ وَلَٰكِنْ لَا تَعْلَمُونَ\n(He will say: \"For each one there is double (torment), but you know not.\")(7:38). Ibn Abi Hatim recorded that Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nإِنَّ جَهَنَّمَ لَمَّا سِيقَ إِلَيْهَا أَهْلُهَا تَلَقَّاهُمْ لَهَبُهَا، ثُمَّ لَفَحَتْهُمْ لَفْحَةً فَلَمْ يَبْقَ لَحْمٌ إِلَّا سَقَطَ عَلَى الْعُرْقُوبِ\n(When the people of Hell are driven towards it, it will meet them with its flames, then the Fire will burn their faces and the flesh will all fall to their hamstrings.)\"","href":"/tafsir/34?verse=31","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:34:34","title":"Ibn Kathir · 34:34–39","text":"And We did not send a warner to a township but those who were given the worldly wealth and luxuries among them said: \"We believe not in what you have been sent with. (34)And they say: \"We are more in wealth and in children, and we are not going to be punished. (35)Say: \"Verily, my Lord expands the provision to whom He wills and restricts, but most men know not. (36)And it is not your wealth, nor your children that bring you nearer to Us, but only he who believes, and does righteous deeds; as for such, there will be multiple rewards for what they did, and they will reside in the high dwellings (Paradise) in peace and security (37)And those who strive against Our Ayat, to frustrate them, they will be brought to the torment (38)Say: \"Truly, my Lord expands the provision for whom He wills of His servants, and (also) restricts (it) for him...\") means, according to His wisdom, He gives a lot of provision to one, and gives very little to another. He has great wisdom in doing so, which cannot be comprehended by anyone but Him). and whatsoever you spend of anything (in Allah's Cause), He will replace it. And He is the Best of providers. (39)\nHow Those Who lived a Life of Luxury disbelieved in the Messengers and were misled by Their pursuit of Wealth and Children\nAllah is consoling His Prophet ﷺ and commanding him to follow the example of the Messengers that came before him. He tells him that no Prophet was ever sent to a township but those among its people who lived a life of luxury disbelieved in him, and the weaker people of the town followed him. The people of Nuh, peace be upon him, said to him:\nأَنُؤْمِنُ لَكَ وَاتَّبَعَكَ الْأَرْذَلُونَ\n(Shall we believe in you, when the weakest (of the people) follow you?)(26:110)\nوَمَا نَرَاكَ اتَّبَعَكَ إِلَّا الَّذِينَ هُمْ أَرَاذِلُنَا بَادِيَ الرَّأْيِ\n(nor do we see any follow you but the meanest among us and they (too) followed you without thinking)(11:27). The leaders among the people of Salih said:\nلِلَّذِينَ اسْتُضْعِفُوا لِمَنْ آمَنَ مِنْهُمْ أَتَعْلَمُونَ أَنَّ صَالِحًا مُرْسَلٌ مِنْ رَبِّهِ ۚ قَالُوا إِنَّا بِمَا أُرْسِلَ بِهِ مُؤْمِنُونَ - قَالَ الَّذِينَ اسْتَكْبَرُوا إِنَّا بِالَّذِي آمَنْتُمْ بِهِ كَافِرُونَ\n(to those who were counted weak – to such of them as believed: \"Know you that Salih is one sent from his Lord.\" They said: \"We indeed believe in that with which he has been sent.\" Those who were arrogant said: \"Verily, we disbelieve in that which you believe in.\")(7:75-76). And Allah said:\nوَكَذَٰلِكَ فَتَنَّا بَعْضَهُمْ بِبَعْضٍ لِيَقُولُوا أَهَٰؤُلَاءِ مَنَّ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِمْ مِنْ بَيْنِنَا ۗ أَلَيْسَ اللَّهُ بِأَعْلَمَ بِالشَّاكِرِينَ\n(Thus We have tried some of them with others, that they might say: \"Is it these (poor believers) that Allah has favored from among us\" Does not Allah know best those who are grateful?)(6:53),\nوَكَذَٰلِكَ جَعَلْنَا فِي كُلِّ قَرْيَةٍ أَكَابِرَ مُجْرِمِيهَا لِيَمْكُرُوا فِيهَا ۖ\n(And thus We have set up in every town great ones of its wicked people to plot therein)(6:123), and\nوَإِذَا أَرَدْنَا أَنْ نُهْلِكَ قَرْيَةً أَمَرْنَا مُتْرَفِيهَا فَفَسَقُوا فِيهَا فَحَقَّ عَلَيْهَا الْقَوْلُ فَدَمَّرْنَاهَا تَدْمِيرًا\n(And when We decide to destroy a town (population), We (first) send a definite order to those among them who lead a life of luxury. Then, they transgress therein, and thus the Word (of torment) is justified against it (them). Then We destroy it with complete destruction)(17:16). And Allah says here:\nوَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا فِي قَرْيَةٍ مِنْ نَذِيرٍ\nAnd We did not send a warner to a township meaning a Prophet or a Messenger,\nإِلَّا قَالَ مُتْرَفُوهَا\n(but those who were given the worldly wealth and luxuries among them) means, those who enjoyed a life of riches and luxury, and positions of leadership. Qatadah said, \"They are their tyrants, chiefs and leaders in evil.\"\nإِنَّا بِمَا أُرْسِلْتُمْ بِهِ كَافِرُونَ\n(We believe not in the (Message) with which you have been sent.) means, 'we do not believe in it and we will not follow it.' Allah tells us that those who enjoyed a life of luxury and who disbelieved the Messengers said:\nوَقَالُوا نَحْنُ أَكْثَرُ أَمْوَالًا وَأَوْلَادًا وَمَا نَحْنُ بِمُعَذَّبِينَ\n(And they say: \"We are more in wealth and in children, and we are not going to be punished.\") meaning, they were proud of their great wealth and great numbers of children, and they believed that this was a sign that Allah loved them and cared for them, and that if He gave them this in this world, He would not punish them in the Hereafter. This was too far-fetched. Allah says:\nأَيَحْسَبُونَ أَنَّمَا نُمِدُّهُمْ بِهِ مِنْ مَالٍ وَبَنِينَ - نُسَارِعُ لَهُمْ فِي الْخَيْرَاتِ ۚ بَلْ لَا يَشْعُرُونَ\n(Do they think that in wealth and children with which We enlarge them? We hasten unto them with good things. Nay, but they perceive not.)(23:55-56)\nفَلَا تُعْجِبْكَ أَمْوَالُهُمْ وَلَا أَوْلَادُهُمْ ۚ إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُعَذِّبَهُمْ بِهَا فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَتَزْهَقَ أَنْفُسُهُمْ وَهُمْ كَافِرُونَ\n(So, let not their wealth nor their children amaze you; in reality Allah's plan is to punish them with these things in the life of this world, and that their souls shall depart while they are disbelievers.)(9:55), and\nذَرْنِي وَمَنْ خَلَقْتُ وَحِيدًا - وَجَعَلْتُ لَهُ مَالًا مَمْدُودًا - وَبَنِينَ شُهُودًا - وَمَهَّدْتُ لَهُ تَمْهِيدًا - ثُمَّ يَطْمَعُ أَنْ أَزِيدَ - كَلَّا ۖ إِنَّهُ كَانَ لِآيَاتِنَا عَنِيدًا - سَأُرْهِقُهُ صَعُودًا\n(Leave Me Alone (to deal) with whom I created lonely. And then granted him resources in abundance. And children to be by his side. And made life smooth and comfortable for him. After all that he desires that I should give more. Nay! Verily, he has been opposing Our Ayat. I shall oblige him to face a severe torment!)(74:11-17)\nAnd Allah has told us about the story of the owner of those two gardens, that he had wealth and crops and children, but that could not help him at all when all of that was taken from him in this world, before he reached the Hereafter. Allah says here:\nقُلْ إِنَّ رَبِّي يَبْسُطُ الرِّزْقَ لِمَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَقْدِرُ\n(Say: \"Verily, my Lord expands the provision to whom He wills and restricts...\") meaning, He gives wealth to those whom He loves and those whom He does not love, and He makes poor whom He wills and makes rich whom He wills. He has complete wisdom and clear proof,\nوَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ\n(but most men know not.) Then Allah says:\nوَمَا أَمْوَالُكُمْ وَلَا أَوْلَادُكُمْ بِالَّتِي تُقَرِّبُكُمْ عِنْدَنَا زُلْفَىٰ\n(And it is not your wealth, nor your children that bring you nearer to Us,) meaning, 'these things are not a sign that We love you or care for you.' Imam Ahmad, may Allah have mercy on him, recorded that Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nإِنَّ اللهَ تَعَالَى لَا يَنْظُرُ إِلَى صُوَرِكُمْ وَأَمْوَالِكُمْ، وَلَكِنْ إِنَّمَا يَنْظُرُ إِلَى قُلُوبِكُمْ وَأَعْمَالِكُمْ\n(Allah does not look at your outward appearance or your wealth, rather He looks at your hearts and your deeds.) Muslim and Ibn Majah also recorded this. Allah says:\nإِلَّا مَنْ آمَنَ وَعَمِلَ صَالِحًا\n(but only he who believes, and does righteous deeds;) meaning, 'only faith and righteous deeds will bring you closer to Us.'\nفَأُولَٰئِكَ لَهُمْ جَزَاءُ الضِّعْفِ بِمَا عَمِلُوا\n(as for such, there will be multiple rewards for what they did,) means, the reward will be multiplied for them between ten and seven hundred times.\nوَهُمْ فِي الْغُرُفَاتِ آمِنُونَ\n(and they will reside in the high dwellings in peace and security.) means, in the lofty dwellings of Paradise, safe from all misery, fear and harm, and from any evil they could fear.\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that 'Ali, may Allah be pleased with him, said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nإِنَّ فِي الْجَنَّةِ لَغُرَفًا تُرَى ظُهُورُهَا مِنْ بُطُونِهَا، وَبُطُونُهَا مِنْ ظُهُورِهَا\n(In Paradise there are lofty rooms whose outside can be seen from the inside and whose inside can be seen from the outside.) A bedouin asked, \"Who are they for?\" He ﷺ said:\nلِمَنْ طَيَّبَ الْكَلَامَ، وَأَطْعَمَ الطَّعَامَ، وَأَدَامَ الصِّيَامَ، وَصَلَّى بِاللَّيْلِ وَالنَّاسُ نِيَامٌ\n(For those who speak well, feed the hungry, persist in fasting and pray at night while people are asleep.)\nوَالَّذِينَ يَسْعَوْنَ فِي آيَاتِنَا مُعَاجِزِينَ\n(And those who strive against Our Ayat, to frustrate them,) means, those who try to block people from the path of Allah and from following His Messengers and believing in His signs,\nأُولَٰئِكَ فِي الْعَذَابِ مُحْضَرُونَ\nthey will be brought to the torment. means, they will all be punished for their deeds, each one accordingly.\nقُلْ إِنَّ رَبِّي يَبْسُطُ الرِّزْقَ لِمَنْ يَشَاءُ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ وَيَقْدِرُ لَهُ ۚ\n(Say: \"Truly, my Lord expands the provision for whom He wills of His servants, and (also) restricts (it) for him...\") means, according to His wisdom, He gives a lot of provision to one, and gives very little to another. He has great wisdom in doing so, which cannot be comprehended by anyone but Him. This is like the Ayah:\nانْظُرْ كَيْفَ فَضَّلْنَا بَعْضَهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ ۚ وَلَلْآخِرَةُ أَكْبَرُ دَرَجَاتٍ وَأَكْبَرُ تَفْضِيلًا\n(See how We favor one above another, and verily, the Hereafter will be greater in degrees and greater in favor.)(17:21). This means that just as there are differences between them in this world – where one may be poor and in straitened circumstances while another is rich and enjoys a life of plenty – so they will be in the Hereafter. There one will reside in apartments in the highest levels of Paradise, whilst another will be in the lowest levels of Hell. As the Prophet ﷺ said, describing the best of people in this world:\nقَدْ أَفْلَحَ مَنْ أَسْلَمَ وَرُزِقَ كَفَافًا وَقَنَّعَهُ اللهُ بِمَا آتَاهُ\n(He truly succeeds who becomes Muslim and is given just enough provision and Allah makes him content with what He has given.)\" It was recorded by Muslim.\nوَمَا أَنْفَقْتُمْ مِنْ شَيْءٍ فَهُوَ يُخْلِفُهُ\n(and whatsoever you spend of anything, He will replace it.) means, 'whatever you spend in the ways that He has commanded you and permitted you, He will compensate you for it in this world by giving you something else instead, and in the Hereafter by giving you reward.' It was reported that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nيَقُولُ اللهُ تَعَالَى: أَنْفِقْ، أُنْفِقْ عَلَيْكَ\n(Allah says: \"Spend, I will spend on you.\") In another Hadith it is reported that every morning, two angels come, and one says, \"O Allah, bring destruction upon the one who withholds (does not spend).\" The other one says, \"O Allah, give compensation to the one who spends.\" And the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nأَنْفِقْ بِلَالُ، وَلَا تَخْشَ مِنْ ذِي الْعَرْشِ إِقْلَالًا\n(Spend, O Bilal, and do not fear that the One Who is on the Throne will withhold from you.)","href":"/tafsir/34?verse=34","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:34:40","title":"Ibn Kathir · 34:40–42","text":"And (remember) the Day when He will gather them all together, then He will say to the angels: \"Was it you that these people used to worship? (40)They (the angels) will say: \"Glorified be You! You are our Protector instead of them. Nay, but they used to worship the Jinn; most of them were believers in them. (41)So Today, none of you can profit or harm one another. And We shall say to those who did wrong: \"Taste the torment of the Fire which you used to deny. (42)\nThe Angels will disown Their Worshippers on the Day of Resurrection\nAllah tells us that on the Day of Resurrection, He will rebuke the idolators before all of creation. He will ask the angels whom the idolators used to worship, claiming that their idols were in the form of these angels and that they could bring them nearer to Allah. He will ask the angels:\nأَهَٰؤُلَاءِ إِيَّاكُمْ كَانُوا يَعْبُدُونَ\n(Was it you that these people used to worship?) meaning, 'did you command them to worship you?' Allah says in Surat Al-Furqan:\nأَأَنْتُمْ أَضْلَلْتُمْ عِبَادِي هَٰؤُلَاءِ أَمْ هُمْ ضَلُّوا السَّبِيلَ\n(Was it you who misled these My servants or did they (themselves) stray from the (right) path?)(25:17). And He will say to 'Isa, peace be upon him:\nأَأَنْتَ قُلْتَ لِلنَّاسِ اتَّخِذُونِي وَأُمِّيَ إِلَٰهَيْنِ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ ۖ قَالَ سُبْحَانَكَ مَا يَكُونُ لِي أَنْ أَقُولَ مَا لَيْسَ لِي بِحَقٍّ\n(Did you say unto men: \"Worship me and my mother as two gods besides Allah?' He will say: \"Glory be to You! It was not for me to say what I had no right (to say).\")(5:116). Similarly, the angels will say:\nسُبْحَانَكَ\n(Glorified be You!) meaning, 'exalted and sanctified be You above the notion that there could be any god besides You.'\nأَنْتَ وَلِيُّنَا مِنْ دُونِهِمْ\n(You are our Protector instead of them.) means, 'we are Your servants and we disown these people before You.'\nبَلْ كَانُوا يَعْبُدُونَ الْجِنَّ ۖ\n(Nay, but they used to worship the Jinn;) meaning, the Shayatin, because they are the ones who made idol worship attractive to them and who misguided them.\nأَكْثَرُهُمْ بِهِمْ مُؤْمِنُونَ\n(most of them were believers in them.) This is like the Ayah:\nإِنْ يَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِهِ إِلَّا إِنَاثًا وَإِنْ يَدْعُونَ إِلَّا شَيْطَانًا مَرِيدًا - لَعَنَهُ اللَّهُ ۘ\n(They invoke nothing but females besides Him, and they invoke nothing but Shaytan, a persistent rebel! Allah cursed him)(4:117-118). Allah says:\nفَالْيَوْمَ لَا يَمْلِكُ بَعْضُكُمْ لِبَعْضٍ نَفْعًا وَلَا ضَرًّا\n(So Today, none of you can profit or harm one another.) means, 'none of those idols and rivals whom you hoped would benefit you, will be of any avail to you, those whom you worshipped in the hope that they would help you at times of stress and calamity. Today they will have no power either to benefit you or to harm you.'\nوَنَقُولُ لِلَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا\nAnd We shall say to those who did wrong: – meaning the idolators –\nذُوقُوا عَذَابَ النَّارِ الَّتِي كُنْتُمْ بِهَا تُكَذِّبُونَ\n(\"Taste the torment of the Fire which you used to deny.\") meaning, this will be said to them by way of rebuke.","href":"/tafsir/34?verse=40","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:34:43","title":"Ibn Kathir · 34:43–45","text":"And when Our Clear Verses are recited to them, they say: \"This is naught but a man who wishes to hinder you from that which your fathers used to worship.\" And they say: \"This is nothing but an invented lie.\" And those who disbelieve say of the truth when it has come to them: \"This is nothing but evident magic! (43)And We had not given them Scriptures that they could study, nor sent to them before you any warner (44)And those before them denied; these have not received even a tenth of what We had granted to those (of old); yet they denied My Messengers. Then how (terrible) was My denial (45)\nThe Saying of the Disbelievers about the Prophets, and its refutation\nAllah tells us that the disbeliever deserve to be severely punished by Him, because when His clear Verses were recited to them, and they heard them fresh from the lips of His Messenger ﷺ, they said:\nقَالُوا مَا هَٰذَا إِلَّا رَجُلٌ يُرِيدُ أَنْ يَصُدَّكُمْ عَمَّا كَانَ يَعْبُدُ آبَاؤُكُمْ\n(They say: \"This is naught but a man who wishes to hinder you from that which your fathers used to worship.\") meaning, that the religion of their fathers was the truth and that what the Messenger brought to them was false – may the curse of Allah be upon them and their fathers!\nوَقَالُوا مَا هَٰذَا إِلَّا إِفْكٌ مُفْتَرًى\n(And they say: \"This is nothing but an invented lie.\") referring to the Qur'an.\nوَقَالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لِلْحَقِّ لَمَّا جَاءَهُمْ إِنْ هَٰذَا إِلَّا سِحْرٌ مُبِينٌ\n(And those who disbelieve say of the truth when it has come to them: \"This is nothing but evident magic!\") Allah says:\nوَمَا آتَيْنَاهُمْ مِنْ كُتُبٍ يَدْرُسُونَهَا ۖ وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا إِلَيْهِمْ قَبْلَكَ مِنْ نَذِيرٍ\n(And We had not given them Scriptures that they could study, nor sent to them before you any warner) meaning, Allah did not reveal any Book to the Arabs before the Qur'an, and He did not send any Prophet to them before Muhammad ﷺ. They used to wish for that and say, 'if only a warner comes to us or a Book is revealed to us, we would be more guided than others,' but when Allah blessed them with that, they disbelieved him and stubbornly rejected him. Then Allah says:\nوَكَذَّبَ الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ\n(And those before them denied;) meaning, other nations.\nوَمَا بَلَغُوا مِعْشَارَ مَا آتَيْنَاهُمْ\n(these have not received even a tenth of what We had granted to those (of old);)\nIbn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"Of the power of this world.\" This was also the view of Qatadah, As-Suddi and Ibn Zayd. This is like the Ayat:\nوَلَقَدْ مَكَّنَّاهُمْ فِيمَا إِنْ مَكَّنَّاكُمْ فِيهِ وَجَعَلْنَا لَهُمْ سَمْعًا وَأَبْصَارًا وَأَفْئِدَةً فَمَا أَغْنَىٰ عَنْهُمْ سَمْعُهُمْ وَلَا أَبْصَارُهُمْ وَلَا أَفْئِدَتُهُمْ مِنْ شَيْءٍ إِذْ كَانُوا يَجْحَدُونَ بِآيَاتِ اللَّهِ وَحَاقَ بِهِمْ مَا كَانُوا بِهِ يَسْتَهْزِئُونَ\n(And indeed We had firmly established them with that wherewith We have not established you! And We had assigned them the hearing, seeing, and hearts; but their hearing, seeing, and their hearts availed them nothing since they used to deny the Ayat of Allah, and they were completely encircled by that which they used to mock at!)(46:26)\nأَفَلَمْ يَسِيرُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ فَيَنْظُرُوا كَيْفَ كَانَ عَاقِبَةُ الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ ۚ كَانُوا أَكْثَرَ مِنْهُمْ وَأَشَدَّ قُوَّةً\n(Have they not traveled through the earth and seen what was the end of those before them? They were more in number than them and mightier in strength)(40:82). but that did not protect them from the punishment of Allah, and Allah destroyed them because they denied His Messengers. Allah says:\nفَكَذَّبُوا رُسُلِي ۖ فَكَيْفَ كَانَ نَكِيرِ\n(yet they denied My Messengers. Then how (terrible) was My denial!) meaning, 'how severe was My wrath and how great was My avenging of My Messengers.'","href":"/tafsir/34?verse=43","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:34:46","title":"Ibn Kathir · 34:46","text":"Say: \"I exhort you to one (thing) only, that you stand up for Allah's sake in pairs and singly, and reflect, there is no madness in your companion. He is only a warner to you in face of a severe torment. (46)\nRefutation of Their Accusation that the Prophet (صلی اللہ علیہ وسلم) was Insane\nAllah says: 'Say, O Muhammad, to these disbelievers who claim that you are crazy,'\nإِنَّمَا أَعِظُكُمْ بِوَاحِدَةٍ\n(I exhort you to one (thing) only,) meaning, 'I am only telling you to one thing,' and that is:\nأَنْ تَقُومُوا لِلَّهِ مَثْنَىٰ وَفُرَادَىٰ ثُمَّ تَتَفَكَّرُوا ۚ مَا بِصَاحِبِكُمْ مِنْ جِنَّةٍ ۚ\n(that you stand up for Allah's sake in pairs and singly, and reflect, there is no madness in your companion.) meaning, 'stand sincerely before Allah, without being influenced by your own desires or tribal feelings, and ask one another, is Muhammad crazy? Advise one another,'\nثُمَّ تَتَفَكَّرُوا\n(and reflect) means, let each person look within himself concerning the matter of Muhammad ﷺ, and ask other people about him if he is still confused, then let him think about the matter. Allah says:\nأَنْ تَقُومُوا لِلَّهِ مَثْنَىٰ وَفُرَادَىٰ ثُمَّ تَتَفَكَّرُوا ۚ مَا بِصَاحِبِكُمْ مِنْ جِنَّةٍ ۚ\n(that you stand up for Allah's sake in pairs and singly, and reflect, there is no madness in your companion.)\nThis meaning was stated by Mujahid, Muhammad bin Ka'b, As-Suddi, Qatadah and others. This is what is meant by the Ayah.\nإِنْ هُوَ إِلَّا نَذِيرٌ لَكُمْ بَيْنَ يَدَيْ عَذَابٍ شَدِيدٍ\n(He is only a warner to you in face of a severe torment.) Al-Bukhari recorded that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, commented on this Ayah: \"One day, the Prophet ﷺ climbed up As-Safa' and shouted,\nيَا صَبَاحَاهْ\n(O people!) The Quraysh gathered around him, and said, 'What is the matter with you?' He said,\nأَرَأَيْتُمْ لَوْ أَخْبَرْتُكُمْ أَنَّ الْعَدُوَّ يُصَبِّحُكُمْ أَوْ يُمَسِّيكُمْ أَمَا كُنْتُمْ تُصَدِّقُونِّي\n(What do you think? If I told you that the enemy were approaching and will reach us in the morning or in the evening, would you believe me?) They said, 'Of course.' He ﷺ said:\nفَإِنِّي نَذِيرٌ لَكُمْ بَيْنَ يَدَيْ عَذَابٍ شَدِيدٍ\n(I am a warner to you in the face of a severe punishment.) Abu Lahab said, 'May you perish! You have called us together only to tell us this?' Then Allah revealed:\nتَبَّتْ يَدَا أَبِي لَهَبٍ وَتَبَّ\n(Perish the two hands of Abu Lahab and perish he!)(111:1) We have already discussed this in our Tafsir of the Ayah:\nوَأَنْذِرْ عَشِيرَتَكَ الْأَقْرَبِينَ\n(And warn your tribe of near kindred)(26:214).","href":"/tafsir/34?verse=46","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:34:47","title":"Ibn Kathir · 34:47–50","text":"Say: \"Whatever wage I might have asked of you is yours. My wage is from Allah only, and He is a Witness over all things. (47)Say: \"Verily, my Lord sends down the truth, the All-Knower of the Unseen. (48)Say: \"The truth has come, and the falsehood can neither create anything nor resurrect. (49)Say: \"If (even) I go astray, I shall stray only to my own loss. But if I remain guided, it is because of the Revelation of my Lord to me. Truly, He is All-Hearer, Ever Near. (50)\nI do not ask for any Reward for conveying the Message\nAllah commands His Messenger ﷺ to say to the idolators:\nمَا سَأَلْتُكُمْ مِنْ أَجْرٍ فَهُوَ لَكُمْ ۖ\n(Whatever wage I might have asked of you is yours.) meaning, 'I do not want anything for conveying the Message of Allah to you, advising you and telling you to worship Allah.'\nإِنْ أَجْرِيَ إِلَّا عَلَى اللَّهِ ۖ\n(My wage is from Allah only,) means, 'rather I will seek the reward for that with Allah.'\nوَهُوَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ شَهِيدٌ\n(and He is a Witness over all things.) means, 'He knows all things, and He knows everything about me and the manner in which I am conveying the Message to you, and He knows all about you.'\nقُلْ إِنَّ رَبِّي يَقْذِفُ بِالْحَقِّ عَلَّامُ الْغُيُوبِ\n(Say: \"Verily, my Lord sends down the truth, the All-Knower of the Unseen.\") This is like the Ayah:\nيُلْقِي الرُّوحَ مِنْ أَمْرِهِ عَلَىٰ مَنْ يَشَاءُ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ\n(He sends the Revelation by His command to any of His servants He wills)(40:15). meaning, He sends the angel to whomsoever He wills of His servants among the people on earth, and He is the All-Knower of the Unseen; nothing whatsoever is hidden from Him in the heavens or on earth.\nقُلْ جَاءَ الْحَقُّ وَمَا يُبْدِئُ الْبَاطِلُ وَمَا يُعِيدُ\n(Say: \"The truth has come, and the falsehood can neither create anything nor resurrect.\") means, truth and the great Law have come from Allah, and falsehood has gone and has perished and vanished. This is like the Ayah:\nبَلْ نَقْذِفُ بِالْحَقِّ عَلَى الْبَاطِلِ فَيَدْمَغُهُ فَإِذَا هُوَ زَاهِقٌ ۚ\n(Nay, We fling the truth against the falsehood, so it destroys it, and behold, it is vanished)(21:18). When the Messenger of Allah ﷺ entered Al-Masjid Al-Haram on the day of the conquest of Makkah, and found those idols standing around the Ka'bah, he started to hit the idols with his bow, reciting,\nوَقُلْ جَاءَ الْحَقُّ وَزَهَقَ الْبَاطِلُ ۚ إِنَّ الْبَاطِلَ كَانَ زَهُوقًا\n(And say: \"The truth has come and the falsehood has vanished. Surely, the falsehood is ever bound to vanish.\")(17:81), and:\nقُلْ جَاءَ الْحَقُّ وَمَا يُبْدِئُ الْبَاطِلُ وَمَا يُعِيدُ\n(Say: \"The truth has come, and the falsehood can neither create anything nor resurrect.\") This was recorded by Al-Bukhari, Muslim, At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa'i.\nقُلْ إِنْ ضَلَلْتُ فَإِنَّمَا أَضِلُّ عَلَىٰ نَفْسِي ۖ وَإِنِ اهْتَدَيْتُ فَبِمَا يُوحِي إِلَيَّ رَبِّي ۚ\n(Say: \"If (even) I go astray, I shall stray only to my own loss. But if I remain guided, it is because of the Revelation of my Lord to me...\") means, all good comes from Allah, and in what Allah sends down of revelation and clear truth there is guidance and wisdom. So whoever goes astray, does so by himself, as 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud, may Allah be pleased with him, said when he was asked about some issue. He said, \"I will say what I think, and if it is correct, then it is from Allah, and if it is wrong, then it is from me and from the Shaytan, and Allah and His Messenger have nothing to do with it.\"\nإِنَّهُ سَمِيعٌ قَرِيبٌ\n(Truly, He is All-Hearer, Ever Near.) means, He hears all the words of His servants, and He is always near to respond to them when they call on Him. An-Nasai recorded the Hadith of Abu Musa which also appears in the Two Sahihs:\nإِنَّكُمْ لَاتَدْعُونَ أَصَمَّ وَلَا غَائِبًا، إِنَّمَا تَدْعُونَ سَمِيعًا قَرِيبًا مُجِيبًا\n(You are not calling upon one who is deaf or absent; you are calling upon One Who is All-Hearer, Ever Near and Responsive.)","href":"/tafsir/34?verse=47","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:34:51","title":"Ibn Kathir · 34:51–54","text":"And if you could but see, when they will be terrified with no escape, and they will be seized from a near place (51)And they will say: \"We do believe (now);\" but how could they receive (Tanawush) from a place so far off (52)Indeed they did disbelieve before (in this world), and they (used to) conjecture about the Unseen, from a far place (53)And a barrier will be set between them and that which they desire, as was done in the past with the people of their kind. Verily, they have been in grave doubt (54)\nHere Allah says: 'if only you could see, O Muhammad, when these deniers are terrified on the Day of Resurrection, and they have no way of escape and nowhere to run to and no refuge.'\nوَأُخِذُوا مِنْ مَكَانٍ قَرِيبٍ\n(and they will be seized from a near place.) means, they will not even be given the slightest chance of escape, but they will be seized from the first instant. Al-Hasan Al-Basri said: \"When they come forth from their graves.\"\nوَقَالُوا آمَنَّا بِهِ\n(And they will say: \"We do believe (now);\") means, on the Day of Resurrection, they will say, 'we believe in Allah and His angels, Books and Messengers.' This is like the Ayah:\nوَلَوْ تَرَىٰ إِذِ الْمُجْرِمُونَ نَاكِسُو رُءُوسِهِمْ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِمْ رَبَّنَا أَبْصَرْنَا وَسَمِعْنَا فَارْجِعْنَا نَعْمَلْ صَالِحًا إِنَّا مُوقِنُونَ\n(And if you only could see when the criminals shall hang their heads before their Lord (saying): \"Our Lord! We have now seen and heard, so send us back that we will do righteous good deeds. Verily, we now believe with certainty.\")(32:12) Allah says:\nوَأَنَّىٰ لَهُمُ التَّنَاوُشُ مِنْ مَكَانٍ بَعِيدٍ\n(but how could they receive from a place so far off?) meaning, how could they attain faith now that they are so far removed from the place where it could be accepted from them, and they have entered the realm of the Hereafter which is the realm of reward and punishment, not the realm of trial and testing? If they had believed in this world, that would have been good for them, but now they have entered the Hereafter, there is no way that their faith can be accepted, just as there is no way a person can get a thing if he is far away from it. Mujahid said:\nوَأَنَّىٰ لَهُمُ التَّنَاوُشُ\n(but how could they 'At-Tanawush'?) means, \"How could they attain that?\" Az-Zuhri said, \"They will wish to attain faith when they have reached the Hereafter and are cut off from this world.\" Al-Hasan Al-Basri said, \"They will seek something when they have no way of attaining it, they will seek faith from a distant place.\"\nوَقَدْ كَفَرُوا بِهِ مِنْ قَبْلُ ۖ\n(Indeed they did disbelieve before) means, how can they attain faith in the Hereafter when in this world they disbelieved in the truth and denied the Messengers?\nوَيَقْذِفُونَ بِالْغَيْبِ مِنْ مَكَانٍ بَعِيدٍ\n(and they (used to) conjecture about the Unseen from a far place.) Malik narrated from Zayd bin Aslam that he said:\nوَيَقْذِفُونَ بِالْغَيْبِ\n(and they (used to) conjecture about the Unseen,) means, \"By guessing.\" as Allah says,\nرَجْمًا بِالْغَيْبِ\n(guessing at the Unseen)(18:22). Sometimes they said he was a poet, sometimes they said he was a soothsayer, or a sorcerer, or a mad man, or other baseless comments. They denied the idea of resurrection and said:\nإِنْ نَظُنُّ إِلَّا ظَنًّا وَمَا نَحْنُ بِمُسْتَيْقِنِينَ\n(we do not think it but as a conjecture, and we have no firm convincing belief.)(45:32). Qatadah and Mujahid said, \"Their belief that there would be no resurrection, no Paradise and no Hell was based on mere conjecture.\"\nوَحِيلَ بَيْنَهُمْ وَبَيْنَ مَا يَشْتَهُونَ\n(And a barrier will be set between them and that which they desire,) Al-Hasan Al-Basri, Ad-Dahhak and others, \"This means faith.\" As-Suddi said:\nوَحِيلَ بَيْنَهُمْ وَبَيْنَ مَا يَشْتَهُونَ\n(And a barrier will be set between them and that which they desire,) means \"Repentance.\" This was also the view of Ibn Jarir, may Allah have mercy on him. Mujahid said:\nوَحِيلَ بَيْنَهُمْ وَبَيْنَ مَا يَشْتَهُونَ\n(And a barrier will be set between them and that which they desire,) means, \"This world and its wealth, luxuries and people.\" Something similar was narrated from Ibn 'Umar, Ibn 'Abbas and Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, may Allah be pleased with him. It is also the opinion of Al-Bukhari and the Group. The correct view is that there is no contradiction between the two views, for a barrier will be set between them and what they desire in this world, and what they seek in the Hereafter will be denied from them.\nكَمَا فُعِلَ بِأَشْيَاعِهِمْ مِنْ قَبْلُ\n(as was done in the past with the people of their kind.) means, as happened to the nations of the past who disbelieved in the Messengers; when the punishment of Allah came upon them, they wished that they had believed, but this was not accepted from them.\nفَلَمَّا رَأَوْا بَأْسَنَا قَالُوا آمَنَّا بِاللَّهِ وَحْدَهُ وَكَفَرْنَا بِمَا كُنَّا بِهِ مُشْرِكِينَ - فَلَمْ يَكُ يَنْفَعُهُمْ إِيمَانُهُمْ لَمَّا رَأَوْا بَأْسَنَا ۖ سُنَّتَ اللَّهِ الَّتِي قَدْ خَلَتْ فِي عِبَادِهِ ۖ وَخَسِرَ هُنَالِكَ الْكَافِرُونَ\n(So, when they saw Our punishment, they said: \"We believe in Allah Alone and reject (all) that we used to associate with Him as (His) partners.\" Then their faith could not avail them when they saw Our punishment. (Like) this has been the way of Allah in dealing with His servants. And there the disbelievers lost utterly.)(40:84-85).\nإِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا فِي شَكٍّ مُرِيبٍ\n(Verily, they have been in grave doubt.) means, in this world they had doubts, so their faith will not be accepted from them when they behold the punishment with their own eyes. Qatadah said, \"Beware of doubt. For whoever dies doubting, will be raised doubting; and whoever dies believing, with certainty will be raised believing with certainty.\"\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surah Saba'. Allah, may He be glorified and exalted, is the Guide to the right way.","href":"/tafsir/34?verse=51","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:35:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 35:1","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nالْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ فَاطِرِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ جَاعِلِ الْمَلَائِكَةِ رُسُلًا أُولِي أَجْنِحَةٍ مَثْنَىٰ وَثُلَاثَ وَرُبَاعَ ۚ يَزِيدُ فِي الْخَلْقِ مَا يَشَاءُ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ\n(1. All praise is due to Allah, Fatir of the heavens and the earth, Who made the angels messengers with wings, two or three or four. He increases in creation what He wills. Verily, Allah is Able to do all things.)\nThe Power of Allah\nIbn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"I did not know what Fatir As-Samawati wal-Ard meant until two bedouins came to me disputing over a well. One of them said to his companion, 'Ana Fatartuha,' meaning, 'I started it.'\" Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, also said,\nفَاطِرِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ\n(Fatir of the heavens and the earth,) means, \"The Originator of the heavens and the earth.\" Ad-Dahhak said, \"Every time the phrase Fatir As-Samawati wal-Ard is used in the Qur'an, it means the Creator of the heavens and the earth.\"\nجَاعِلِ الْمَلَائِكَةِ رُسُلًا\n(Who made the angels messengers) means, between Him and His Prophets.\nأُولِي أَجْنِحَةٍ\n(with wings) means, with which they fly to convey quickly that which they have been commanded to convey.\nمَثْنَىٰ وَثُلَاثَ وَرُبَاعَ\n(two or three or four.) means, among them are some who have two wings, some have three and some who have four. Some have more than that, as stated in the Hadith mentioning that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ saw Jibril, peace be upon him, on the Night of the Isra' with six hundred wings. Between each pair of wings was a distance like that between the east and the west. Allah says:\nيَزِيدُ فِي الْخَلْقِ مَا يَشَاءُ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ\n(He increases in creation what He wills. Verily, Allah is Able to do all things.) As-Suddi said, \"He increases their wings and creates them as He wills.\"","href":"/tafsir/35?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:35:2","title":"Ibn Kathir · 35:2","text":"Whatever of mercy, Allah may grant to mankind, none can withhold it; and whatever He may withhold, none can grant it thereafter. And He is the Almighty, the All-Wise (2)\nNone can withhold the Mercy of Allah\nAllah tells us that what He wills, happens, and what He does not will, does not happen. None can give what He withholds, and none can withhold what He gives.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Warrad, the freed slave of Al-Mughirah bin Shu'bah, said, \"Mu'awiyah wrote to Al-Mughirah bin Shu'bah, saying, 'Write for me what you heard from the Messenger of Allah ﷺ.' So Al-Mughirah called me and I wrote for him: 'I heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ say when he finished praying,\nلَا إِلٰهَ إِلَّا اللهُ وَحْدَهُ لَا شَرِيكَ لَهُ، لَهُ الْمُلْكُ وَلَهُ الْحَمْدُ، وَهُوَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ، اللّٰهُمَّ لَا مَانِعَ لِمَا أَعْطَيْتَ وَلَا مُعْطِيَ لِمَا مَنَعْتَ، وَلَا يَنْفَعُ ذَا الْجَدِّ مِنْكَ الْجَدُّ\n(There is no god (worthy of worship) except Allah alone, with no partner or associate. To Him be praise and dominion, and He is able to do all things. O Allah, there is none who can withhold what You give, and none can give what You withhold, and and good fortune and richness in anything cannot benefit one against Your will.)\nAnd I heard him forbid gossiping, asking too many questions and wasting money, burying girls alive, disobeying one's mother, and withholding from others while asking from them.'\" This was also recorded by Al-Bukhari and Muslim, with several chain of narration.\nIt was recorded in Sahih Muslim that Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"When the Messenger of Allah ﷺ raised his head from bowing, he would say:\nسَمِعَ اللهُ لِمَنْ حَمِدَهُ، اللّٰهُمَّ رَبَّنَا لَكَ الْحَمْدُ مِلْءُ السَّمَاءِ وَالْأَرْضِ، وَمِلْءُ مَا شِئْتَ مِنْ شَيْءٍ بَعْدُ، اللّٰهُمَّ أَهْلَ الثَّنَاءِ وَالْمَجْدِ،أَحَقُّ مَا قَالَ الْعَبْدُ وَكُلُّنَا لَكَ عَبْدٌ، اللّٰهُمَّ لَا مَانِعَ لِمَا أَعْطَيْتَ وَلَا مُعْطِيَ لِمَا مَنَعْتَ، وَلَا يَنْفَعُ ذَا الْجَدِّ مِنْكَ الْجَدُّ\n(Allah hears those who praise Him. O Allah, our Lord, to You be praise, filling the heavens and the earth, and filling whatever You wish besides. O Allah, the One deserving praise and glory. The truest words that any servant says – and all of us are Your servants – are: O Allah, there is none who can withhold what You give, and none can give what You withhold, and no wealth or majesty can benefit anyone against Your will.)\" This Ayah is like the Ayah:\nوَإِنْ يَمْسَسْكَ اللَّهُ بِضُرٍّ فَلَا كَاشِفَ لَهُ إِلَّا هُوَ ۖ وَإِنْ يُرِدْكَ بِخَيْرٍ فَلَا رَادَّ لِفَضْلِهِ ۚ\n(And if Allah touches you with harm, there is none who can remove it but He; and if He intends any good for you, there is none who can repel His favor)(10:107). And there are many similar Ayat.","href":"/tafsir/35?verse=2","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:35:3","title":"Ibn Kathir · 35:3","text":"O mankind! Remember the grace of Allah upon you! Is there any creator other than Allah who provides for you from the sky (rain) and the earth? La ilaha illa Huwa. How then are you turning away (from Him)(3)\nThe Evidence of Tawhid\nAllah shows His servants that they should worship Him Alone, for just as He is Independent in His power of creation and provision, so He should be worshipped Alone with no partners or associates such as idols and false gods. So Allah says:\nلَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ ۖ فَأَنَّىٰ تُؤْفَكُونَ\n(La ilaha illa Huwa. How then are you turning away (from Him)) meaning, 'how can you turn away from Him after this has been made clear and this proof has been made obvious, but you still worship idols and false gods?' And Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/35?verse=3","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:35:4","title":"Ibn Kathir · 35:4–6","text":"And if they deny you, so were Messengers denied before you. And to Allah return all matters (4)O mankind! Verily, the promise of Allah is true. So, let not this present life deceive you, and let not the chief deceiver deceive you about Allah (5)Surely, Shaytan is an enemy to you, so take (treat) him as an enemy. He only invites his followers that they may become the dwellers of the blazing Fire (6)\nConsolation in the fact that the previous Messengers were denied, and a reminder of the Resurrection\nAllah says: 'Even if these idolators who associate others with Allah disbelieve in you, O Muhammad, and go against the Message of Tawhid that you have brought, you have an example in the Messengers who came before you.' They also brought a clear Message to their people and told them to worship Allah alone, but their people denied them and went against them.\nوَإِلَى اللَّهِ تُرْجَعُ الْأُمُورُ\n(And to Allah return all matters (for decision).) means, 'We will requite them for that in full.' Then Allah says:\nيَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّ وَعْدَ اللَّهِ حَقٌّ ۖ\n(O mankind! Verily, the promise of Allah is true.) meaning the Resurrection will undoubtedy come to pass.\nفَلَا تَغُرَّنَّكُمُ الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا ۖ\n(So, let not this present life deceive you,) means, 'this life is as nothing in compare to the great good that Allah has promised to His close friends and the followers of His Messengers, so do not let these transient attractions distract you from that which is lasting.'\nوَلَا يَغُرَّنَّكُمْ بِاللَّهِ الْغَرُورُ\n(and let not the chief deceiver deceive you about Allah.) This refers to Shaytan, as stated by Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him. Meaning, do not let the Shaytan tempt you and divert you away from following the Messengers of Allah and believing what they say, for he is the chief deceiver and arch-liar. This Ayah is like the Ayah that appears at the end of Surah Luqman:\nفَلَا تَغُرَّنَّكُمُ الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا وَلَا يَغُرَّنَّكُمْ بِاللَّهِ الْغَرُورُ\n(let not then this (worldly) present life deceive you, nor let the chief deceiver deceive you about Allah)(31:33). Then Allah tells us of the enmity of Iblis towards the sons of Adam:\nإِنَّ الشَّيْطَانَ لَكُمْ عَدُوٌّ فَاتَّخِذُوهُ عَدُوًّا ۚ\n(Surely, Shaytan is an enemy to you, so take (treat) him as an enemy.) meaning, 'he has declared his enmity towards you, so be even more hostile towards him, oppose him and do not believe the things with which he tries to tempt you.'\nإِنَّمَا يَدْعُو حِزْبَهُ لِيَكُونُوا مِنْ أَصْحَابِ السَّعِيرِ\n(He only invites his followers that they may become the dwellers of the blazing Fire.) means, 'he only wants to misguide you so that you will enter the blazing Fire with him.' This is a manifest enemy, and we ask Allah, the All-Powerful and Almighty to make us enemies of Shaytan and to make us followers of the Book of Allah and of the way of His Messengers. For He is able to do whatever He wills and He will respond to all supplication. This is like the Ayah:\nوَإِذْ قُلْنَا لِلْمَلَائِكَةِ اسْجُدُوا لِآدَمَ فَسَجَدُوا إِلَّا إِبْلِيسَ كَانَ مِنَ الْجِنِّ فَفَسَقَ عَنْ أَمْرِ رَبِّهِ ۗ أَفَتَتَّخِذُونَهُ وَذُرِّيَّتَهُ أَوْلِيَاءَ مِنْ دُونِي وَهُمْ لَكُمْ عَدُوٌّ ۚ بِئْسَ لِلظَّالِمِينَ بَدَلًا\n(And (remember) when We said to the angels: \"Prostrate yourselves unto Adam.\" So they prostrated themselves except Iblis. He was one of the Jinn; he disobeyed the command of his Lord. Will you then take him (Iblis) and his offspring as protectors and helpers rather than Me while they are enemies to you What an evil is the exchange for the wrongdoers.)(18:50)","href":"/tafsir/35?verse=4","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:35:7","title":"Ibn Kathir · 35:7–8","text":"Those who disbelieve, theirs will be a severe torment; and those who believe and do righteous good deeds, theirs will be forgiveness and a great reward (7)Is he, then, to whom the evil of his deeds is made fairseeming, so that he considers it as good? Verily, Allah sends astray whom He wills, and guides whom He wills. So destroy not yourself in sorrow for them. Truly, Allah is the All-Knower of what they do (8)\nThe Punishment of the Disbeliever and the Reward of the Believer on the Day of Resurrection\nHaving stated that the ultimate destiny of the followers of Iblis will be the blazing Fire, Allah then tells us that for those who disbelieve there will be a severe punishment. This is because they obeyed the Shaytan and disobeyed Ar-Rahman. And He tells us that those who believed in Allah and His Messengers\nوَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ لَهُمْ مَغْفِرَةٌ\n(and do righteous good deeds, theirs will be forgiveness) meaning, from whatever sins they did,\nوَأَجْرٌ كَبِيرٌ\n(and a great reward.) for the good deeds that they did. Then Allah says:\nأَفَمَنْ زُيِّنَ لَهُ سُوءُ عَمَلِهِ فَرَآهُ حَسَنًا ۖ\n(Is he, then, to whom the evil of his deeds is made fairseeming, so that he considers it as good?) meaning, 'such as disbelievers or immoral persons who do evil deeds and believe that they are doing something good, i.e., a person who is like that has been misguided by Allah, so what can you do for him You cannot help him at all.'\nفَإِنَّ اللَّهَ يُضِلُّ مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَهْدِي مَنْ يَشَاءُ ۖ\n(Verily, Allah sends astray whom He wills and guides whom He wills.) means according to His decree.\nفَلَا تَذْهَبْ نَفْسُكَ عَلَيْهِمْ حَسَرَاتٍ\n(So destroy not yourself in sorrow for them.) means, do not grieve about that, for Allah is Wise in His decree and He leaves astray whomsoever He leaves astray, and He guides whomsoever He guides, and in doing so He has perfect knowledge and wisdom. Allah says:\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلِيمٌ بِمَا يَصْنَعُونَ\n(Truly, Allah is the All-Knower of what they do!)","href":"/tafsir/35?verse=7","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:35:9","title":"Ibn Kathir · 35:9–11","text":"And it is Allah Who sends the winds, so that they raise up the clouds, and We drive them to a dead land, and revive therewith the earth after its death. As such (will be) the Resurrection (9)Whosoever desires Al-'Izzah then to Allah belongs Al-'Izzah. To Him ascend the good words, and the righteous deeds exalt it, but those who plot evils, theirs will be a severe torment. And the plotting of such will perish (10)And Allah did create you from dust, then from Nutfah, then He made you pairs. And no female conceives or gives birth but with His knowledge. And no aged man is granted a length of life nor is a part cut off from his life, but is in a Book. Surely, that is easy for Allah (11)\nEvidence of Life after Death\nOften Allah refers to the Resurrection by using the analogy of the earth coming back to life after it has died, as in the beginning of Surat Al-Hajj, where He urges His servants to draw the lesson of the former from the latter. For the earth is dead and lifeless, with nothing growing in it, then He sends to it clouds which bring water, which He sends down upon it,\nاهْتَزَّتْ وَرَبَتْ وَأَنْبَتَتْ مِنْ كُلِّ زَوْجٍ بَهِيجٍ\n(it is stirred (to life), and it swells and puts forth every lovely kind (of growth))(22:5). So too, when Allah wishes to resurrect the bodies, He will send rain from beneath the Throne which will cover the whole earth, and the bodies will grow in their graves like seeds grow in the earth. It says in the Sahih:\nكُلُّ ابْنِ آدَمَ يَبْلَىٰ إِلَّا عَجْبُ الذَّنَبِ، مِنْهُ خُلِقَ وَمِنْهُ يُرَكَّبُ\n(Every part of the son of Adam will disintegrate apart from the coccyx, from which he was created and from him he will be made anew.) Allah says:\nكَذَٰلِكَ النُّشُورُ\n(As such (will be) the Resurrection!) According to the Hadith of Abu Razin: \"I said, 'O Messenger of Allah, how will Allah bring the dead back to life? What is the sign of that in His creation?' He ﷺ said:\nيَا أَبَا رَزِينٍ! أَمَا مَرَرْتَ بِوَادِي قَوْمِكَ مُمْحِلًا ثُمَّ مَرَرْتَ بِهِ يَهْتَزُّ خَضِرًا\n(O Abu Razin, do you not pass through the valley of your people (and see it) arid and barren, then you pass through it (and see it) stirred (to life) and green?) I said, 'Yes.' He ﷺ said:\nفَكَذَلِكَ يُحْيِي اللهُ الْمَوْتَى\n(Thus will Allah bring the dead back to life.)\"\nHonor, Power and Glory in this World and in the Hereafter come only by obeying Allah\nمَنْ كَانَ يُرِيدُ الْعِزَّةَ فَلِلَّهِ الْعِزَّةُ جَمِيعًا ۚ\n(Whosoever desires Al-'Izzah then to Allah belongs all Al-'Izzah.) means, whoever desires honor, power and glory in this world and the next, let him be obedient towards Allah, may He be exalted. This will help him reach his goal, for Allah is the Sovereign of this world and the Hereafter, and to Him belong all honor, power and glory. This is like the Ayat:\nالَّذِينَ يَتَّخِذُونَ الْكَافِرِينَ أَوْلِيَاءَ مِنْ دُونِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ ۚ أَيَبْتَغُونَ عِنْدَهُمُ الْعِزَّةَ فَإِنَّ الْعِزَّةَ لِلَّهِ جَمِيعًا\n(Those who take disbelievers for protectors instead of believers, do they seek Al-'Izzah with them? Verily, then to Allah belongs all honor, power and glory.)(4:139)\nوَلَا يَحْزُنْكَ قَوْلُهُمْ ۘ إِنَّ الْعِزَّةَ لِلَّهِ جَمِيعًا ۚ\n(And let not their speech grieve you, for all Al-'Izzah belongs to Allah)(10:65).\nوَلِلَّهِ الْعِزَّةُ وَلِرَسُولِهِ وَلِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَلَٰكِنَّ الْمُنَافِقِينَ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ\n(But Al-'Izzah belongs to Allah, and to His Messenger, and to the believers, but the hypocrites know not)(63:8). Mujahid said:\nمَنْ كَانَ يُرِيدُ الْعِزَّةَ\n(Whosoever desires Al-'Izzah) means, by worshipping idols,\nفَإِنَّ الْعِزَّةَ لِلَّهِ جَمِيعًا\n(then to Allah belongs Al-'Izzah).\nمَنْ كَانَ يُرِيدُ الْعِزَّةَ فَلِلَّهِ الْعِزَّةُ جَمِيعًا ۚ\n(Whosoever desires Al-'Izzah then to Allah belongs Al-'Izzah.) means, let him seek honor, power and glory through obeying Allah, may He be glorified.\nRighteous Deeds ascend to Allah\nإِلَيْهِ يَصْعَدُ الْكَلِمُ الطَّيِّبُ\n(To Him ascend the good words,) means, words of remembrance, recitation of Qur'an, and supplications. This was the view of more than one of the Salaf.\nIbn Jarir recorded that Al-Mukhariq bin Sulaym said that 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud, may Allah be pleased with him, said to them, \"If we tell you a Hadith, we will bring you proof of it from the Book of Allah. When the Muslim servants says, 'Glory and praise be to Allah, there is no god worthy of worship except Allah, Allah is Most Great and blessed be Allah,' an angel takes these words and puts them under his wing, then he ascends with them to the heaven. He does not take them past any group of angels but they seek forgiveness for the one who said them, until he brings them before Allah, may He be glorified.\" Then 'Abdullah, may Allah be pleased with him, recited:\nإِلَيْهِ يَصْعَدُ الْكَلِمُ الطَّيِّبُ وَالْعَمَلُ الصَّالِحُ يَرْفَعُهُ ۚ\n(To Him ascend the good words, and the righteous deeds exalt it).\" Imam Ahmad recorded that An-Nu'man bin Bashir, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nالَّذِينَ يَذْكُرُونَ اللهَ مِنْ جَلَالِ اللهِ مِنْ تَسْبِيحِهِ وَتَكْبِيرِهِ وَتَحْمِيدِهِ وَتَهْلِيلِهِ، يَتَعَاطَفْنَ حَوْلَ الْعَرْشِ لَهُنَّ دَوِيٌّ كَدَوِيِّ النَّحْلِ، يَذْكُرْنَ بِصَاحِبِهِنَّ، أَلَا يُحِبُّ أَحَدُكُمْ أَنْ لَا يَزَالَ لَهُ عِنْدَ اللهِ شَيْءٌ يُذَكِّرُ بِهِ\n(Those who remember Allah and glory Allah by saying, 'Glory be to Allah, Allah is most Great, all praise is due to Allah and La ilaha illallah, these words go around the Throne buzzing like bees, mentioning those who said them. Would one of you not like to have something with Allah mentioning him?)\" This was also recorded by Ibn Majah.\nوَالْعَمَلُ الصَّالِحُ يَرْفَعُهُ\n(and the righteous deeds exalt it). Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The good word is the remembrance of Allah, may He be exalted, which is taken up to Allah, and the righteous deed is the performance of obligatory duties. Whoever remembers Allah when doing an obligatory duty, his deed carries his remembrance of Allah and takes it up to Allah, may He be exalted. Whoever remembers Allah and does not perform the obligatory duties, his words will be rejected, as will his deed.\"\nوَالَّذِينَ يَمْكُرُونَ السَّيِّئَاتِ\n(but those who plot evils,) Mujahid, Said bin Jubayr and Shahr bin Hawshab said, \"This refers to those who show off by their actions,\" i.e., they deceive the people by giving the impression that they are obeying Allah, when in fact they are hated by Allah for showing off. Allah says:\nلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ شَدِيدٌ ۖ وَمَكْرُ أُولَٰئِكَ هُوَ يَبُورُ\n(theirs will be severe torment. And the plotting of such will perish.) meaning, it will fail and vanish, for their reality is apparent from up close to those who have insight and wisdom. No one conceals a secret but Allah will cause it to become known, on his face or by a slip of the tongue, or He will cause the person to wear it like a cloak (so that everyone will see it). If it is good, then the consequences will be good, and if it is bad, then the consequences will be bad. The person who shows off cannot continue to deceive anyone but the fool, but the believers who have insight are not deceived by that; from up close, they soon discover it. And nothing at all can be hidden from the Knower of the Unseen (Allah).\nAllah is the Creator and Knower of the Unseen\nوَاللَّهُ خَلَقَكُمْ مِنْ تُرَابٍ ثُمَّ مِنْ نُطْفَةٍ\n(And Allah did create you from dust, then from Nutfah,) means, He initiated the creation of your father Adam from dust, then He created his offspring from semen of worthless water.\nثُمَّ جَعَلَكُمْ أَزْوَاجًا\n(then He made you pairs.) means, male and female, as a kindness and a mercy from Him, He gave you partners from your own kind, that you may find repose in them.\nوَمَا تَحْمِلُ مِنْ أُنْثَىٰ وَلَا تَضَعُ إِلَّا بِعِلْمِهِ ۚ\n(And no female conceives or gives birth but with His knowledge.) means, He knows about that and nothing is hidden from Him at all, but,\nوَمَا تَسْقُطُ مِنْ وَرَقَةٍ إِلَّا يَعْلَمُهَا وَلَا حَبَّةٍ فِي ظُلُمَاتِ الْأَرْضِ وَلَا رَطْبٍ وَلَا يَابِسٍ إِلَّا فِي كِتَابٍ مُبِينٍ\n(not a leaf falls, but He knows it. There is not a grain in the darkness of the earth nor anything fresh or dry, but is written in a Clear Record.)(6:59) We have already discussed in this respect in the Ayah:\nاللَّهُ يَعْلَمُ مَا تَحْمِلُ كُلُّ أُنْثَىٰ وَمَا تَغِيضُ الْأَرْحَامُ وَمَا تَزْدَادُ ۖ وَكُلُّ شَيْءٍ عِنْدَهُ بِمِقْدَارٍ - عَالِمُ الْغَيْبِ وَالشَّهَادَةِ الْكَبِيرُ الْمُتَعَالِ\n(Allah knows what every female bears, and by how much the wombs fall short or exceed. Everything with Him is in (due) proportion. All-Knower of the unseen and the seen, the Most Great, the Most High.)(13:8-9).\nوَمَا يُعَمَّرُ مِنْ مُعَمَّرٍ وَلَا يُنْقَصُ مِنْ عُمُرِهِ إِلَّا فِي كِتَابٍ ۚ\n(And no aged man is granted a length of life nor is a part cut off from his life, but is in a Book.) means, some of those sperm are granted a long life, which He knows and it is recorded with Him in the First Book.\nوَلَا يُنْقَصُ مِنْ عُمُرِهِ\n(nor is a part cut off from his life,) Here the pronoun (his) refers to mankind in general, not to a specific person, because the long life which is recorded in the Book and is known by Allah will not be cut off. It was reported via Al-Awfi that Ibn Abbas said concerning the Ayah,\nوَمَا يُعَمَّرُ مِنْ مُعَمَّرٍ وَلَا يُنْقَصُ مِنْ عُمُرِهِ إِلَّا فِي كِتَابٍ ۚ إِنَّ ذَٰلِكَ عَلَى اللَّهِ يَسِيرٌ\n(And no aged man is granted a length of life nor is a part cut off from his life, but is in a Book. Surely, that is easy for Allah.) There is no one for whom Allah has decreed a long life but he will reach the age that has been decreed for him. When he reaches the time that has been decreed for him, he will not surpass it. And there is no one for whom Allah has decreed a short life but it will end when he reaches the age that has been decreed for him. Allah says:\nوَلَا يُنْقَصُ مِنْ عُمُرِهِ إِلَّا فِي كِتَابٍ ۚ إِنَّ ذَٰلِكَ عَلَى اللَّهِ يَسِيرٌ\n(nor is a part cut off from his life, but is in a Book. Surely, that is easy for Allah.) He said, \"That is recorded in a Book with Him.\" This was also the view of Ad-Dahhak bin Muzahim. On the other hand, some of them said, \"The phrase\nوَمَا يُعَمَّرُ مِنْ مُعَمَّرٍ\n(And no aged man is granted a length of life) means, what He decrees for him of life, and\nوَلَا يُنْقَصُ مِنْ عُمُرِهِ\n(nor is a part cut off from his life) means, his time is constantly decreasing. All of this is known to Allah year after year, month after month, week after week, day after day, hour after hour. Everything is written with Allah in His Book.\" This was reported by Ibn Jarir from Abu Malik, and was also the view of As-Suddi and 'Ata' Al-Khurasani.\nIn the Tafsir of this Ayah, An-Nasa'i recorded that Anas bin Malik, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ say:\nمَنْ سَرَّهُ أَنْ يُبْسَطَ لَهُ فِي رِزْقِهِ وَيُنْسَأَ لَهُ فِي أَثَرِهِ فَلْيَصِلْ رَحِمَهُ\n(Whoever would like to have ample provision and a long life, let him uphold the ties of kinship.)\"\nIt was also recorded by Al-Bukhari, Muslim and Abu Dawud.\nإِنَّ ذَٰلِكَ عَلَى اللَّهِ يَسِيرٌ\n(Surely, that is easy for Allah.) means, that is very easy for Him, and He has detailed knowledge of all His creation, for His knowledge encompasses all things, and nothing at all is hidden from Him.","href":"/tafsir/35?verse=9","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:35:12","title":"Ibn Kathir · 35:12","text":"And the two seas (kinds of water) are not alike: this is palatable, sweet and pleasant to drink, and that is salty and bitter. And from them both you eat fresh tender meat (fish), and derive the ornaments that you wear. And you see the ships cleaving, that you may seek of His bounty, and that you may give thanks (12)\nThe Blessings and Signs of Allah\nAllah says, pointing out His mighty power in creating different things, how He has created the two seas (kinds of water). The fresh, palatable sea (kind of water) refers to the rivers which flow among people, rivers great and small according to people's needs in all regions and areas and lands. This water is sweet and palatable for whoever wants to drink it.\nوَهَٰذَا مِلْحٌ أُجَاجٌ\n(and that is salty and bitter.) means, unpalatable. This is the ocean in which the big ships sail, and is salty and undrinkable. Allah says:\nوَهَٰذَا مِلْحٌ أُجَاجٌ\n(and that is salty and bitter.) Then Allah says:\nوَمِنْ كُلٍّ تَأْكُلُونَ لَحْمًا طَرِيًّا\n(And from them both you eat fresh tender meat,) meaning, fish.\nوَتَسْتَخْرِجُونَ حِلْيَةً تَلْبَسُونَهَا\n(and derive the ornaments that you wear.) This is like the Ayah:\nيَخْرُجُ مِنْهُمَا اللُّؤْلُؤُ وَالْمَرْجَانُ - فَبِأَيِّ آلَاءِ رَبِّكُمَا تُكَذِّبَانِ\n(Out of them both come out pearl and coral. Then which of the blessings of your Lord will you both (Jinn and men) deny?)(55:22-23).\nوَتَرَى الْفُلْكَ فِيهِ مَوَاخِرَ\n(And you see the ships cleaving,) means, they travel through it, plowing through the water with their beak-shaped bows. Muja0hid said, The wind drives the ships, and the wind cannot drive any ships except the big ones.\nلِتَبْتَغُوا مِنْ فَضْلِهِ\n(that you may seek of His bounty,) means, through your journeys to engage in trade from one land to another.\nوَلَعَلَّكُمْ تَشْكُرُونَ\n(and that you may give thanks.) means, that you may give thanks to your Lord for subjugating this mighty creation – the sea – to you, so that you can travel through it as you wish and go wherever you want, and nothing stops you; His power has subjugated for you whatever is in the heavens and on earth, and all of this is by His grace and mercy.","href":"/tafsir/35?verse=12","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:35:13","title":"Ibn Kathir · 35:13–14","text":"He merges the night into the day, and He merges the day into the night. And He has subjected the sun and the moon, each runs its course for a term appointed. Such is Allah, your Lord; His is the kingdom. And those, whom you invoke or call upon instead of Him, own not even a Qitmir (13)If you invoke them, they hear your call; and if (in case) they were to hear, they could not grant it to you. And on the Day of Resurrection, they will disown your worshipping them. And none can inform you like Him Who is the All-Knower (14)\nThe gods of the Idolators do not even own a Qitmir\nAnother aspect of His perfect power and might is that He has subjugated the night with its darkness and the day with its light. He takes from the length of the one and adds it to the shortness of the other, until they become equal. Then He takes from the latter and adds to the former, so one becomes long and the other becomes short, so they take from one another in summer and in winter.\nوَسَخَّرَ الشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ\n(And He has subjected the sun and the moon,) and the stars and planets, with their light. All of them run in their appointed courses and in the manner prescribed for them, as decreed by the Almighty, All-Knowing.\nكُلٌّ يَجْرِي لِأَجَلٍ مُسَمًّى\n(each runs its course for a term appointed.) means, until the Day of Resurrection.\nذَٰلِكُمُ اللَّهُ رَبُّكُمْ\n(Such is Allah, your Lord?) means, the One Who has done all this is the Almighty Lord besides Whom there is no other true God.\nوَالَّذِينَ تَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِهِ\n(And those, whom you invoke or call upon instead of Him,) means, 'the idols and false gods whom you claim to be in the form of angels who are close to Allah,'\nمَا يَمْلِكُونَ مِنْ قِطْمِيرٍ\n(own not even a Qitmir.) Ibn Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, 'Ata', 'Atiyah Al-'Awfi, Al-Hasan, Qatadah and others said, \"This is the thread that is attached to the pit of a date.\" In other words, they do not possess anything in the heavens or on earth, not even anything equivalent to this Qitmir. Then Allah says:\nإِنْ تَدْعُوهُمْ لَا يَسْمَعُوا دُعَاءَكُمْ\n(If you invoke them, they hear not your call;) means, 'the gods upon whom you call instead of Allah, do not hear your supplication, because they are inanimate and have no soul in them.'\nوَلَوْ سَمِعُوا مَا اسْتَجَابُوا لَكُمْ\n(and if (in case) they were to hear, they could not grant it to you.) means, 'they are not able to do any of the things that you ask them for.'\nوَيَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ يَكْفُرُونَ بِشِرْكِكُمْ ۚ\n(And on the Day of Resurrection, they will disown your worshipping them) means, 'they will disown you.' This is like the Ayat:\nوَمَنْ أَضَلُّ مِمَّنْ يَدْعُو مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ مَنْ لَا يَسْتَجِيبُ لَهُ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ وَهُمْ عَنْ دُعَائِهِمْ غَافِلُونَ - وَإِذَا حُشِرَ النَّاسُ كَانُوا لَهُمْ أَعْدَاءً وَكَانُوا بِعِبَادَتِهِمْ كَافِرِينَ\n(And who is more astray than one who calls on besides Allah, such as will not answer him till the Day of Resurrection, and who are (even) unaware of their calls to them? And when mankind are gathered, they (false deities) will become their enemies and will deny their worshipping.)(46:5-6), and\nوَاتَّخَذُوا مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ آلِهَةً لِيَكُونُوا لَهُمْ عِزًّا - كَلَّا ۚ سَيَكْفُرُونَ بِعِبَادَتِهِمْ وَيَكُونُونَ عَلَيْهِمْ ضِدًّا\n(And they have taken gods besides Allah, that they might give them honor, power and glory. Nay, but they will deny their worship of them, and become opponents to them.)(19:81-82)\nوَلَا يُنَبِّئُكَ مِثْلُ خَبِيرٍ\n(And none can inform you like Him Who is the All-Knower.) means, no one can tell you about the consequences of things and how they will end like the One Who is the All-Knower of them. Qatadah said, \"He is referring to Himself, may He be blessed and exalted, for He undoubtedly tells the truth.\"","href":"/tafsir/35?verse=13","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:35:15","title":"Ibn Kathir · 35:15–18","text":"O mankind! it is you who stand in need of Allah. But Allah is the Rich, Worthy of all praise (15)If He willed, He could destroy you and bring about a new creation (16)And that is not hard for Allah (17)And no bearer of burdens shall bear another's burden; and if one heavily laden calls another to (bear) his load, nothing of it will be lifted even though he be near of kin. You can warn only those who fear their Lord unseen and perform the Salah. And he who purifies himself (from all kinds of sins), then he purifies only for the benefit of himself. And to Allah is the Return (of all)(18)\nMankind is in need of Allah, and each Person will carry His own Burdens on the Day of Resurrection\nAllah tells us that He has no need of anyone or anything else, but all of creation is in need of Him and is in a position of humility before Him. He says:\nيَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ أَنْتُمُ الْفُقَرَاءُ إِلَى اللَّهِ ۖ\n(O mankind! it is you who stand in need of Allah.) meaning, they need Him in all that they do, but He has no need of them at all. Allah says:\nوَاللَّهُ هُوَ الْغَنِيُّ الْحَمِيدُ\n(But Allah is the Rich, Worthy of all praise.) meaning, He is unique in His being Free of all needs, and has no partner or associate, and He is Worthy of all praise in all that He does, says, decrees and legislates.\nإِنْ يَشَأْ يُذْهِبْكُمْ وَيَأْتِ بِخَلْقٍ جَدِيدٍ\n(If He willed, He could destroy you and bring about a new creation.) means, if He wanted to, He could destroy you and bring forth another people, and this is not difficult or impossible for Him. He says:\nوَمَا ذَٰلِكَ عَلَى اللَّهِ بِعَزِيزٍ\n(And that is not hard for Allah.) Allah's saying:\nوَلَا تَزِرُ وَازِرَةٌ وِزْرَ أُخْرَىٰ ۚ\n(And no bearer of burdens shall bear another's burden;) means, on the Day of Resurrection.\nوَإِنْ تَدْعُ مُثْقَلَةٌ إِلَىٰ حِمْلِهَا\n(and if one heavily laden calls another to (bear) his load,) means, if the person who is carrying a heavy burden calls someone else to help him carry his load, all or part of it,\nلَا يُحْمَلْ مِنْهُ شَيْءٌ وَلَوْ كَانَ ذَا قُرْبَىٰ ۗ\n(nothing of it will be lifted even though he be near of kin.) means, even if he is closely-related to him, even if he is his father or son, for each person will be preoccupied with his own self and his own situation. Then Allah says:\nإِنَّمَا تُنْذِرُ الَّذِينَ يَخْشَوْنَ رَبَّهُمْ بِالْغَيْبِ وَأَقَامُوا الصَّلَاةَ ۚ\n(You can warn only those who fear their Lord unseen and perform the Salah.) means, 'the only ones who will draw a lesson from what you have brought are those who are possessed of insight and wisdom, who fear their Lord and who do as He commands.'\nوَمَنْ تَزَكَّىٰ فَإِنَّمَا يَتَزَكَّىٰ لِنَفْسِهِ ۚ\n(And he who purifies himself, then he purifies only for the benefit of himself.) means, who does righteous deeds, the benefit of that will come back to him,\nوَإِلَى اللَّهِ الْمَصِيرُ\n(And to Allah is the Return.) means, to Him everything will ultimately return, and He is swift in bringing to account. He will reward or punish everyone according to his deeds: if they are good, then the end will be good, and if they are bad, then the end will be bad.","href":"/tafsir/35?verse=15","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:35:19","title":"Ibn Kathir · 35:19–26","text":"Not alike are the blind and the seeing (19)Nor are (depths of) darkness and light (20)Nor are the shade and the sun's heat (21)Nor are the living and the dead. Verily, Allah makes whom He wills to hear, but you cannot make hear those who are in graves (22)You are only a warner (23)Verily, We have sent you with the truth, a bearer of glad tidings and a warner. And there never was a nation but a warner had passed among them (24)And if they deny you, those before them also denied. Their Messengers came to them with clear signs, and with the Scriptures, and with the Book giving light (25)Then I took hold of those who disbelieved, and how terrible was My denial (26)\nThe Believer and the Disbeliever are not equal\nAllah says that these antonyms are clearly not equal, the blind and the seeing are not equal, there is a difference and a huge gap between them. Darkness and light are not equal, neither are shade and the sun's heat. By the same token, the living and the dead are not equal. This is the parable Allah makes of the believers who are the living, and the disbelievers who are the dead. This is like the Ayat:\nأَوَمَنْ كَانَ مَيْتًا فَأَحْيَيْنَاهُ وَجَعَلْنَا لَهُ نُورًا يَمْشِي بِهِ فِي النَّاسِ كَمَنْ مَثَلُهُ فِي الظُّلُمَاتِ لَيْسَ بِخَارِجٍ مِنْهَا ۚ\n(Is he who was dead and We gave him life and set for him a light (of belief) whereby he can walk amongst men – like him who is in the (depths of) darkness from which he can never come out?)(6:122),\nمَثَلُ الْفَرِيقَيْنِ كَالْأَعْمَىٰ وَالْأَصَمِّ وَالْبَصِيرِ وَالسَّمِيعِ ۚ هَلْ يَسْتَوِيَانِ مَثَلًا ۚ\n(The parable of the two parties is as that of the blind and the deaf and the seer and the hearer. Are they equal when compared?)(11:24)\nThe believer sees and hears, and walks in the light upon a straight path in this world and the Hereafter, until he comes to settle in Gardens (Paradise) wherein is shade and springs. The disbeliever is blind and deaf, walking in darkness from which he cannot escape, he is lost in his misguidance in this world and the Hereafter, until he ends up in fierce hot wind and boiling water, and shadow of black smoke, neither cool nor good.\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ يُسْمِعُ مَنْ يَشَاءُ ۖ\n(Verily, Allah makes whom He wills to hear,) means. He guides them to listen to the proof and accept it and adhere it.\nوَمَا أَنْتَ بِمُسْمِعٍ مَنْ فِي الْقُبُورِ\n(but you cannot make hear those who are in graves.) means, 'just as the dead cannot benefit from guidance and the call to truth after they have died as disbelievers and ended up in the graves, so too you cannot help these idolators who are decreed to be doomed, and you cannot guide them.'\nإِنْ أَنْتَ إِلَّا نَذِيرٌ\n(You are only a warner) means, 'all you have to do is to convey the Message and warn them, and Allah leaves astray whomsoever He wills and guides whomsoever He wills.'\nإِنَّا أَرْسَلْنَاكَ بِالْحَقِّ بَشِيرًا وَنَذِيرًا ۚ\n(Verily, We have sent you with the truth, a bearer of glad tidings and a warner.) means, a bearer of glad tidings to the believers and a warner to the disbelievers.\nوَإِنْ مِنْ أُمَّةٍ إِلَّا خَلَا فِيهَا نَذِيرٌ\n(And there never was a nation but a warner had passed among them.) means, there was never any nation among the sons of Adam but Allah sent warners to them, and left them with no excuse. This is like the Ayat:\nإِنَّمَا أَنْتَ مُنْذِرٌ ۖ وَلِكُلِّ قَوْمٍ هَادٍ\n(You are only a warner, and to every people there is a guide)(13:7).\nوَلَقَدْ بَعَثْنَا فِي كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ رَسُولًا أَنِ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ وَاجْتَنِبُوا الطَّاغُوتَ ۖ فَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ هَدَى اللَّهُ وَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ حَقَّتْ عَلَيْهِ الضَّلَالَةُ ۚ\n(And verily, We have sent among every Ummah a Messenger (proclaiming): \"Worship Allah, and avoid all false deities.\" Then of them were some whom Allah guided and of them were some upon whom the straying was justified)(16:36). And there are many similar Ayat.\nوَإِنْ يُكَذِّبُوكَ فَقَدْ كَذَّبَ الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ جَاءَتْهُمْ رُسُلُهُمْ بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ\n(And if they deny you, those before them also denied. Their Messengers came to them with clear signs,) means, clear miracles and definitive proofs.\nوَبِالزُّبُرِ\n(and with the Scriptures,) means, the Books.\nوَبِالْكِتَابِ الْمُنِيرِ\n(and with the Book giving light.) means, clear and obvious.\nثُمَّ أَخَذْتُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا ۖ\n(Then I took hold of those who disbelieved,) means, 'despite all of this, they denied the Messengers and the Message they brought, so I seized them, i.e., with My punishment.'\nفَكَيْفَ كَانَ نَكِيرِ\n(and how terrible was My denial!) means, 'how great and intense and terrible do you think My punishment was?' And Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/35?verse=19","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:35:27","title":"Ibn Kathir · 35:27–28","text":"See you not that Allah sends down water from the sky, and We produce therewith fruits of various colors, and among the mountains are Judad, white and red, of varying colors and (others) Gharabib black (27)And likewise, men and moving creature and cattle are of various colors. It is only those among His servants who have knowledge that fear Allah. Verily, Allah is Almighty, Oft-Forgiving (28)\nThe Perfect Power of Allah\nAllah tells us of His complete and perfect power of creation. He tells us how He makes different kinds of things from one thing, which is the water that He sends down from the heaven. From water He brings forth fruits of various colors, yellow, red, green, white and other colors, as we can see in the immense variety of their colors, tastes and scents. This is like another Ayah where Allah says:\nوَفِي الْأَرْضِ قِطَعٌ مُتَجَاوِرَاتٌ وَجَنَّاتٌ مِنْ أَعْنَابٍ وَزَرْعٌ وَنَخِيلٌ صِنْوَانٌ وَغَيْرُ صِنْوَانٍ يُسْقَىٰ بِمَاءٍ وَاحِدٍ وَنُفَضِّلُ بَعْضَهَا عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ فِي الْأُكُلِ ۚ إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِقَوْمٍ يَعْقِلُونَ\n(And in the earth are neighbouring tracts, and gardens of vines, and green crops, and date palms, growing into two or three from a single stem root, or otherwise, watered with the same water; yet some of them We make more excellent than others to eat. Verily, in these things there are Ayat for the people who understand.)(13:4)\nوَمِنَ الْجِبَالِ جُدَدٌ بِيضٌ وَحُمْرٌ مُخْتَلِفٌ أَلْوَانُهَا\n(and among the mountains are Judad, white and red, of varying colors) means, He created the mountains like this, with different colors, as we also see that there are indeed white and red mountains, and in some of them there are streaks which are also of varying colors. Ibn 'Abbas said Al-Judad means pathways. This was also the view of Abu Malik, Al-Hasan, Qatadah and As-Suddi. And there are some mountains which are very black. 'Ikrimah said, \"Al-Gharabib means mountains which are high and black.\" This was also the view of Abu Malik, 'Ata' Al-Khurasani and Qatadah. Ibn Jarir said, \"When the Arabs describe something as being very black, they say Ghirbib.\"\nوَمِنَ النَّاسِ وَالدَّوَابِّ وَالْأَنْعَامِ مُخْتَلِفٌ أَلْوَانُهُ كَذَٰلِكَ ۗ\n(And likewise, men and moving creatures and cattle are of various colors.) means, the same is true of living creatures too, humans and animals, all creatures which walk on their feet, and cattle. Here something general is followed by something specific. These are all different too, for among mankind there are Berbers, Ethiopians and some non-Arabs who are very black, and Slavs and Romans who are very white, and the Arabs who are in between, and the Indians. Allah says in another Ayah:\nوَاخْتِلَافُ أَلْسِنَتِكُمْ وَأَلْوَانِكُمْ ۚ إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِلْعَالِمِينَ\n(and the difference of your languages and colors. Verily, in that are indeed signs for men of sound knowledge)(30:22). Similarly, animals and cattle vary in their colors, even within one species, and a single animal may have patches of different colors. Blessed be Allah, the Best of creators. Allah then says:\nإِنَّمَا يَخْشَى اللَّهَ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ الْعُلَمَاءُ ۗ\n(It is only those who have knowledge among His servants that fear Allah.) meaning, only those who have knowledge truly fear Him as He should be feared, because the more they know about the Almighty, All-Powerful, All-Knowing Who has the most perfect attributes and is described with the most beautiful Names, the more they will fear Him.\nAli bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas commented on the Ayah:\nإِنَّمَا يَخْشَى اللَّهَ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ الْعُلَمَاءُ ۗ\n(It is only those who have knowledge among His servants that fear Allah.) those who know that Allah is able to do all things. Ibn 'Abbas said, \"The one among His servants who knows about Ar-Rahman, is the one who does not associate anything in worship with Him; the one who accepts as lawful that which He has permitted and accepts as unlawful that which He has prohibited. He obeys His commands and is certain that he will meet Him and be brought to account for his deeds. Sa'id bin Jubayr said, \"Fear is what stands between you and disobeying Allah, may He be glorified.\" Al-Hasan Al-Basri said, \"The knowledgeable person is the one who fears Ar-Rahman with regard to the Unseen, who likes that which Allah wants him to like, and who shuns that which angers Allah.\" Then Al-Hasan recited:\nإِنَّمَا يَخْشَى اللَّهَ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ الْعُلَمَاءُ ۗ إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَزِيزٌ غَفُورٌ\n(It is only those among His servants who have knowledge that fear Allah. Verily, Allah is Almighty, Oft-Forgiving.) Sufyan Ath-Thawri narrated from Abu Hayyan At-Taymi from a man who said, \"It used to be said that the knowledgeable are of three types: (first) one who knows Allah and the command of Allah, (second) one who knows Allah but does not know the command of Allah, and (third) one who knows the command of Allah but does not know Allah. The one who knows Allah and the command of Allah is the one who fears Allah and knows the limits (Hudud) and the obligatory duties (Fara'id). The one who knows Allah but does not know the command of Allah is the one who fears Allah but does not know the limits (Hudud) and the obligatory duties (Fara'id). The one who knows the command of Allah but does not know Allah is the one who knows the limits (Hudud) and the obligatory duties (Fara'id) but does not fear Allah.\"","href":"/tafsir/35?verse=27","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:35:29","title":"Ibn Kathir · 35:29–30","text":"Verily, those who recite the Book of Allah, and perform the Salah, and spend out of what We have provided for them, secretly and openly, they hope for a (sure) trade-gain that will never perish (29)That He may pay them their wages in full, and give them (even) more, out of His grace. Verily, He is Oft-Forgiving, Most Ready to appreciate (30)\nThe Muslims will be the Ones Who gain in the Hereafter\nHere Allah tells us that His believing servants, who recite and believe in His Book, and do the deeds prescribed in it such as establishing regular prayer at the prescribed times, night and day, spending (in charity) out of that which Allah has provided for them secretly and openly,\nيَرْجُونَ تِجَارَةً لَنْ تَبُورَ\n(they hope for a (sure) trade-gain that will never perish.) means, they hope for a reward from Allah which will inevitably be theirs. Allah says:\nلِيُوَفِّيَهُمْ أُجُورَهُمْ وَيَزِيدَهُمْ مِنْ فَضْلِهِ ۚ\n(That He may pay them their wages in full, and give them (even) more, out of His grace.) meaning, that He may give them a reward for what they have done, and multiply it by adding more, such as has never occurred to them.\nإِنَّهُ غَفُورٌ\n(Verily, He is Oft-Forgiving,) means, He forgives their sins,\nشَكُورٌ\n(Most Ready to appreciate.) means, He appreciates even a little of their good deeds.","href":"/tafsir/35?verse=29","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:35:31","title":"Ibn Kathir · 35:31","text":"And what We have revealed to you of the Book, it is the (very) truth confirming that which was (revealed) before it. Verily, Allah is indeed All-Aware and All-Seer of His servants (31)\nThe Qur'an is The true Book of Allah\nوَالَّذِي أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْكَ\nAnd what We have revealed to you – O Muhammad, of the Book, i.e., the Qur'an,\nهُوَ الْحَقُّ مُصَدِّقًا لِمَا بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ\n(it is the (very) truth confirming that which was (revealed) before it.) means, of the previous books. It confirms them just as they bore witness to the coming of the Qur'an and that it would be sent down from the Lord of the worlds.\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ بِعِبَادِهِ لَخَبِيرٌ بَصِيرٌ\n(Verily, Allah is indeed All-Aware and All-Seer of His servants.) means, He is All-Aware of them and knows who deserves to receive the blessing which He may give to him and not to others. the Prophets and the Messengers are favored above the rest of mankind, and some of the Prophets were given more than others and given higher status than others. The position given to Muhammad ﷺ is higher than that of all the others, may the blessings and peace of Allah be upon them all.","href":"/tafsir/35?verse=31","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:35:32","title":"Ibn Kathir · 35:32","text":"Then We gave the Book as inheritance to such of Our servants whom We chose. Then of them are some who wrong themselves, and of them are some who follow a middle course, and of them are some who are, by Allah's leave, foremost in good deeds. That – that is indeed a great grace (32)\nThe Inheritance of the Qur'an is of three kinds\nAllah says: 'Then We made those who uphold the Book confirming what came before, the one whom We have chosen from among Our servants. They are this Ummah, who are divided into three types.' Allah says:\nفَمِنْهُمْ ظَالِمٌ لِنَفْسِهِ\n(Then of them are some who wrong themselves,) these are the ones who are careless about doing some obligatory actions, and who commit some forbidden actions.\nوَمِنْهُمْ مُقْتَصِدٌ\n(and of them are some who follow a middle course,) these are the ones who fulfill their obligations and avoid things that are forbidden, but they may neglect some good deeds and do some things which are disliked.\nوَمِنْهُمْ سَابِقٌ بِالْخَيْرَاتِ بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ\n(and of them are some who are, by Allah's leave, foremost in good deeds.) these are the ones who do obligatory actions and things which are encouraged, and who avoid doing unlawful and disliked actions, and avoid some actions which are permissible.\nAli bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas commented on the Ayah:\nثُمَّ أَوْرَثْنَا الْكِتَابَ الَّذِينَ اصْطَفَيْنَا مِنْ عِبَادِنَا ۖ\n(Then We gave the Book as inheritance to such of Our servants whom We chose.) \"This refers to the Ummah of Muhammad ﷺ. Allah caused it to inherit every Book that He had revealed; those who wrong themselves will be forgiven, those who follow a middle course will have an easy accounting, and those who are foremost in good deeds will enter Paradise without being brought to account.\" Abu Al-Qasim At-Tabarani reported from Ibn 'Abbas that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said one day:\nشَفَاعَتِي لِأَهْلِ الْكَبَائِرِ مِنْ أُمَّتِي\n(My intercession will be for those among my Ummah who commit major sins.)\"\nIbn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"Those who are foremost in good deeds will enter Paradise without being brought to account; those who follow a middle course will enter Paradise by the mercy of Allah; and those who wrong themselves and Ashab Al-A'raf will enter Paradise by the intercession of Muhammad ﷺ.\"\nIt was also reported from a number of the Salaf that those among this Ummah who wrong themselves are still among those whom Allah has chosen, even though they are imperfect and fell short [by not adhering to the straight path]. Others said that those who wrong themselves are not part of this Ummah and are not among those whom Allah has chosen and who inherited the Book. The correct view is that they are also part of this Ummah.\nThe Virtues of the Scholars\nThe scholars are the most fortunate of people with regard to this blessing, and the most entitled to this mercy. Imam Ahmad, may Allah have mercy on him, recorded that Qays bin Kathir said, \"One of the people of Al-Madinah came to Abu Ad-Darda', may Allah be pleased with him, when he was in Damascus. [Abu Ad-Darda'] said, 'What brought you here, my brother?' He said, 'A Hadith which I heard that you narrate from the Messenger of Allah ﷺ.' He said, 'Have you come for trade?' He said, 'No.' He said, 'Have you come for any other reason?' He said, 'No.' He said, 'Have you come only to seek this Hadith?' He said, 'Yes.' He, may Allah be pleased with him said, 'I heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ say:\nمَنْ سَلَكَ طَرِيقًا يَطْلُبُ فِيهَا عِلْمًا، سَلَكَ اللهُ تَعَالَى بِهِ طَرِيقًا إِلَى الْجَنَّةِ، وَإِنَّ الْمَلَائِكَةَ لَتَضَعُ أَجْنِحَتَهَا رِضًا لِطَالِبِ الْعِلْمِ، وَإِنَّهُ لَيَسْتَغْفِرُ لِلْعَالِمِ مَنْ فِي السَّمَوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ حَتَّى الْحِيتَانُ فِي الْمَاءِ، وَفَضْلُ الْعَالِمِ عَلَى الْعَابِدِ كَفَضْلِ الْقَمَرِ عَلَى سَائِرِ الْكَوَاكِبِ، وَإِنَّ الْعُلَمَاءَ هُمْ وَرَثَةُ الْأَنْبِيَاءِ، وَإِنَّ الْأَنْبِيَاءَ لَمْ يُوَرِّثُوا دِينَارًا وَلَا دِرْهَمًا، وَإِنَّمَا وَرَّثُوا الْعِلْمَ، فَمَنْ أَخَذَ بِهِ أَخَذَ بِحَظٍّ وَافِرٍ\n(Whoever follows a path to seek knowledge, Allah will show him the way to Paradise. The angels lower their wings being pleased with the one who seeks knowledge. Whoever is in the heavens and on earth, even the fish in the sea, ask for forgiveness for the scholar. The superiority of the scholar over the worshipper is like that of the moon over all other heavenly bodies. The scholars are the heirs of the Prophets, for the Prophets did not leave behind Dinars and Dirhams, but they left behind knowledge; and whoever receives it, receives an abundance of good fortune.)'\"\nIt was also reported by Abu Dawud, At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah.","href":"/tafsir/35?verse=32","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:35:33","title":"Ibn Kathir · 35:33–35","text":"'Adn (Gardens) will they enter, therein will they be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls, and their garments therein will be of silk (33)And they will say: \"All praise and thanks be to Allah, Who has removed from us (all) grief. Verily, our Lord is indeed Oft-Forgiving, Most Ready to appreciate. (34)\"Who, out of His grace, has lodged us in a home that will last forever, where toil will touch us not nor weariness will touch us. (35)\nAllah tells us that those whom He chose among His servants, those who inherited the Book which was revealed from the Lord of the worlds, will, on the Day of Resurrection, have an abode in Everlasting Gardens which they will enter on the Day when they are raised anew and meet Allah.\nيُحَلَّوْنَ فِيهَا مِنْ أَسَاوِرَ مِنْ ذَهَبٍ وَلُؤْلُؤًا\n(therein will they be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls,) It was recorded in the Sahih from Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nتَبْلُغُ الْحِلْيَةُ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِ حَيْثُ يَبْلُغُ الْوَضُوءُ\n(The ornaments of the believer will reach as far as his Wudu'.)\nوَلِبَاسُهُمْ فِيهَا حَرِيرٌ\n(and their garments therein will be of silk.) For this reason it is forbidden for them (the males) in this world, but Allah will permit it for them in the Hereafter. It was recorded in the Sahih that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nمَنْ لَبِسَ الْحَرِيرَ فِي الدُّنْيَا لَمْ يَلْبَسْهُ فِي الْآخِرَةِ\n(Whoever wears silk in this world, will not wear it in the Hereafter.) And he ﷺ said:\nهِيَ لَهُمْ فِي الدُّنْيَا، وَلَكُمْ فِي الْاخِرَةِ\n(It is for them in this world, and for you in the Hereafter.)\nوَقَالُوا الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي أَذْهَبَ عَنَّا الْحَزَنَ ۖ\n(And they will say: \"All the praises and thanks be to Allah, Who has removed from us (all) grief...\") which means fear of everything that is feared; it has been lifted from us and we have been relieved of all that we used to fear of the anxieties of the world and the Hereafter.\nIbn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, and others said, \"He forgives them for their major sins, and appreciates even the smallest of their good deeds.\"\nالَّذِي أَحَلَّنَا دَارَ الْمُقَامَةِ مِنْ فَضْلِهِ\n(Who, out of His grace, has lodged us in a home that will last forever,) means, 'Who has given us this position and status out of His grace and blessing and mercy, for our good deeds are not equivalent to this.' It was reported in the Sahih that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nلَنْ يُدْخِلَ أَحَدًا مِنْكُمْ عَمَلُهُ الْجَنَّةَ\n(None of you will enter Paradise by virtue of his good deeds.) They said, \"Not even you, O Messenger of Allah?\" He said,\nوَلَا أَنَا إِلَّا أَنْ يَتَغَمَّدَنِي اللهُ تَعَالَى بِرَحْمَةٍ مِنْهُ وَفَضْلٍ\n(Not even me, unless Allah encompasses me with His mercy and grace.)\nلَا يَمَسُّنَا فِيهَا نَصَبٌ وَلَا يَمَسُّنَا فِيهَا لُغُوبٌ\n(where toil will touch us not nor weariness will touch us.) means, neither hardship nor exhaustion will touch us. The words translated here as \"toil\" and \"weariness\" both mean exhaustion, as if what is meant by the negation of both is that neither their bodies nor their souls will become exhausted; and Allah knows best. They used to exhaust themselves in worshipping this world, but their obligations will come to an end when they enter Paradise, where they will enjoy eternal rest and repose. Allah says:\nكُلُوا وَاشْرَبُوا هَنِيئًا بِمَا أَسْلَفْتُمْ فِي الْأَيَّامِ الْخَالِيَةِ\n(Eat and drink at ease for that which you have sent on before you in days past!)(69:24)","href":"/tafsir/35?verse=33","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:35:36","title":"Ibn Kathir · 35:36–37","text":"But those who disbelieve, for them will be the fire of Hell. Neither will it have a complete killing effect on them so that they die nor shall its torment be lightened for them. Thus do We requite every disbeliever  (36)Therein they will cry: \"Our Lord! Bring us out, we shall do righteous good deeds, not that we used to do.\" (Allah will reply:) \"Did We not give you lives long enough, so that whosoever would receive admonition could receive it? And the warner came to you. So taste you. For the wrongdoers there is no helper. (37)\nThe Punishment of the Disbeliever and what Their State will be in Hell\nHaving told us how the blessed will be (in Paradise), Allah now starts to tell us what the state of doomed will be. He says:\nوَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَهُمْ نَارُ جَهَنَّمَ لَا يُقْضَىٰ عَلَيْهِمْ فَيَمُوتُوا\n(But those who disbelieve, for them will be the fire of Hell. Neither will it have a complete killing effect on them so that they die) This is like the Ayah:\nلَا يَمُوتُ فِيهَا وَلَا يَحْيَىٰ\n(Wherein he will neither die nor live)(20:74). It was reported in Sahih Muslim that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nأَمَّا أَهْلُ النَّارِ الَّذِينَ هُمْ أَهْلُهَا، فَلَا يَمُوتُونَ فِيهَا وَلَا يَحْيَوْنَ\n(As for the people of Hell who will dwell therein, they will neither live nor die there.) And Allah says:\nوَنَادَوْا يَا مَالِكُ لِيَقْضِ عَلَيْنَا رَبُّكَ ۖ قَالَ إِنَّكُمْ مَاكِثُونَ\n(And they will cry (to the keeper of Hell): \"O Malik! Let your Lord make an end of us.\" He will say: \"Verily, you shall abide forever.\")(43:77). When they are in this state, they will think that if only they could die, it would be a time of rest for them, but that can never happen to them. Allah says:\nلَا يُقْضَىٰ عَلَيْهِمْ فَيَمُوتُوا وَلَا يُخَفَّفُ عَنْهُمْ مِنْ عَذَابِهَا\n(Neither will it have a complete killing effect on them so that they die nor shall its torment be lightened for them.) This is like the Ayat:\nإِنَّ الْمُجْرِمِينَ فِي عَذَابِ جَهَنَّمَ خَالِدُونَ - لَا يُفَتَّرُ عَنْهُمْ وَهُمْ فِيهِ مُبْلِسُونَ\n(Verily, the criminals will be in the torment of Hell to abide therein forever. (That) will not be lightened for them, and they will be plunged into destruction with deep regrets, sorrows and in despair therein.)(43:74-75).\nكُلَّمَا خَبَتْ زِدْنَاهُمْ سَعِيرًا\n(whenever it abates, We shall increase for them the fierceness of the Fire)(17:97), and\nفَذُوقُوا فَلَنْ نَزِيدَكُمْ إِلَّا عَذَابًا\n(So taste you. No increase shall We give you, except in torment.)(78:30). Then Allah says:\nكَذَٰلِكَ نَجْزِي كُلَّ كَفُورٍ\n(Thus do We requite every disbeliever!) meaning, this is the recompense of everyone who disbelieved in his Lord and denied the truth.\nوَهُمْ يَصْطَرِخُونَ فِيهَا\n(Therein they will cry) means, they will call out in the Fire, beseeching Allah with their voices:\nرَبَّنَا أَخْرِجْنَا نَعْمَلْ صَالِحًا غَيْرَ الَّذِي كُنَّا نَعْمَلُ\n(\"Our Lord! Bring us out, we shall do righteous good deeds, not that we used to do.\") which means, they will ask to go back to the worldly life so that they can do something different to the first deeds they did. But Allah, may He be glorified, knows that if He sent them back to this world, they would go back to what they had been forbidden to do, and He knows that they are lying, so He will not respond to their plea. This is like the Ayah where Allah tells us that they will say:\nفَهَلْ إِلَىٰ خُرُوجٍ مِنْ سَبِيلٍ - ذَٰلِكُمْ بِأَنَّهُ إِذَا دُعِيَ اللَّهُ وَحْدَهُ كَفَرْتُمْ ۖ وَإِنْ يُشْرَكْ بِهِ تُؤْمِنُوا ۚ\n(Then is there any way to get out (of the Fire). (It will be said): \"This is because, when Allah Alone was invoked you disbelieved (denied), but when partners were joined to Him, you believed!)(40:11,12) i.e., 'there will be no response for you because you were like that; if you were to return to this world, you would just go back to that which you had been forbidden to do.' Allah says here:\nأَوَلَمْ نُعَمِّرْكُمْ مَا يَتَذَكَّرُ فِيهِ مَنْ تَذَكَّرَ وَجَاءَكُمُ النَّذِيرُ ۖ\n(Did We not give you lives long enough, so that whosoever would receive admonition could receive it? And the warner came to you.) meaning, 'did you not live for long enough in the world that if you were to be among those who would benefit from the truth, you would have benefited from it during your lifetimes?'\nImam Ahmad recorded that Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, said that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nلَقَدْ أَعْذَرَ اللهُ تَعَالَى إِلَى عَبْدٍ أَحْيَاهُ حتّٰى بَلَغَ سِتِّينَ أَوْ سَبْعِينَ سَنَةً، لَقَدْ أَعْذَرَ اللهُ تَعَالَى إِلَيْهِ، لَقَدْ أَعْذَرَ اللهُ تَعَالَى إِلَيْهِ\n(Allah has left no excuse for the person who lives to be sixty or seventy years old; Allah has left no excuse for him; Allah has left no excuse for him.)\nImam Al-Bukhari also recorded, in the Book of Riqaq in his Sahih, that Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nأَعْذَرَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ إِلَى امْرِىءٍ أَخَّرَ عُمْرَهُ حتّٰى بَلَغَ سِتِّينَ سَنَةً\n(Allah has left no excuse for a man who reaches the age of sixty.)\" Ibn Jarir recorded that Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nمَنْ عَمَّرَهُ اللهُ تَعَالَى سِتِّينَ سَنَةً فَقَدْ أَعْذَرَ إِلَيْهِ فِي الْعُمْرِ\n(Whoever is granted a long life until the age of sixty, Allah has left no excuse for him.)\" This was also recorded by Imam Ahmad and An-Nasa'i in Ar-Riqaq. Because this is the age at which Allah removes any excuse from His servants, this is the usual age of people in this Ummah, as was reported in the Hadith of Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, who said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nأَعْمَارُ أُمَّتِي مَا بَيْنَ السِّتِّينَ إِلَى السَّبْعِينَ، وَأَقَلُّهُمْ مَنْ يَجُوزُ ذَلِكَ\n(The usual life span in my Ummah is between sixty and seventy years, and only a few pass this age.)\" This was also recorded by At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah in the Book of Zuhd [of his Sunan].\nوَجَاءَكُمُ النَّذِيرُ\n(And the warner came to you.) It was reported that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, 'Ikrimah, Abu Ja'far Al-Baqir, may Allah be pleased with him, Qatadah and Sufyan bin 'Uyaynah said, \"This means grey hair.\" As-Suddi and 'Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam said, \"This means the Messenger of Allah ﷺ\" and Ibn Zayd recited,\nهَٰذَا نَذِيرٌ مِنَ النُّذُرِ الْأُولَىٰ\n(This is a warner of the (series of) warners of old.)(53:56). This is the correct view according to Shayban who narrated that Qatadah said, \"Proof will be established against them by the fact that they lived long enough and that Messengers came to them.\" This is also the view favored by Ibn Jarir, and it is the apparent meaning of the Ayah:\nوَنَادَوْا يَا مَالِكُ لِيَقْضِ عَلَيْنَا رَبُّكَ ۖ قَالَ إِنَّكُمْ مَاكِثُونَ - لَقَدْ جِئْنَاكُمْ بِالْحَقِّ وَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَكُمْ لِلْحَقِّ كَارِهُونَ\n(And they will cry (to the keeper of Hell): \"O Malik! Let your Lord make an end of us.\" He will say: \"Verily, you shall abide forever.\" Indeed We have brought the truth to you, but most of you have a hatred for the truth.)(43:77-78) meaning: 'We showed you the truth clearly through the Messengers, but you rejected it and opposed it.' And Allah says:\nوَمَاكُنَّا مُعَذِّبِينَ حَتَّىٰ نَبْعَثَ رَسُولًا\n(And We never punish until We have sent a Messenger)(17:15).\nكُلَّمَا أُلْقِيَ فِيهَا فَوْجٌ سَأَلَهُمْ خَزَنَتُهَا أَلَمْ يَأْتِكُمْ نَذِيرٌ - قَالُوا بَلَىٰ قَدْ جَاءَنَا نَذِيرٌ فَكَذَّبْنَا وَقُلْنَا مَا نَزَّلَ اللَّهُ مِنْ شَيْءٍ إِنْ أَنْتُمْ إِلَّا فِي ضَلَالٍ كَبِيرٍ\n(Every time a group is cast therein, its keepers will ask: \"Did no warner come to you?\" They will say: \"Yes, indeed a warner did come to us, but we denied him and said: 'Allah never sent down anything; you are only in great error'.\")(67:8-9).\nفَذُوقُوا فَمَا لِلظَّالِمِينَ مِنْ نَصِيرٍ\n(So taste you. For the wrongdoers there is no helper.) means, 'taste the punishment of the Fire, as a recompense for your going against the Prophets in all your deeds, for today you will have no helper to save you from your fate of punishment and chains.'","href":"/tafsir/35?verse=36","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:35:38","title":"Ibn Kathir · 35:38–39","text":"Verily, Allah is the All-Knower of the Unseen of the heavens and the earth. Verily, He is the All-Knower of that is in the breasts (38)He it is Who has made you successors generations after generations in the earth, so whosoever disbelieves, on him will be his disbelief. And the disbelief of the disbelievers adds nothing but hatred of their Lord. And the disbelief of the disbelievers adds nothing but loss (39)\nHere Allah tells us that He knows the unseen in the heavens and earth, and that He knows all that is hidden and the secrets of the hearts. And He tells us that He will reward or punish everyone according to his deeds. Then Allah says:\nهُوَ الَّذِي جَعَلَكُمْ خَلَائِفَ فِي الْأَرْضِ ۚ\n(He it is Who has made you successors generations after generations in the earth,) meaning, all people succeed one another, generation after generation. This is like the Ayah:\nوَيَجْعَلُكُمْ خُلَفَاءَ الْأَرْضِ\n(and makes you inheritors of the earth, generations after generations)(27:62).\nفَمَنْ كَفَرَ فَعَلَيْهِ كُفْرُهُ ۖ\n(so whosoever disbelieves, on him will be his disbelief.) means, he and no one else will have to bear the consequences of that.\nوَلَا يَزِيدُ الْكَافِرِينَ كُفْرُهُمْ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِمْ إِلَّا مَقْتًا ۖ\n(And the disbelief of the disbelievers adds nothing but hatred of their Lord.) means, the longer they persist in their disbelief, the more Allah hates them, and the longer they persist in it, the more they and their families will lose on the Day of Resurrection. This is in contrast to the believers, for the longer they live and do good deeds, the higher their status in Paradise will be, the greater their reward, and the more beloved they will be to their Creator.","href":"/tafsir/35?verse=38","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:35:40","title":"Ibn Kathir · 35:40–41","text":"Say: \"Have you considered your partners whom you call upon besides Allah? Show Me, what they have created of the earth. Or have they any share in the heavens? Or have We given them a Book, so that they act on clear proof therefrom? Nay, the wrongdoers promise one another nothing but delusions. (40)Verily, Allah grasps the heavens and the earth lest they should move away from their places, and if they were to move away from their places, there is not one that could grasp them after Him. Truly, He is Ever Most Forbearing, Oft-Forgiving (41)\nThe Helplessness of the false gods and the Power of Allah\nAllah tells His Messenger ﷺ to say to the idolators:\nأَرَأَيْتُمْ شُرَكَاءَكُمُ الَّذِينَ تَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ\n(Have you considered your partners whom you call upon besides Allah?) the idols and rivals.\nأَرُونِي مَاذَا خَلَقُوا مِنَ الْأَرْضِ أَمْ لَهُمْ شِرْكٌ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ\n(Show Me what they have created of the earth. Or have they any share in the heavens?) meaning, they have nothing at all of that, they do not possess even the membrane covering the stone of a date.\nأَمْ آتَيْنَاهُمْ كِتَابًا فَهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَيِّنَتٍ مِنْهُ\n(Or have We given them a Book, so that they act on clear proof therefrom?) meaning, 'have We revealed to them a Book on which they base their Shirk and disbelief?' This is not the case at all.\nبَلْ إِنْ يَعِدُ الظَّالِمُونَ بَعْضُهُمْ بَعْضًا إِلَّا غُرُورًا\n(Nay, the wrongdoers promise one another nothing but delusions.) means, they are merely following their own whims, opinions and wishes which are their personal desires, and they are no more than misguidance and falsehood.\nThen Allah tells us of His mighty power, by which the heavens and the earth stand by His command, and the forces that He has placed between them to hold them. He says:\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ يُمْسِكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ أَنْ تَزُولَا ۚ\n(Verily, Allah grasps the heavens and the earth lest they should move away from their places,) means, lest they should shift from where they are. This is like the Ayat:\nوَيُمْسِكُ السَّمَاءَ أَنْ تَقَعَ عَلَى الْأَرْضِ إِلَّا بِإِذْنِهِ\n(He withholds the heaven from falling on the earth except by His leave)(22:65), and\nوَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ أَنْ تَقُومَ السَّمَاءُ وَالْأَرْضُ بِأَمْرِهِ ۚ\n(And among His signs is that the heaven and the earth stand by His command)(30:25).\nوَلَئِنْ زَالَتَا إِنْ أَمْسَكَهُمَا مِنْ أَحَدٍ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ ۚ\n(and if they were to move away from their places, there is not one that could grasp them after Him.) means, no one can make them stay and preserve them except Him. He is Ever Most Forbearing and Oft-Forgiving because He sees His servants disbelieving in Him and disobeying Him, yet He is patient and gives them time, He waits and does not hasten the punishment, and He conceals the faults of others and forgives them. He says:\nإِنَّهُ كَانَ حَلِيمًا غَفُورًا\n(Truly, He is Ever Most Forbearing, Oft-Forgiving.)","href":"/tafsir/35?verse=40","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:35:42","title":"Ibn Kathir · 35:42–43","text":"And they swore by Allah their most binding oath that if a warner came to them, they would be more guided than any of the nations; yet when a warner came to them, it increased in them nothing but flight (from the truth)(42)(They took to flight because of their) arrogance in the land and their plotting of evil. But the evil plot encompasses only him who makes it. Then, can they expect anything (else) but the Sunnah (way of dealing) of the peoples of old? So, no change will you find in Allah's Sunnah, and no turning off will you find in Allah's Sunnah (43)\nThey longed for a Warner to come, but when He came, They disbelieved in Him\nAllah tells us how Quraysh and the Arabs swore by Allah their most binding oath before the Messenger ﷺ came to them,\nلَئِنْ جَاءَهُمْ نَذِيرٌ لَيَكُونُنَّ أَهْدَىٰ مِنْ إِحْدَى الْأُمَمِ\n(that if a warner came to them, they would be more guided than any of the nations;) i.e., than any of the nations to whom Messengers had been sent. This was the view of Ad-Dahhak and others. This is like the Ayat:\nأَنْ تَقُولُوا إِنَّمَا أُنْزِلَ الْكِتَابُ عَلَىٰ طَائِفَتَيْنِ مِنْ قَبْلِنَا وَإِنْ كُنَّا عَنْ دِرَاسَتِهِمْ لَغَافِلِينَ - أَوْ تَقُولُوا لَوْ أَنَّا أُنْزِلَ عَلَيْنَا الْكِتَابُ لَكُنَّا أَهْدَىٰ مِنْهُمْ ۚ فَقَدْ جَاءَكُمْ بَيِّنَةٌ مِنْ رَبِّكُمْ وَهُدًى وَرَحْمَةٌ ۚ فَمَنْ أَظْلَمُ مِمَّنْ كَذَّبَ بِآيَاتِ اللَّهِ وَصَدَفَ عَنْهَا ۗ\n(Lest you (pagan Arabs) should say: \"The Book was sent down only to two sects before us, and for our part, we were in fact unaware of what they studied.\" Or lest you should say: \"If only the Book had been sent down to us, we would surely have been better guided than they.\" So, now has come unto you a clear proof from your Lord, and a guidance and a mercy. Who then does more wrong than one who rejects the Ayat of Allah and turns away therefrom?)(6:156-157)\nوَإِنْ كَانُوا لَيَقُولُونَ - لَوْ أَنَّ عِنْدَنَا ذِكْرًا مِنَ الْأَوَّلِينَ - لَكُنَّا عِبَادَ اللَّهِ الْمُخْلَصِينَ - فَكَفَرُوا بِهِ ۖ فَسَوْفَ يَعْلَمُونَ\n(And indeed they (Arab pagans) used to say: \"If we had a reminder as had the men of old, We would have indeed been the chosen servants of Allah!\" But they disbelieve therein, so they will come to know!)(37:167-170) Allah says:\nفَلَمَّا جَاءَهُمْ نَذِيرٌ\n(yet when a warner came to them,) – meaning, Muhammad ﷺ with the Book revealed to him, i.e., the Clear Qur'an,\nمَا زَادَهُمْ إِلَّا نُفُورًا\n(it increased in them nothing but flight (from the truth).) means, they only increased in their disbelief. Then Allah explains this further:\nاسْتِكْبَارًا فِي الْأَرْضِ\n((They took to flight because of their) arrogance in the land) means, they were too arrogant to follow the signs of Allah.\nوَمَكْرَ السَّيِّئِ\n(and their plotting of evil.) means, they plotted to prevent people from following the path of Allah.\nوَلَا يَحِيقُ الْمَكْرُ السَّيِّئُ إِلَّا بِأَهْلِهِ ۚ\n(But the evil plot encompasses only him who makes it.) means, the evil consequences of that will come back upon them and not on others.\nفَهَلْ يَنْظُرُونَ إِلَّا سُنَّتَ الْأَوَّلِينَ ۚ\n(Then, can they expect anything (else) but the Sunnah (way of dealing) of the peoples of old?) meaning, the punishment of Allah for disbelieving in His Messengers and going against His command.\nفَلَنْ تَجِدَ لِسُنَّتِ اللَّهِ تَبْدِيلًا ۖ\n(and no turning off will you find in Allah's Sunnah.) means, it does not change or alter, and this is what happens to every disbeliever.\nوَلَن تَجِدَ لِسُنَّتِ اللَّهِ تَحْوِيلًا\n(and no turning off will you find in Allah's Sunnah.) means,\nوَإِذَا أَرَادَ اللَّهُ بِقَوْمٍ سُوءًا فَلَا مَرَدَّ لَهُ ۚ\n(But when Allah wills a people's punishment, there can be no turning back of it)(13:11). This means, no one can remove that from them or ward it off from them. And Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/35?verse=42","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:35:44","title":"Ibn Kathir · 35:44–45","text":"Have they not traveled in the land, and seen what was the end of those before them – though they were superior to them in power? Allah is not such that anything in the heavens or in the earth escapes Him. Verily, He is All-Knowing, All-Able (44)And if Allah were to punish men for that which they earned, He would not leave a moving creature on the surface of the earth; but He gives them respite to an appointed term, and when their term comes, then verily, Allah is Ever All-Seer of His servants (45)\nRemember the Bad Consequences of disbelieving in the Prophets\nAllah says: 'say, O Muhammad, to these people who disbelieve the Message you have brought: travel in the land and see what was the punishment of those who disbelieved the Messengers, how Allah destroyed them completely, and a similar (end awaits) the disbelievers. See how their homes were emptied of them and how they lost everything after living in luxury and being so numerous and so well equipped, and having so much wealth and so many children. All of that was of no avail to them and could not protect them in the slightest from the punishment of Allah when the command of the Lord came. Nothing is impossible for Him when He wants it to happen in the heavens or on earth.'\nإِنَّهُ كَانَ عَلِيمًا قَدِيرًا\n(Verily, He is All-Knowing, All-Able.) means, He knows all that exists and is able to do all things.\nThe Wisdom behind delaying the Punishment\nThen Allah says:\nوَلَوْ يُؤَاخِذُ اللَّهُ النَّاسَ بِمَا كَسَبُوا مَا تَرَكَ عَلَىٰ ظَهْرِهَا مِنْ دَابَّةٍ\n(And if Allah were to punish men for that which they earned, He would not leave a moving creature on the surface of the earth;) meaning, if He were to punish them for all of their sins, He would destroy all the people of the earth and all that they own of livestock and crops.\nSa'id bin Jubayr and As-Suddi commented on the Ayah:\nمَا تَرَكَ عَلَىٰ ظَهْرِهَا مِنْ دَابَّةٍ\n(He would not leave a moving creature on the surface of the earth;) \"This means, He would have stopped sending rain to them, and all the animals would have died as a result.\"\nوَلَٰكِنْ يُؤَخِّرُهُمْ إِلَىٰ أَجَلٍ مُسَمًّى\n(but He gives them respite to an appointed term,) means, but He is delaying until the Day of Resurrection, when He will bring them to account and will reward or punish each one according to his deeds: He will reward those who obeyed Him and will punish those who disobeyed Him. He says:\nفَإِذَا جَاءَ أَجَلُهُمْ فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ كَانَ بِعِبَادِهِ بَصِيرًا\n(and when their term comes, then verily, Allah is Ever All-Seer of His servants.)\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surah Fatir. All praise and gratitude is due to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/35?verse=44","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:36:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 36:1–7","text":"The Virtues of Surah Ya Sin\nAl-Hafiz Abu Ya'la recorded that Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nمَنْ قَرَأَ \"يس\" فِي لَيْلَةٍ أَصْبَحَ مَغْفُورًا لَهُ، وَمَنْ قَرَأَ \"حٰم\" الَّتِي يُذْكَرُ فِيهَا الدُّخَانُ أَصْبَحَ مَغْفُورًا لَهُ\n(Whoever recites Ya Sin in the night, will wake up forgiven, and whoever recites Ha Mim in which Ad-Dukhan (the Smoke) is mentioned, will wake up forgiven.) Its chain of narration is good (Jayyid) .\nIbn Hibban recorded in his Sahih that Jundub bin 'Abdullah, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nمَنْ قَرَأَ \"يس\" فِي لَيْلَةٍ ابْتِغَاءَ وَجْهِ اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ غُفِرَ لَهُ\n(Whoever recites Ya Sin in the night, seeking the Face of Allah, will be forgiven.)\nبِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nيس - وَالْقُرْآنِ الْحَكِيمِ - إِنَّكَ لَمِنَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ - عَلَىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ - تَنْزِيلَ الْعَزِيزِ الرَّحِيمِ - لِتُنْذِرَ قَوْمًا مَا أُنْذِرَ آبَاؤُهُمْ فَهُمْ غَافِلُونَ - لَقَدْ حَقَّ الْقَوْلُ عَلَىٰ أَكْثَرِهِمْ فَهُمْ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ\n(1. Ya Sin.)(2. By the Qur'an, full of wisdom,)(3. Truly, you are one of the Messengers,)(4. On the straight path.)(5. Sent down by the Almighty, the Most Merciful,)(6. In order that you may warn a people whose forefathers were not warned, so they are heedless.)(7. Indeed the Word has proved true against most of them, so they will not believe.)\nThe Messenger (ﷺ) was sent as a Warner\nWe have already discussed the individual letters at the beginning of Surat Al-Baqarah.\nوَالْقُرْآنِ الْحَكِيمِ\n(By the Qur'an, full of wisdom) means, Al-Muhkam (perfect) which falsehood cannot come to from before it or behind it.\nإِنَّكَ\n(Truly, you) means, O Muhammad,\nلَمِنَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ - عَلَىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ\n(are one of the Messengers, on the straight path.) means, following a straight methodology and religion, and an upright Law.\nتَنْزِيلَ الْعَزِيزِ الرَّحِيمِ\n(Sent down by the Almighty, the Most Merciful.) means, this path which you have brought is a revelation from the Lord of might Who is Most Merciful to His believing servants. This is like the Ayah:\nوَإِنَّكَ لَتَهْدِي إِلَىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ - صِرَاطِ اللَّهِ الَّذِي لَهُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ ۗ أَلَا إِلَى اللَّهِ تَصِيرُ الْأُمُورُ\n(And verily, you are indeed guiding (mankind) to the straight path. The path of Allah to Whom belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is on the earth. Verily, to Allah all matters return.)(42:52-53).\nلِتُنْذِرَ قَوْمًا مَا أُنْذِرَ آبَاؤُهُمْ فَهُمْ غَافِلُونَ\n(In order that you may warn a people whose forefathers were not warned, so they are heedless.) This refers to the Arabs, for no warner had come to them before him. The fact that they alone are mentioned does not mean that others are excluded, just as mentioning some individuals does not mean that all others are excluded. We have already mentioned the Ayat and Mutawatir Hadiths which state that the mission of the Prophet ﷺ is universal, when we discussed the meaning of the Ayah:\nقُلْ يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنِّي رَسُولُ اللَّهِ إِلَيْكُمْ جَمِيعًا\n(Say: \"O mankind! Verily, I am sent to you all as the Messenger of Allah.\")(7:158).\nلَقَدْ حَقَّ الْقَوْلُ عَلَىٰ أَكْثَرِهِمْ\n(Indeed the Word has proved true against most of them,) Ibn Jarir said, \"The punishment has become inevitable for most of them, because Allah has decreed in the Mother of the Book (Al-Lawh Al-Mahfuz) that they will not believe.\nفَهُمْ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ\n(so they will not believe.) in Allah, or in His Messengers.","href":"/tafsir/36?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:36:8","title":"Ibn Kathir · 36:8–12","text":"Verily, We have put on their necks iron collars reaching to the chins, so that their heads are raised up (8)And We have put a barrier before them, and a barrier behind them, and We have covered them up, so that they cannot see (9)It is the same to them whether you warn them or you warn them not, they will not believe (10)You can only warn him who follows the Reminder, and fears the Most Gracious unseen. Bear you to such one the glad tidings of forgiveness, and a generous reward (11)Verily, We give life to the dead, and We record that which they send before (them), and their traces and all things We have recorded with numbers in Imam Mubin (a Clear Book)(12)\nThe State of Those Who are decreed to be among the Doomed\nAllah says: 'In the case of those who are decreed to be among the doomed, when it comes to the matter of being guided, We have made them like a person who has a chain around his neck and whose hands are tied together beneath his chin so that his head is lifted up.' As Allah says:\nفَهُمْ مُقْمَحُونَ\n(so that their heads are raised up.) Mentioning the chains around the neck is sufficient and there is no need to mention the hands, although they are referred to by implication. Al-'Awfi said, narrating from Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, concerning the Ayah:\nإِنَّا جَعَلْنَا فِي أَعْنَاقِهِمْ أَغْلَالًا فَهِيَ إِلَى الْأَذْقَانِ فَهُمْ مُقْمَحُونَ\n(Verily, We have put on their necks iron collars reaching to the chins, so that their heads are raised up.) This is like the Ayah:\nوَلَا تَجْعَلْ يَدَكَ مَغْلُولَةً إِلَىٰ عُنُقِكَ\n(And let not your hand be tied (like a miser) to your neck)(17:29). meaning that their hands are tied to their necks and they cannot stretch them forth in order to do any good deeds.\nفَهُمْ مُقْمَحُونَ\n(so that their heads are raised up.) according to Mujahid it means their heads are raised, and their hands are placed over their mouths, so they are restrained from doing anything good.\nوَجَعَلْنَا مِنْ بَيْنِ أَيْدِيهِمْ سَدًّا\n(And We have put a barrier before them,) Mujahid said, \"Between them and the truth.\"\nوَمِنْ خَلْفِهِمْ سَدًّا\n(and a barrier behind them,) Mujahid said, \"Between them and the truth, so they are confused.\" Qatadah said, \"They move from one form of misguidance to another.\"\nفَأَغْشَيْنَاهُمْ\n(and We have covered them up,) means, 'We have blinded their eyes to the truth.'\nفَهُمْ لَا يُبْصِرُونَ\n(so that they cannot see.) means, they cannot benefit from goodness or be guided to it. Ibn Jarir said, \"It was narrated from Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, that he used to recite \"Fa a'shaynahum\" [instead of Fa'aghshaynahum], from Al-'Asha (weakness of the sight, blindness), which is a complaint of the eye.\"\nAbdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam said, \"Allah placed this barrier between them and Islam and Iman, so that they will never reach it,\" and he recited:\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ حَقَّتْ عَلَيْهِمْ كَلِمَتُ رَبِّكَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ - وَلَوْ جَاءَتْهُمْ كُلُّ آيَةٍ حَتَّىٰ يَرَوُا الْعَذَابَ الْأَلِيمَ\n(Truly, those, against whom the Word (wrath) of your Lord has been justified, will not believe, Even if every sign should come to them, until they see the painful torment.)(10:96-97).\nThen he said, \"Whoever has been prevented by Allah, will never be able.\"\nIkrimah said, \"Abu Jahl said, 'If I see Muhammad, I will do such and such.' Then Allah revealed:\nإِنَّا جَعَلْنَا فِي أَعْنَاقِهِمْ أَغْلَالًا\n(Verily, We have put on their necks iron collars...) up to:\nفَهُمْ لَا يُبْصِرُونَ\n(so that they cannot see.)\" He said, \"They used to say, 'Here is Muhammad,' and he would say, 'Where is he? Where is he?' And he would not be able to see him.\" Ibn Jarir also recorded this.\nوَسَوَاءٌ عَلَيْهِمْ أَأَنْذَرْتَهُمْ أَمْ لَمْ تُنْذِرْهُمْ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ\n(It is the same to them whether you warn them or you warn them not, they will not believe.) means, Allah has decreed that they will be misguided, so warning them will not help them and will not have any effect on them. Something similar has already been seen at the beginning of Surat Al-Baqarah, and Allah also says:\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ حَقَّتْ عَلَيْهِمْ كَلِمَتُ رَبِّكَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ - وَلَوْ جَاءَتْهُمْ كُلُّ آيَةٍ حَتَّىٰ يَرَوُا الْعَذَابَ الْأَلِيمَ\n(Truly, those, against whom the Word (wrath) of your Lord has been justified, will not believe, Even if every sign should come to them, until they see the painful torment.)(10:96-97).\nإِنَّمَا تُنْذِرُ مَنِ اتَّبَعَ الذِّكْرَ\n(You can only warn him who follows the Reminder,) means, 'only the believers will benefit from your warning, those who follow the Reminder,' which is the Qur'an.\nوَخَشِيَ الرَّحْمَٰنَ بِالْغَيْبِ\n(and fears the Most Gracious unseen.) means, even when no one sees him except Allah, may He be blessed and exalted, he knows that Allah is watching him and sees what he does.\nفَبَشِّرْهُ بِمَغْفِرَةٍ\n(Bear you to such one the glad tidings of forgiveness,) i.e., of his sins,\nوَأَجْرٍ كَرِيمٍ\n(and a generous reward.) means, one that is vast and great and beautiful. This is like the Ayah:\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَخْشَوْنَ رَبَّهُمْ بِالْغَيْبِ لَهُمْ مَغْفِرَةٌ وَأَجْرٌ كَبِيرٌ\n(Verily, those who fear their Lord unseen, theirs will be forgiveness and a great reward.)(67:12).\nإِنَّا نَحْنُ نُحْيِي الْمَوْتَىٰ\n(Verily, We give life to the dead,) means, on the Day of Resurrection. This also indicates that Allah gives life to the heart of whomever He wills among the disbelievers, those whose hearts have died in misguidance, by guiding them after that to the truth. As Allah says after mentioning hardness of the heart:\nاعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ يُحْيِي الْأَرْضَ بَعْدَ مَوْتِهَا ۚ قَدْ بَيَّنَّا لَكُمُ الْآيَاتِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَعْقِلُونَ\n(Know that Allah gives life to the earth after its death! Indeed We have made clear the Ayat to you, that you may understand.)(57:17)\nوَنَكْتُبُ مَا قَدَّمُوا\n(and We record that which they send before (them),) means, their deeds.\nوَآثَارَهُمْ\n(and their traces) means, 'We write down the deeds which they used to do themselves, and the legacy they left behind, so We will requite them for that: if it is good, then We will reward them, and if it is evil, then We will punish them.' This is like the Hadith:\nمَنْ سَنَّ فِي الْإِسْلَامِ سُنَّةً حَسَنَةً كَانَ لَهُ أَجْرُهَا، وَأَجْرُ مَنْ عَمِلَ بِهَا مِنْ بَعْدِهِ مِنْ غَيْرِ أَنْ يَنْقُصَ مِنْ أُجُورِهِمْ شَيْئًا، وَمَنْ سَنَّ فِي الْإِسْلَامِ سُنَّةً سَيِّـــئَـةً كَانَ عَلَيْهِ وِزْرُهَا وَوِزْرُ مَنْ عَمِلَ بِهَا مِنْ بَعْدِهِ مِنْ غَيْرِ أَنْ يَنْقُصَ مِنْ أَوْزَارِهِمْ شَيْئًا\n(Whoever starts (or sets an example of) something good in Islam, will have a reward for it, and a reward equal to that of everyone who does it after him, without that detracting from their reward in the slightest. Whoever starts (or sets an example of) something evil in Islam, will bear the burden for that, and a burden equal to that of everyone who does it after him, without that detracting from their burden in the slightest.)\nThis was recorded by Muslim from Jarir bin 'Abdullah Al-Bajali, may Allah be pleased with him in which is detailed a story of the people from the Mudar tribe, who were wearing woollen rags. Ibn Abi Hatim recorded this Hadith in full from Jarir bin 'Abdullah, may Allah be pleased with him. In it the Prophet ﷺ then recited:\nوَنَكْتُبُ مَا قَدَّمُوا وَآثَارَهُمْ\n(and We record that which they send before (them), and their traces) Muslim also recorded it with a different chain of narration.\nThere is also another Hadith recorded in Sahih Muslim from Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, who said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nإِذَا مَاتَ ابْنُ آدَمَ انْقَطَعَ عَمَلُهُ إِلَّا مِنْ ثَلَاثٍ: مِنْ عِلْمٍ يُنْتَفَعُ بِهِ، أَوْ وَلَدٍ صَالِحٍ يَدْعُو لَهُ، أَوْ صَدَقَةٍ جَارِيَةٍ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ\n(When the son of Adam dies, all his deeds come to an end except three: knowledge which is beneficial to others, a righteous child who prays for him, or ongoing charity which he leaves behind.)\" Sufyan Ath-Thawri reported that Abu Sa'id said, \"I heard Mujahid say concerning the Ayah:\nإِنَّا نَحْنُ نُحْيِي الْمَوْتَىٰ وَنَكْتُبُ مَا قَدَّمُوا وَآثَارَهُمْ ۚ\n(Verily, We give life to the dead, and We record that which they send before (them), and their traces) 'What they left behind of misguidance.'\"\nIbn Abi Najih and others said, narrating from Mujahid:\nمَا قَدَّمُوا\n(that which they send before (them),) \"Their deeds.\"\nوَآثَارَهُمْ\n(and their traces). He said, \"Their footsteps.\" This was also the view of Al-Hasan and Qatadah.\nوَآثَارَهُمْ\n(and their traces) means their footsteps.\nQatadah said, \"If Allah were to have neglected anything with regard to you, O son of Adam, He would have neglected what the wind could remove of these footsteps.\" But He takes into account the footsteps of the son of Adam and all his deeds; He even takes into account these footsteps and whether they are for the purpose of obeying Allah or disobeying Him. So, whoever can have his footsteps recorded for the purpose of obeying Allah, let him do that.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Jabir bin 'Abdullah, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"There was an empty area around the Masjid, and Banu Salamah wanted to move to be closer to the Masjid. When the Messenger of Allah ﷺ heard about that, he said to them:\nإِنَّهُ بَلَغَنِي أَنَّكُمْ تُرِيدُونَ أَنْ تَنْتَقِلُوا قُرْبَ الْمَسْجِدِ؟\n(I have heard that you want to move close to the Masjid.) They said, 'Yes, O Messenger of Allah, that is what we want.' He ﷺ said:\nيَا بَنِي سَلِمَةَ! دِيَارَكُمْ تُكْتَبْ آثَارُكُمْ، دِيَارَكُمْ تُكْتَبْ آثَارُكُمْ\n(O Banu Salamah, stay where you are, and your footsteps will be recorded, stay where you are, and your footsteps will be recorded.)\" This was also recorded by Muslim from Jabir, may Allah be pleased with him.\nImam Ahmad recorded that 'Abdullah bin 'Amr, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"A man died in Al-Madinah and the Prophet ﷺ prayed over him, and said,\nيَا لَيْتَهُ مَاتَ فِي غَيْرِ مَوْلِدِهِ\n(Would that he had died somewhere other than in his place of birth!) A man among the people said, 'Why, O Messenger of Allah?' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nإِنَّ الرَّجُلَ إِذَا تُوُفِّيَ فِي غَيْرِ مَوْلِدِهِ، قِيسَ لَهُ مِنْ مَوْلِدِهِ إِلَى مُنْقَطِعِ أَثَرِهِ فِي الْجَنَّةِ\n(When a man dies somewhere other than in his place of birth, it will be measured for him from where he was born to where his footsteps no longer appear, (and this is the space that will be allocated for him) in Paradise.)\" It was also recorded by An-Nasa'i and Ibn Majah.\nIbn Jarir narrated that Thabit said, \"I was walking with Anas and I began to walk quickly. He took my hand and we walked slowly, and when we had finished praying, Anas said, 'I walked with Zayd bin Thabit and I was walking quickly, and he said: O Anas! Do you not feel that your footsteps are being written down?'\"\nThere is no contradiction between this and the first report, on the contrary, this indicates the same thing somewhat more forcefully. Because these footsteps are being recorded, then those which are setting an example, whether good or bad, are more likely to be recorded. And Allah knows best.\nوَكُلَّ شَيْءٍ أَحْصَيْنَاهُ فِي إِمَامٍ مُبِينٍ\n(and all things We have recorded with numbers (as a record) in Imam Mubin (a Clear Book).) means, everything that exists is precisely dictated in a record in Al-Lawh Al-Mahfuz. Al-Imam Al-Mubin here refers to the source of all records. This was the view of Mujahid, Qatadah and 'Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam. Similarly, Allah also says:\nيَوْمَ نَدْعُو كُلَّ أُنَاسٍ بِإِمَامِهِمْ ۖ\n((And remember) the Day when We shall call together all human beings with their (respective) Imam (record of good and bad deeds))(17:71). meaning the Book of their deeds which will testify as to their deeds, whether they were good or bad. This is like the Ayat:\nوَوُضِعَ الْكِتَابُ وَجِيءَ بِالنَّبِيِّينَ وَالشُّهَدَاءِ\n(and the Book will be placed (open), and the Prophets and the witnesses will be brought forward)(39:69), and\nوَوُضِعَ الْكِتَابُ فَتَرَى الْمُجْرِمِينَ مُشْفِقِينَ مِمَّا فِيهِ وَيَقُولُونَ يَا وَيْلَتَنَا مَالِ هَٰذَا الْكِتَابِ لَا يُغَادِرُ صَغِيرَةً وَلَا كَبِيرَةً إِلَّا أَحْصَاهَا ۚ وَوَجَدُوا مَا عَمِلُوا حَاضِرًا ۗ وَلَا يَظْلِمُ رَبُّكَ أَحَدًا\n(And the Book (one's Record) will be placed, and you will see the criminals, fearful of that which is (recorded) therein. They will say: \"Woe to us! What sort of Book is this that leaves neither a small thing nor a big thing, but has recorded it with numbers!\" And they will find all that they did, placed before them, and your Lord treats no one with injustice.)(18:49).","href":"/tafsir/36?verse=8","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:36:13","title":"Ibn Kathir · 36:13–17","text":"And put forward to them a similitude; the Dwellers of the Town, when there came Messengers to them (13)When We sent to them two Messengers, they denied them both; so We reinforced them with a third, and they said: \"Verily, we have been sent to you as Messengers. (14)They said: \"You are only human beings like ourselves, and the Most Gracious has revealed nothing. You are only telling lies. (15)The Messengers said: \"Our Lord knows that we have been sent as Messengers to you, (16)\"And our duty is only to convey plainly. (17)\nThe Story of the Dwellers of the Town and Their Messengers, a Lesson that Those Who belied Their Messengers were destroyed\nAllah says, 'O Muhammad, tell your people who disbelieve in you,'\nمَثَلًا أَصْحَابَ الْقَرْيَةِ إِذْ جَاءَهَا الْمُرْسَلُونَ\n(a similitude; the Dwellers of the Town, when there came Messengers to them.) In the reports that he transmitted from Ibn 'Abbas, Ka'b Al-Ahbar and Wahb bin Munabbih – Ibn Ishaq reported that it was the city of Antioch, in which there was a king called Antiochus the son of Antiochus the son of Antiochus, who used to worship idols. Allah sent to him three Messengers, whose names were Sadiq, Saduq and Shalum, and he disbelieved in them. It was also narrated from Buraydah bin Al-Husayb, 'Ikrimah, Qatadah and Az-Zuhri that it was Antioch. Some of the Imams were not sure that it was Antioch, as we shall see below after telling the rest of the story, if Allah wills.\nإِذْ أَرْسَلْنَا إِلَيْهِمُ اثْنَيْنِ فَكَذَّبُوهُمَا\n(When We sent to them two Messengers, they denied them both;) means, they hastened to disbelieve in them.\nفَعَزَّزْنَا بِثَالِثٍ\n(so We reinforced them with a third,) means, 'We supported and strengthened them with a third Messenger. ' Ibn Jurayj narrated from Wahb bin Sulayman, from Shu'ayb Al-Jaba'i, \"The names of the first two Messengers were Sham'un and Yuhanna, and the name of the third was Bulus, and the city was Antioch (Antakiyah).\nفَقَالُوا\n(and they said) means, to the people of that city,\nإِنَّا إِلَيْكُمْ مُرْسَلُونَ\n(Verily, we have been sent to you as Messengers.) meaning, 'from your Lord Who created you and Who commands you to worship Him Alone with no partners or associates.' This was the view of Abu Al-'Aliyah. Qatadah bin Di'amah claimed that they were messengers of the Messiah, peace be upon him, sent to the people of Antioch.\nقَالُوا مَا أَنْتُمْ إِلَّا بَشَرٌ مِثْلُنَا\n(They said: \"You are only human beings like ourselves...\") means, 'so how could you receive revelation when you are human beings and we are human beings, so why do we not receive revelation like you? If you are Messengers, you should be angels.' This is like what many of the nations said who disbelieved, as Allah has told us in the Ayah:\nذَٰلِكَ بِأَنَّهُ كَانَتْ تَأْتِيهِمْ رُسُلُهُمْ بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ فَقَالُوا أَبَشَرٌ يَهْدُونَنَا\n(That was because there came to them their Messengers with clear proofs, but they said: \"Shall mere men guide us?\")(64: 6) meaning that they were amazed by that and they denied it. And Allah says:\nقَالُوا إِنْ أَنْتُمْ إِلَّا بَشَرٌ مِثْلُنَا تُرِيدُونَ أَنْ تَصُدُّونَا عَمَّا كَانَ يَعْبُدُ آبَاؤُنَا فَأْتُونَا بِسُلْطَانٍ مُبِينٍ\n(They said: \"You are no more than human beings like us! You wish to turn us away from what our fathers used to worship. Then bring us a clear authority.\")(14:10). And Allah tells us that they said:\nوَلَئِنْ أَطَعْتُمْ بَشَرًا مِثْلَكُمْ إِنَّكُمْ إِذًا لَخَاسِرُونَ\n(\"If you were to obey a human being like yourselves, then verily, you indeed would be losers.\")(23:34). And Allah says:\nوَمَا مَنَعَ النَّاسَ أَنْ يُؤْمِنُوا إِذْ جَاءَهُمُ الْهُدَىٰ إِلَّا أَنْ قَالُوا أَبَعَثَ اللَّهُ بَشَرًا رَسُولًا\n(And nothing prevented men from believing when the guidance came to them, except that they said: \"Has Allah sent a man as (His) Messenger?\")(17:94). These people said:\nمَا أَنتُمْ إِلَّا بَشَرٌ مِّثْلُنَا وَمَا أَنزَلَ الرَّحْمَٰنُ مِن شَيْءٍ إِنْ أَنتُمْ إِلَّا تَكْذِبُونَ - قَالُوا رَبُّنَا يَعْلَمُ إِنَّا إِلَيْكُمْ لَمُرْسَلُونَ\n(You are only human beings like ourselves, and the Most Gracious has revealed nothing. You are only telling lies.\" The Messengers said: \"Our Lord knows that we have been sent as Messengers to you.\")\nThis means that the three Messengers answered them saying: \"Allah knows that we are His Messengers to you. If we were lying, He would have taken the utmost vengeance against us, but He will cause us to prevail and will make us victorious against you, and you will come to know whose will be the happy end in the Hereafter.\" This is like the Ayah:\nقُلْ كَفَىٰ بِاللَّهِ بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَكُمْ شَهِيدًا ۖ يَعْلَمُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ ۗ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا بِالْبَاطِلِ وَكَفَرُوا بِاللَّهِ أُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْخَاسِرُونَ\n(Say: \"Sufficient is Allah for a witness between me and you. He knows what is in the heavens and on earth.\" And those who believe in falsehood, and disbelieve in Allah, it is they who are the losers.)(29:52)\nوَمَا عَلَيْنَا إِلَّا الْبَلَاغُ الْمُبِينُ\n(And our duty is only to convey plainly.) means, 'all we have to do is to convey to you the Message with which we have been sent; if you obey, then happiness will be yours in this world and the Hereafter, and if you do not respond, you will soon know the consequences of that.' And Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/36?verse=13","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:36:18","title":"Ibn Kathir · 36:18–19","text":"They (people) said: \"For us, we see an evil omen from you; if you cease not, we will surely stone you, and a painful torment will touch you from us. (18)They (Messengers) said: \"Your evil omens be with you! Because you are admonished? Nay, but you are a people mischievous.\") Then the people of the city said to the (19)\nإِنَّا تَطَيَّرْنَا بِكُمْ\n(For us, we see an evil omen from you;) meaning, 'we do not see in your faces any sign of good for our lives.' Qatadah said, \"They were saying, 'if something bad befalls us, it will be because of you.'\" Mujahid said, \"They were saying: People like you never enter a town, but its people are punished.\"\nلَئِنْ لَمْ تَنْتَهُوا لَنَرْجُمَنَّكُمْ\n(if you cease not, we will surely stone you,) Qatadah said, \"By throwing stones at you.\"\nوَلَيَمَسَّنَّكُمْ مِنَّا عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ\n(and a painful torment will touch you from us.) means, a severe punishment. Their Messengers said to them:\nطَائِرُكُمْ مَعَكُمْ\n(Your evil omens be with you!) meaning, 'they are thrown back at you.' This is like the Ayah where Allah describes the people of Fir'awn:\nفَإِذَا جَاءَتْهُمُ الْحَسَنَةُ قَالُوا لَنَا هَٰذِهِ ۖ وَإِنْ تُصِبْهُمْ سَيِّئَةٌ يَطَّيَّرُوا بِمُوسَىٰ وَمَنْ مَعَهُ ۗ أَلَا إِنَّمَا طَائِرُهُمْ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ\n(But whenever good came to them, they said: \"Ours is this.\" And if evil afflicted them, they ascribed it to evil omens connected with Musa and those with him. Be informed! Verily, their evil omens are with Allah)(7:131). And the people of Salih said:\nاطَّيَّرْنَا بِكَ وَبِمَنْ مَعَكَ ۚ قَالَ طَائِرُكُمْ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ\n(\"We augur ill omen from you and those with you.\" He said: \"Your ill omen is with Allah.\")(27:47) And Allah said:\nوَإِنْ تُصِبْهُمْ حَسَنَةٌ يَقُولُوا هَٰذِهِ مِنْ عِنْدِ اللَّهِ ۖ وَإِنْ تُصِبْهُمْ سَيِّئَةٌ يَقُولُوا هَٰذِهِ مِنْ عِنْدِكَ ۚ قُلْ كُلٌّ مِنْ عِنْدِ اللَّهِ ۖ فَمَالِ هَٰؤُلَاءِ الْقَوْمِ لَا يَكَادُونَ يَفْقَهُونَ حَدِيثًا\n(And if some good reaches them, they say, \"This is from Allah,\" but if some evil befalls them, they say, \"This is from you.\" Say: \"All things are from Allah,\" so what is wrong with these people that they fail to understand any word?)(4:78)\nأَئِنْ ذُكِّرْتُمْ ۚ بَلْ أَنْتُمْ قَوْمٌ مُسْرِفُونَ\n((Do you call it \"evil omen\") because you are admonished? Nay, but you are a people mischievous.) means, 'because of us, because we admonished you and told you to worship Allah Alone and with all sincerity, and in return you said what you said and threatened us. Nay, but you are a mischievous people.' Qatadah said, \"This means, 'Because we reminded you about Allah, you saw an evil omen in us. Nay, but you are a mischievous people'.\"","href":"/tafsir/36?verse=18","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:36:20","title":"Ibn Kathir · 36:20–25","text":"And there came a man running from the farthest part of the town. He said, \"O my people! Obey the Messengers. (20)\"Obey those who ask no wages of you, and who are rightly guided. (21)\"And why should I not worship Him Who has created me and to Whom you shall be returned. (22)\"Shall I take besides Him gods? If the Most Gracious intends me any harm, their intercession will be of no use for me whatsoever, nor can they save me. (23)\"Then verily, I should be in plain error. (24)\"Verily, I have believed in your Lord, so listen to me! (25)\nQuoting what reached him from Ibn 'Abbas, Ka'b Al-Ahbar and Wahb bin Munabbih – Ibn Ishaq reported that, \"The people of the city resolved to kill their Messengers, then a man came running to them from the farthest part of the town, i.e., to help them against his people. They said, his name was Habib, and he used to work with ropes. He was a sickly man who suffered from leprosy, and he was very charitable, giving half of his earnings in charity, and his Fitrah (natural inclination) was sound.\" Shabib bin Bishr said, narrating from 'Ikrimah, from Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, that the name of the man mentioned in Ya Sin was Habib An-Najjar, and he was killed by his people.\nقَالَ يَا قَوْمِ اتَّبِعُوا الْمُرْسَلِينَ\n(He said: \"O my people! Obey the Messengers.\") – he urged his people to follow the Messengers who had come to them.\nاتَّبِعُوا مَنْ لَا يَسْأَلُكُمْ أَجْرًا\n(Obey those who ask no wages of you,) means, 'for the Message which they convey to you, and they are rightly-guided in what they are calling you to, the worship of Allah Alone with no partner or associate.'\nوَمَا لِيَ لَا أَعْبُدُ الَّذِي فَطَرَنِي\n(And why should I not worship Him Who has created me) means, 'and what is there to stop me from sincerely worshipping the One Who has created me, and worshipping Him Alone, with no partner or associate?'\nوَإِلَيْهِ تُرْجَعُونَ\n(and to Whom you shall be returned.) means, 'on the Day of Resurrection, when He will requite you for your deeds: if they are good then you will be rewarded and if they are evil then you will be punished.'\nأَأَتَّخِذُ مِنْ دُونِهِ آلِهَةً\n(Shall I take besides Him gods?) This is a rhetorical question intended to rebuke and chastise.\nإِنْ يُرِدْنِ الرَّحْمَٰنُ بِضُرٍّ لَا تُغْنِ عَنِّي شَفَاعَتُهُمْ شَيْئًا وَلَا يُنْقِذُونِ\n(If the Most Gracious intends me any harm, their intercession will be of no use for me whatsoever, nor can they save me.) means, 'these gods whom you worship instead of Him possess no power whatsoever, if Allah wills me some harm,'\nفَلَا كَاشِفَ لَهُ إِلَّا هُوَ\n(none can remove it but He)(6:17). 'These idols can neither cause any harm nor bring any benefit, and they cannot save me from the predicament I am in.'\nإِنِّي إِذًا لَفِي ضَلَالٍ مُبِينٍ\n(Then verily, I should be in plain error.) means, 'if I were to take them as gods instead of Allah.'\nإِنِّي آمَنْتُ بِرَبِّكُمْ فَاسْمَعُونِ\n(Verily, I have believed in your Lord, so listen to me!) Ibn Ishaq said, quoting from what had reached him from Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, Ka'b and Wahb, \"He said to his people:\nإِنِّي آمَنْتُ بِرَبِّكُمْ\n('Verily, I have believed in your Lord) in Whom you have disbelieved,\nفَاسْمَعُونِ\n(so listen to me!)' means, listen to what I say.\" Or it may be that he was addressing the Messengers when he said:\nإِنِّي آمَنْتُ بِرَبِّكُمْ\n(Verily, I have believed in your Lord,) meaning, 'Who has sent you,'\nفَاسْمَعُونِ\n(so listen to me!) meaning, 'bear witness to that before Him.' This was narrated by Ibn Jarir, who said, \"And others said that this was addressed to the Messengers, and he said to them: 'Listen to what I say and bear witness to what I say before my Lord, that I have believed in your Lord and have followed you.' This interpretation is more apparent, and Allah knows best. Ibn Ishaq said, quoting from what had reached him from Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, Ka'b and Wahb, 'When he said that, they turned on him as one, and killed him at once, and he had no one to protect him from that.'\" Qatadah said, \"They started to stone him while he was saying, 'O Allah, guide my people for they do not know, and they kept stoning him until he died a violent death, and he was still praying for them.' May Allah have mercy on him.\"","href":"/tafsir/36?verse=20","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:36:26","title":"Ibn Kathir · 36:26–29","text":"It was said: \"Enter Paradise.\" He said: \"Would that my people knew. (26)\"That my Lord (Allah) has forgiven me, and made me of the honored ones! (27)And We sent not against his people after him an army from the heaven, nor was it needful for Us to send (such a thing)(28)It was but one 'Şayḥah' and lo! they (all) were still (29)\nMuhammad bin Ishaq reported from some of his companions from Ibn Mas'ud, may Allah be pleased with him, that they stamped on him until his intestines came out of his back passage. Allah said to him:\nادْخُلِ الْجَنَّةَ\n(\"Enter Paradise.\") so he entered it with all its bountiful provision, when Allah had taken away from him all the sickness, grief and exhaustion of this world. Mujahid said, \"It was said to Habib An-Najjar, 'Enter Paradise.' This was his right, for he had been killed. When he saw the reward,\nقَالَ يَا لَيْتَ قَوْمِي يَعْلَمُونَ\n(He said: \"Would that my people knew...\").\" Qatadah said, \"You will never find a believer but he is sincere and is never insincere. When he saw with his own eyes how Allah had honored him, he said:\nقَالَ يَا لَيْتَ قَوْمِي يَعْلَمُونَ - بِمَا غَفَرَ لِي رَبِّي وَجَعَلَنِي مِنَ الْمُكْرَمِينَ\n(He said: \"Would that my people knew that my Lord has forgiven me, and made me of the honored ones!\") He wished that his people could know about what he was seeing with his own eyes of the honor of Allah.\" Ibn 'Abbas said, \"He was sincere towards his people during his lifetime by saying,\nيَا قَوْمِ اتَّبِعُوا الْمُرْسَلِينَ\n(O my people! Obey the Messengers)(36:20) , and after his death by saying:\nيَا لَيْتَ قَوْمِي يَعْلَمُونَ - بِمَا غَفَرَ لِي رَبِّي وَجَعَلَنِي مِنَ الْمُكْرَمِينَ\n(Would that my people knew that my Lord (Allah) has forgiven me, and made me of the honored ones!) This was recorded by Ibn Abi Hatim. Sufyan Ath-Thawri narrated from 'Asim Al-Ahwal from Abu Mijlaz:\nبِمَا غَفَرَ لِي رَبِّي وَجَعَلَنِي مِنَ الْمُكْرَمِينَ\n(That my Lord has forgiven me, and made me of the honored ones!) \"Because of my faith in my Lord and my belief in the Messengers.\" He meant that if they could see the great reward and everlasting blessings that he had attained, this would lead them to follow the Messengers. May Allah have mercy on him and be pleased with him, for he was so keen that his people should be guided.\nوَمَا أَنْزَلْنَا عَلَىٰ قَوْمِهِ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ مِنْ جُنْدٍ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ وَمَا كُنَّا مُنْزِلِينَ\n(And We sent not against his people after him an army from the heaven, nor was it needful for Us to send.) Allah tells us that He took revenge on his people after they had killed him because He, may He be blessed and exalted, was angry with them, for they had disbelieved in His Messengers and killed His close friend. Allah tells us that He did not send an army of angels, nor did He need to send them, to destroy these people; the matter was simpler than that. This was the view of Ibn Mas'ud, according to the reports of Ibn Ishaq from some of his companions concerning the Ayah:\nوَمَا أَنْزَلْنَا عَلَىٰ قَوْمِهِ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ مِنْ جُنْدٍ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ وَمَا كُنَّا مُنْزِلِينَ\n(And We sent not against his people after him an army from the heaven, nor was it needful for Us to send.) He said: \"We did not seek to outnumber them, for the matter was simpler than that.\"\nإِنْ كَانَتْ إِلَّا صَيْحَةً وَاحِدَةً فَإِذَا هُمْ خَامِدُونَ\n(It was but one 'Şayḥah' and lo! they (all) were still.) He said, \"So Allah destroyed that tyrant king, and destroyed the people of Antioch, and they disappeared from the face of the earth, leaving no trace behind. It was said that the words\nوَمَا كُنَّا مُنْزِلِينَ\n(nor was it needful for Us to send (such a thing).) mean, 'We did not send the angels against the nations when We destroyed them; all We did was to send the punishment to destroy them.' It was said that the words:\nوَمَا أَنْزَلْنَا عَلَىٰ قَوْمِهِ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ مِنْ جُنْدٍ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ\n(And We sent not against his people after him an army from the heaven,) mean, another Message to them. This was the view of Mujahid and Qatadah. Qatadah said, \"Allah did not rebuke his people after they killed him,\nإِنْ كَانَتْ إِلَّا صَيْحَةً وَاحِدَةً فَإِذَا هُمْ خَامِدُونَ\n(It was but one 'Şayḥah' and lo! they (all) were still).\"\nIbn Jarir said, \"The former view is more correct, because the Message does not need to be brought by an army.\" The scholars of Tafsir said, \"Allah sent Jibril, peace be upon him, to them, and he seized the pillars at the gate of their city, then he hurled one 'Şayḥah' upon them and lo! they (all) were still, to the last man among them, and no soul was left in any body.\"\nWe have already referred to the reports from many of the Salaf that this city was Antioch, and that these three Messengers were messengers sent from the Messiah 'Isa bin Maryam, peace be upon him, as Qatadah and others stated. This is not mentioned by any of the later scholars of Tafsir besides him, and this issue must be examined from a number of angles.\n(The first) is that if we take this story at face value, it indicates that these men were Messengers from Allah, may He be glorified, not from the Messiah, peace be upon him, as Allah says:\nإِذْ أَرْسَلْنَا إِلَيْهِمُ اثْنَيْنِ فَكَذَّبُوهُمَا فَعَزَّزْنَا بِثَالِثٍ فَقَالُوا إِنَّا إِلَيْكُمْ مُرْسَلُونَ\n(When We sent to them two Messengers, they denied them both; so We reinforced them with a third, and they said: \"Verily, we have been sent to you as Messengers.\") up to:\nرَبُّنَا يَعْلَمُ إِنَّا إِلَيْكُمْ لَمُرْسَلُونَ - وَمَا عَلَيْنَا إِلَّا الْبَلَاغُ الْمُبِينُ\n(\"Our Lord knows that we have been sent as Messengers to you. And our duty is only to convey plainly (the Message).\") If they had been from among the Disciples, they would have said something to indicate that they had come from the Messiah, peace be upon him. And Allah knows best. Moreover, if they had been messengers sent by the Messiah, why would the people have said to them,\nمَا أَنْتُمْ إِلَّا بَشَرٌ مِثْلُنَا\n(\"You are only human beings like ourselves\")\n(The second) is that the people of Antioch did believe in the messengers sent by the Messiah to them. Antioch was the first city to believe in the Messiah, and it is one of the four cities in which there are Christian patriarchs. These cities are: Jerusalem, because it is the city of the Messiah; Antioch, because it was the first city where all of the people believed in the Messiah; Alexandria, because it was in that city that they agreed to reform the hierarchy of patriarchs, metropolitans (archbishops), bishops, priests, deacons and monks; and Rome, because it is the city of the Emperor Constantine who supported and helped to establish their religion. When he adopted Constantinople as his city, the Patriarch of Rome moved there, as has been mentioned by several historian, such as Sa'id bin Batriq and others, both People of the Book and Muslims. If we accept that, then the people of Antioch were the first to believe, but Allah tells us that the people of this town rejected His Messengers and that He destroyed them with one 'Şayḥah' and lo! they (all) were still. And Allah knows best.\n(The third) is that the story of Antioch and the Disciples of the Messiah happened after the Tawrah had been revealed. Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri, may Allah be pleased with him, and others among the Salaf stated that after revealing the Tawrah, Allah, may He be blessed and exalted, did not destroy an entire nation by sending a punishment upon them. Rather, He commanded the believers to fight the idolators. They mentioned this when discussing the Ayah:\nوَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَا مُوسَى الْكِتَابَ مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا أَهْلَكْنَا الْقُرُونَ الْأُولَىٰ\n(And indeed We gave Musa – after We had destroyed the generations of old – the Scripture)(28:43). This implies that the city mentioned in the Qur'an is a city other than Antioch, as also stated by more than one of the Salaf. Or, if we wish to keep the same name, it is possible that it is another Antioch, not the one which is well-known, for it is not known that it (the famous Antioch) was destroyed, either during Christian times or before. And Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/36?verse=26","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:36:30","title":"Ibn Kathir · 36:30–32","text":"Alas for mankind! There never came a Messenger to them but they used to mock at him (30)Do they not see how many of the generations We have destroyed before them? Verily, they will not return to them (31)And surely, all – everyone of them will be brought before Us (32)\nWoe to the Disbelievers!\nAli bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas commented on the Ayah:\nيَا حَسْرَةً عَلَى الْعِبَادِ ۚ\n(Alas for mankind!), this means, woe to mankind! Qatadah said:\nيَا حَسْرَةً عَلَى الْعِبَادِ ۚ\n(Alas for mankind!) means, \"Alas for mankind, who have neglected the command of Allah.\"\nThe meaning is that they will feel regret and sorrow on the Day of Resurrection. When they see the punishment with their own eyes; they will regret how they disbelieved the Messengers of Allah and went against the commands of Allah, for they used to disbelieve in them in this world.\nمَا يَأْتِيهِمْ مِنْ رَسُولٍ إِلَّا كَانُوا بِهِ يَسْتَهْزِئُونَ\n(There never came a Messenger to them but they used to mock at him.) means, they disbelieved him and made fun of him, and rejected the message of truth with which he had been sent.\nThe Refutation of the Belief in the Transmigration of Souls\nThen Allah says:\nأَلَمْ يَرَوْا كَمْ أَهْلَكْنَا قَبْلَهُمْ مِنَ الْقُرُونِ أَنَّهُمْ إِلَيْهِمْ لَا يَرْجِعُونَ\n(Do they not see how many of the generations We have destroyed before them Verily, they will not return to them.) meaning, 'do you not learn a lesson from those whom Allah destroyed before you of those who disbelieved in the Messengers? They came to this world only once, and will not return to it.' It is not as many of those ignorant and immoral people claim that\nإِنْ هِيَ إِلَّا حَيَاتُنَا الدُّنْيَا نَمُوتُ وَنَحْيَا\n(\"There is nothing but our life of this world! We die and we live!\")(23:37). This was the belief in the cycle of reincarnation; in their ignorance they believed that they would come back to this world as they had been before. But Allah refuted their false belief and said:\nأَلَمْ يَرَوْا كَمْ أَهْلَكْنَا قَبْلَهُمْ مِنَ الْقُرُونِ أَنَّهُمْ إِلَيْهِمْ لَا يَرْجِعُونَ\n(Do they not see how many of the generations We have destroyed before them? Verily, they will not return to them.) Allah's saying:\nوَإِنْ كُلٌّ لَمَّا جَمِيعٌ لَدَيْنَا مُحْضَرُونَ\n(And surely, all – everyone of them will be brought before Us.) means, all of the past nations and those that are yet to come, will be gathered and brought to account before Allah, may He be glorified and exalted, on the Day of Judgement, and they will be requitted according to their good and evil deeds. This is like the Ayah:\nوَإِنَّ كُلًّا لَمَّا لَيُوَفِّيَنَّهُمْ رَبُّكَ أَعْمَالَهُمْ ۚ\n(And verily, to each of them your Lord will repay their works in full.)(11:111).","href":"/tafsir/36?verse=30","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:36:33","title":"Ibn Kathir · 36:33–36","text":"And a sign for them is the dead land. We give it life, and We bring forth from it grains, so that they eat thereof (33)And We have made therein gardens of date palms and grapes, and We have caused springs of water to gush forth therein (34)So that they may eat of the fruit thereof – and their hands made it not. Will they not then give thanks (35)Glory be to Him Who has created all the pairs of that which the earth produces, as well as of their own kind, and of that which they know not (36)\nProof of the Creator of the Universe and of Life after Death\nAllah, may He be glorified and exalted, says:\nوَآيَةٌ لَهُمُ\n(And a sign for them) means, evidence for them of the existence of the Creator and His perfect power and ability to resurrect the dead,\nالْأَرْضُ الْمَيْتَةُ\n(is the dead land.) means, when it is dead and arid, with no vegetation, then Allah sends water upon it, it is stirred (to life), and it swells and puts forth every lovely kind (of growth). Allah says:\nأَحْيَيْنَاهَا وَأَخْرَجْنَا مِنْهَا حَبًّا فَمِنْهُ يَأْكُلُونَ\n(We give it life, and We bring forth from it grains, so that they eat thereof.) meaning, 'We have made it a provision for them and their cattle.'\nوَجَعَلْنَا فِيهَا جَنَّاتٍ مِنْ نَخِيلٍ وَأَعْنَابٍ وَفَجَّرْنَا فِيهَا مِنَ الْعُيُونِ\n(And We have made therein gardens of date palms and grapes, and We have caused springs of water to gush forth therein.) means, 'We have created therein rivers which flow to the places where they are needed, so that they may eat of their fruits.' When Allah reminds them of the blessing that He bestows upon His creation by creating crops and plants, He mentions the different types and kinds of fruits. Allah says:\nوَمَا عَمِلَتْهُ أَيْدِيهِمْ\n(and their hands made it not.) means, all of that could only come about by the mercy of Allah towards them, not by their own efforts and labor and strength. This was the view of Ibn 'Abbas and Qatadah. Allah says:\nأَفَلَا يَشْكُرُونَ\n(Will they not then give thanks?) meaning, will they not then give thanks for the innumerable blessings that He has bestowed upon them.\nIbn Jarir, however, understood the word Ma to mean Alladhi (i.e., a relative pronoun). In this case the meaning of the Ayah would be that they eat from the fruits provided by Allah's bounty and from what their own hands have done, i.e., by planting the seeds and tending the plants. Ibn Jarir mentioned other possible interpretations in his Tafsir, but this is the interpretation that he favored. This interpretation also fits with the recitation of Ibn Mas'ud:\nلِيَأْكُلُوا مِنْ ثَمَرِهِ وَمِمَّا عَمِلَتْهُ أَيْدِيهِمْ ۖ أَفَلَا يَشْكُرُونَ\n(So that they may eat of the fruit thereof – and from what their own hands have done.) Then Allah says:\nسُبْحَانَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ الْأَزْوَاجَ كُلَّهَا مِمَّا تُنْبِتُ الْأَرْضُ\n(Glory be to Him Who has created all the pairs of that which the earth produces,) meaning, of crops and fruits and plants.\nوَمِنْ أَنْفُسِهِمْ\n(as well as of their own (human) kind,) means, He made them into male and female.\nوَمِمَّا لَا يَعْلَمُونَ\n(and of that which they know not.) means, different kinds of creatures of which they know nothing. This is like the Ayah:\nوَمِنْ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ خَلَقْنَا زَوْجَيْنِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَذَكَّرُونَ\n(And of everything We have created pairs, that you may remember.)(51:49)","href":"/tafsir/36?verse=33","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:36:37","title":"Ibn Kathir · 36:37–40","text":"And a sign for them is the night. We withdraw therefrom the day, and behold, they are in darkness (37)And the sun runs on its fixed course for a term (appointed). That is the decree of the Almighty, the All-Knowing (38)And the moon, We have decreed for it stages, till it returns like the old dried curved date stalk (39)It is not for the sun to overtake the moon, nor does the night outstrip the day. They all float, each in an orbit (40)\nAmong the Signs of the Might and Power of Allah are the Night and Day, and the Sun and Moon\nAllah tells us of further proof of His great might and power, which is His creation of the night and day, the one with its darkness and the other with its light. He has caused them to follow one another, so that one comes and the other goes, and so on, as He says:\nيُغْشِي اللَّيْلَ النَّهَارَ يَطْلُبُهُ حَثِيثًا\n(He brings the night as a cover over the day, seeking it rapidly)(7:54). Allah says here:\nوَآيَةٌ لَهُمُ اللَّيْلُ نَسْلَخُ مِنْهُ النَّهَارَ\n(And a sign for them is the night. We withdraw therefrom the day,) meaning, 'We take it away from it, so it goes away and the night comes.' Allah says:\nفَإِذَا هُمْ مُظْلِمُونَ\n(and behold, they are in darkness.) As it says in the Hadith:\nإِذَا أَقْبَلَ اللَّيْلُ مِنْ هٰهُنَا، وَأَدْبَرَ النَّهَارُ مِنْ هٰهُنَا، وَغَرَبَتِ الشَّمْسُ، فَقَدْ أَفْطَرَ الصَّائِمُ\n(When the night comes from here, and the day departs from here, and the sun has set, then the fasting person should break his fast.) This is the apparent meaning of the Ayah. Allah's saying:\nوَالشَّمْسُ تَجْرِي لِمُسْتَقَرٍّ لَهَا ۚ ذَٰلِكَ تَقْدِيرُ الْعَزِيزِ الْعَلِيمِ\n(And the sun runs on its fixed course for a term (appointed). That is the decree of the Almighty, the All-Knowing) There are two views over the meaning of the phrase\nلِمُسْتَقَرٍّ لَهَا\n(on its fixed course for a term (appointed).)(The first view) is that it refers to its fixed course of location, which is beneath the Throne, beyond the earth in that direction. Wherever it goes, it is beneath the Throne, it and all of creation, because the Throne is the roof of creation and it is not a sphere as many astronomers claim. Rather it is a dome supported by legs or pillars, carried by the angels, and it is above the universe, above the heads of people. When the sun is at its zenith at noon, it is in its closest position to Throne, and when it runs in its fourth orbit at the opposite point to its zenith, at midnight, it is in its furthest position from the Throne. At that point it prostrates and asks for permission to rise, as mentioned in the Hadiths.\nAl-Bukhari recorded that Abu Dharr, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"I was with the Prophet ﷺ in the Masjid at sunset, and he ﷺ said:\nيَا أَبَا ذَرٍّ، أَتَدْرِي أَيْنَ تَغْرُبُ الشَّمْسُ؟\n(O Abu Dharr! Do you know where the sun sets?) I said, 'Allah and His Messenger know best.' He ﷺ said:\nفَإِنَّهَا تَذْهَبُ حَتّٰى تَسْجُدَ تَحْتَ الْعَرْشِ، فَذَلِكَ قَوْلُهُ تَعَالَى:وَالشَّمْسُ تَجْرِي لِمُسْتَقَرٍّ لَهَا ۚ ذَٰلِكَ تَقْدِيرُ الْعَزِيزِ الْعَلِيمِ\n(It goes and prostrates beneath the Throne, and that is what Allah says: (And the sun runs on its fixed course for a term. That is the decree of the Almighty, the All-Knowing.))\"\nIt was also reported that Abu Dharr, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"I asked the Messenger of Allah ﷺ about the Ayah:\nوَالشَّمْسُ تَجْرِي لِمُسْتَقَرٍّ لَهَا ۚ\n(And the sun runs on its fixed course for a term.) He ﷺ said:\nمُسْتَقَرُّهَا تَحْتَ الْعَرْشِ\n(Its fixed course is beneath the Throne.)\" (The second view) is that this refers to when the sun's appointed time comes to an end, which will be on the Day of Resurrection, when its fixed course will be abolished, it will come to a halt and it will be rolled up. This world will come to an end, and that will be the end of its appointed time. This is the fixed course of its time. Qatadah said:\nلِمُسْتَقَرٍّ لَّهَـا\n(on its fixed course for a term (appointed).) means, \"It has an appointed time and it will not go beyond that.\" It was also said that this means, it keeps moving in its summer orbit for a certain time, and it does not exceed that, then it moves to its winter orbit for a certain time, and it does not exceed that. This was narrated from 'Abdullah bin 'Amr, may Allah be pleased with him. Ibn Mas'ud and Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with them, recited this Ayah as:\n(وَالشَّمْسُ تَجْرِي لَا مُسْتَقَرَّ لَهَا)\n(And the sun runs with no fixed course for a term,) meaning that it has no destination and it does not settle in one place, rather it keeps moving night and day, never slowing down or stopping, as in the Ayah:\nوَسَخَّرَ لَكُمُ الشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ دَائِبَيْنِ ۖ\n(And He has made the sun and the moon, both constantly pursuing their courses, to be of service to you)(14:33). which means, they will never slow down or stop, until the Day of Resurrection.\nذَٰلِكَ تَقْدِيرُ الْعَزِيزِ\n(That is the decree of the Almighty,) means, which none can oppose or prevent.\nالْعَلِيمِ\n(the All-Knowing.) Who knows every movement and every cessation of movement, Who has decreed that and Who has set it in motion following a pattern in which there are no differences or inversions, as Allah says:\nفَالِقُ الْإِصْبَاحِ وَجَعَلَ اللَّيْلَ سَكَنًا وَالشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ حُسْبَانًا ۚ ذَٰلِكَ تَقْدِيرُ الْعَزِيزِ الْعَلِيمِ\n((He is the) Cleaver of the daybreak. He has appointed the night for resting, and the sun and the moon for reckoning. Such is the measuring of the Almighty, the All-Knowing.)(6:96) And this is how this Ayah ends:\nذَٰلِكَ تَقْدِيرُ الْعَزِيزِ الْعَلِيمِ\n(That is the decree of the Almighty, the All-Knowing.) Then Allah says:\nوَالْقَمَرَ قَدَّرْنَاهُ مَنَازِلَ\n(And the moon, We have decreed for it stages,) meaning, 'We have caused it to run in a different orbit, from which passing of the months can be deduced, just as night and day are known from the sun.' This is like the Ayah:\nيَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْأَهِلَّةِ ۖ قُلْ هِيَ مَوَاقِيتُ لِلنَّاسِ وَالْحَجِّ ۗ\n(They ask you about the crescent moons. Say: \"These are signs to mark fixed periods of time for mankind and for the pilgrimage (Hajj).\")(2:189),\nهُوَ الَّذِي جَعَلَ الشَّمْسَ ضِيَاءً وَالْقَمَرَ نُورًا وَقَدَّرَهُ مَنَازِلَ لِتَعْلَمُوا عَدَدَ السِّنِينَ وَالْحِسَابَ ۚ\n(It is He Who made the sun a shining thing and the moon as a light and measured out for it stages that you might know the number of years and the reckoning)(10:5), and\nوَجَعَلْنَا اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ آيَتَيْنِ ۖ فَمَحَوْنَا آيَةَ اللَّيْلِ وَجَعَلْنَا آيَةَ النَّهَارِ مُبْصِرَةً لِتَبْتَغُوا فَضْلًا مِنْ رَبِّكُمْ وَلِتَعْلَمُوا عَدَدَ السِّنِينَ وَالْحِسَابَ ۚ وَكُلَّ شَيْءٍ فَصَّلْنَاهُ تَفْصِيلًا\n(And We have appointed the night and the day as two Ayat (signs). Then, We have obliterated the sign of the night while We have made the sign of the day illuminating, that you may seek bounty from your Lord, and that you may know the number of the years and the reckoning. And We have explained everything with full explanation.)(17:12)\nSo, He has given the sun its own light, and the moon its (reflection of) light, and has given each its own orbit. So the sun rises each day and sets at the end of the day, giving one kind of light all the time, but it moves, rising and setting at different points in the summer and winter, thus making the days and nights longer or shorter alternatively according to the season. Its authority is in the daytime, for it is the heavenly body that dominates the day. As for the moon, Allah has decreed that it should pass through different phases.\nAt the beginning of the month, the moon appears small when it rises. It gives off little light, then on the second night its light increases and it rises to a higher position, and the higher it rises the more light it gives – even though it is reflected from the sun – until it becomes full on the fourteenth night of the month. Then it starts to wane until the end of the month, until it appears like the old dried curved date stalk. Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"This is the original stem (which connects the bunch of dates to the tree).\"\nThe Arabs have a name for each set of three nights in a month, according to the phases of the moon. They call the first three nights Ghurar; the next three nights Nufal; the next three nights Tusa' (nine) – because the last of them is the ninth. The next three nights are called 'Ushar (ten) – because the first of them is the tenth. The next three nights are called Al-Bid (white) – because of the light of the moon which shines brightly throughout these three nights. The next three nights are called Dura', the plural of Dar'a', because on the first of them the night is dark from the moon rising late. Dar'a' refers to the black sheep, i.e., the one whose head is black; the next three nights Zulam; then Hanadis, then Da'adi; then Mihaq, because of the absence of moonlight at the beginning of the month. Abu 'Ubayd did not recognize the names Tusa' and 'Ushar, in the book Gharib Al-Musannaf.\nلَا الشَّمْسُ يَنْبَغِي لَهَا أَنْ تُدْرِكَ الْقَمَرَ\n(It is not for the sun to overtake the moon,) Mujahid said, \"Each of them has a limit which it does not transgress or fall short of. When the time of one comes, the other goes away, and when the time for one to prevail comes, the time of the other ceases.\" 'Ikrimah said concerning the Ayah,\nلَا الشَّمْسُ يَنْبَغِي لَهَا أَنْ تُدْرِكَ الْقَمَرَ\n(It is not for the sun to overtake the moon,) this means that each of them has its time when it prevails. So it is not appropriate for the sun to rise at night.\nوَلَا اللَّيْلُ سَابِقُ النَّهَارِ\n(nor does the night outstrip the day.) means, after night has passed, it is not right for another night to come until it has been day. The authority of the sun is during the day and the authority of the moon is at night. Ad-Dahhak said, \"The night does not depart from here until the day comes from here – and he pointed to the east.\" Mujahid said:\nوَلَا اللَّيْلُ سَابِقُ النَّهَارِ\n(nor does the night outstrip the day.) \"They seek one another rapidly.\" The meaning is that there is no gap between night and day; each of them follows the other with no interval, because they have been subjugated and are both constantly pursuing one another.\nوَكُلٌّ فِي فَلَكٍ يَسْبَحُونَ\n(They all float, each in an orbit.) means, night and day, the sun and the moon, all of them are floating, i.e., revolving, in their orbits in the heaven. This was the view of Ibn 'Abbas, 'Ikrimah, Ad-Dahhak, Al-Hasan, Qatadah and 'Ata' Al-Khurasani. Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, and others among the Salaf said, \"In an orbit like the arc of a spinning wheel.\"","href":"/tafsir/36?verse=37","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:36:41","title":"Ibn Kathir · 36:41–44","text":"And an Ayah for them is that We bore their offspring in the laden ship (41)And We have created for them of the like thereunto, on which they ride (42)And if We will, We shall drown them, and there will be no shout for them, nor will they be saved (43)Unless it be a mercy from Us, and as an enjoyment for a while (44)\nAmong the Signs of Allah is that He carried Them in the laden Ship\nAllah tells us: another sign for them of His might and power is that He has subjugated the sea to carry ships, including – most significantly – the ship of Nuh , peace be upon him, in which Allah saved him and the believers, apart from whom none of the descendants of Adam were left on the face of the earth. Allah says:\nوَآيَةٌ لَهُمْ أَنَّا حَمَلْنَا ذُرِّيَّتَهُمْ\n(And an Ayah for them is that We bore their offspring) means, their forefathers,\nفِي الْفُلْكِ الْمَشْحُونِ\n(in the laden ship.) means, in the ship which was filled with luggage and animals, in which Allah commanded him to put two of every kind. Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"Laden means filled.\" This was also the view of Sa'id bin Jubayr, Ash-Sha'bi, Qatadah and As-Suddi. Ad-Dahhak, Qatadah and Ibn Zayd said, \"This was the ship of Nuh peace be upon him.\"\nوَخَلَقْنَا لَهُمْ مِنْ مِثْلِهِ مَا يَرْكَبُونَ\n(And We have created for them of the like thereunto, on which they ride.) Al-'Awfi said, narrating from Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, \"This means the camel, for it is the ship of the land on which they carry goods and on which they ride. \" Ibn Jarir recorded that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"Do you know what the Ayah:\nوَخَلَقْنَا لَهُمْ مِنْ مِثْلِهِ مَا يَرْكَبُونَ\n(And We have created for them of the like thereunto, on which they ride.) refers to?\" We said, \"No.\" He said, \"This refers to the ships which were made after the ship of Nuh, peace be upon him, which was similar to it.\" This was also the view of Abu Malik, Ad-Dahhak, Qatadah, Abu Salih and As-Suddi, that the Ayah\nوَخَلَقْنَا لَهُمْ مِنْ مِثْلِهِ مَا يَرْكَبُونَ\n(And We have created for them of the like thereunto, on which they ride.) refers to ships.\nوَإِنْ نَشَأْ نُغْرِقْهُمْ\n(And if We will, We shall drown them,) means, those who are on board the ships.\nفَلَا صَرِيخَ لَهُمْ\n(and there will be no shout for them) means, there will be no one to save them from their predicament.\nوَلَا هُمْ يُنْقَذُونَ\n(nor will they be saved.) means, from what has befallen them.\nإِلَّا رَحْمَةً مِنَّا\n(Unless it be a mercy from Us,) means, 'but by Our mercy We make it easy for you to travel on land and sea, and We keep you safe until an appointed time.' Allah says:\nوَمَتَاعًا إِلَىٰ حِينٍ\n(and as an enjoyment for a while.) meaning, until a time that is known to Allah, may He be glorified and exalted.","href":"/tafsir/36?verse=41","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:36:45","title":"Ibn Kathir · 36:45–47","text":"And when it is said to them: \"Beware of that which is before you, and that which is behind you, in order that you may receive mercy. (45)And never came an Ayah from among the Ayat of their Lord to them, but they did turn away from it (46)And when it is said to them: \"Spend of that with which Allah has provided you,\" those who disbelieve say to those who believe: \"Shall we feed those whom, if Allah willed, He would have fed? You are only in a plain error. (47)\nThe Misguidance of the Idolators\nAllah tells us how the idolators persisted in their misguidance and in not paying attention to the sins that they had committed in the past or what was to happen to them in the future, on the Day of Resurrection.\nوَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمُ اتَّقُوا مَا بَيْنَ أَيْدِيكُمْ وَمَا خَلْفَكُمْ\n(And when it is said to them: \"Fear of that which is before you, and that which is behind you...\") Mujahid said, \"This refers to sins.\" Others said it is the opposite.\nلَعَلَّكُمْ تُرْحَمُونَ\n(in order that you may receive mercy.) means, 'so that, if you fear such things Allah will have mercy on you and will save you from His punishment.' The wording implies that they would not respond. Rather that they would turn away and ignore that, as Allah says:\nوَمَا تَأْتِيهِمْ مِنْ آيَةٍ مِنْ آيَاتِ رَبِّهِمْ\n(And never came an Ayah from among the Ayat of their Lord to them,) meaning, signs of Tawhid and the truth of the Messengers,\nإِلَّا كَانُوا عَنْهَا مُعْرِضِينَ\n(but they did turn away from it,) means, they did not accept it or benefit from it.\nوَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ أَنْفِقُوا مِمَّا رَزَقَكُمُ اللَّهُ\n(And when it is said to them: \"Spend of that with which Allah has provided you,\") means, when they are told to spend of that which Allah has provided to them on the poor and needy among the Muslims,\nقَالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا\n(those who disbelieve say to those who believe) means, about the believers who are poor, i.e., they say to those believers who tell them to spend on the needy,\nأَنُطْعِمُ مَنْ لَوْ يَشَاءُ اللَّهُ أَطْعَمَهُ\n(Shall we feed those whom, if Allah willed, He (Himself) would have fed?) meaning, 'those whom you are telling us to spend on, if Allah had wanted to, He would have made them independent and fed them from His provision, so we are in accordance with the will of Allah with regard to them.'\nإِنْ أَنْتُمْ إِلَّا فِي ضَلَالٍ مُبِينٍ\n(You are only in a plain error.) means, 'by telling us to do that.'","href":"/tafsir/36?verse=45","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:36:48","title":"Ibn Kathir · 36:48–50","text":"And they say: \"When will this promise be fulfilled, if you are truthful? (48)They await only but a single 'Şayḥah' which will seize them while they are disputing (49)Then they will not be able to make bequest, nor they will return to their family (50)\nThe Disbelievers thought that the Day of Resurrection would never come to pass\nAllah tells us how the disbelievers thought that the Day of Resurrection would never come to pass, as they said:\nمَتَىٰ هَٰذَا الْوَعْدُ\n(\"When will this promise be fulfilled...\")\nيَسْتَعْجِلُ بِهَا الَّذِينَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِهَا ۖ\n(Those who believe not therein seek to hasten it)(42:18). Allah says:\nمَا يَنْظُرُونَ إِلَّا صَيْحَةً وَاحِدَةً تَأْخُذُهُمْ وَهُمْ يَخِصِّمُونَ\n(They await only but a single 'Şayḥah' which will seize them while they are disputing!) meaning, they are only waiting for a single shout which – and Allah knows best – will be the trumpet blast of terror when the Trumpet will be blown while the people are in their marketplaces and places of work, arguing and disputing as they usually do. While in this state, Allah will command Israfil to blow into the Trumpet, so he will sound a long note and there will be no one left on the face of the earth except he will tilt his head to listen to the sound coming from heaven. Then the people who are alive will be driven to the gathering place by a fire which will surround them on all sides. Allah says:\nفَلَا يَسْتَطِيعُونَ تَوْصِيَةً\n(Then they will not be able to make bequest,) meaning, with regard to their possessions, because the matter is more serious than that,\nوَلَا إِلَىٰ أَهْلِهِمْ يَرْجِعُونَ\n(nor they will return to their family.) Numerous Hadiths and reports have been narrated about this, which we have mentioned elsewhere. After this there will be the Trumpet blast which will cause everyone who is alive to die, besides the One Who is Ever Living, Eternal. Then after that the trumpet blast of the resurrection will be sounded.","href":"/tafsir/36?verse=48","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:36:51","title":"Ibn Kathir · 36:51–54","text":"And the Trumpet will be blown and behold from the graves they will come out quickly to their Lord (51)They will say: \"Woe to us! Who has raised us up from our place of sleep.\" (It will be said to them): \"This is what the Most Gracious had promised, and the Messengers spoke truth! (52)It will be but a single 'Şayḥah', so behold they will all be brought up before Us (53)This Day, none will be wronged in anything, nor will you be requited anything except that which you used to do (54)\nThe Trumpet Blast of the Resurrection\nThis will be the third blast of the trumpet, the trumpet blast of the resurrection when people will come forth from their graves. Allah says:\nفَإِذَا هُمْ مِنَ الْأَجْدَاثِ إِلَىٰ رَبِّهِمْ يَنْسِلُونَ\n(and behold from the graves they will come out quickly to their Lord.) 'Yansilūn' means they will be walking quickly. This is like the Ayah:\nيَوْمَ يَخْرُجُونَ مِنَ الْأَجْدَاثِ سِرَاعًا كَأَنَّهُمْ إِلَىٰ نُصُبٍ يُوفِضُونَ\n(The Day when they will come out of the graves quickly as racing to a goal.)(70:43).\nقَالُوا يَا وَيْلَنَا مَنْ بَعَثَنَا مِنْ مَرْقَدِنَا ۜ ۗ\n(They will say: \"Woe to us! Who has raised us up from our place of sleep.\") meaning, their graves, which in this world they thought they would never be raised from. When they see with their own eyes that in which they had disbelieved,\nقَالُوا يَا وَيْلَنَا مَنْ بَعَثَنَا مِنْ مَرْقَدِنَا ۜ ۗ\n(They will say: \"Woe to us! Who has raised us up from our place of sleep.\") This does not contradict the fact that they will be punished in their graves, because in comparison to what is to come afterwards, that will seem like a nap. Ubayy bin Ka'b, may Allah be pleased with him, Mujahid, Al-Hasan and Qatadah said, \"They will sleep before the Resurrection.\" Qatadah said, \"That will be between the two trumpet blasts, they will say, 'Who has raised us up from our place of sleep?'\"\nWhen they say that, the believers will respond. This was the view of more than one of the Salaf.\nهَٰذَا مَا وَعَدَ الرَّحْمَٰنُ وَصَدَقَ الْمُرْسَلُونَ\n((It will be said to them): \"This is what the Most Gracious had promised, and the Messengers spoke truth!\") Al-Hasan said, \"The angels will reply to them in this manner. There is no contradiction because both are possible. And Allah knows best.\nإِنْ كَانَتْ إِلَّا صَيْحَةً وَاحِدَةً فَإِذَا هُمْ جَمِيعٌ لَدَيْنَا مُحْضَرُونَ\n(It will be but a single 'Şayḥah', so behold they will all be brought up before Us!) This is like the Ayat:\nفَإِنَّمَا هِيَ زَجْرَةٌ وَاحِدَةٌ - فَإِذَا هُمْ بِالسَّاهِرَةِ\n(But it will be only a single Zajrah, when behold, they find themselves (on the surface of the earth) alive (after their death).)(79:13-14),\nوَمَا أَمْرُ السَّاعَةِ إِلَّا كَلَمْحِ الْبَصَرِ أَوْ هُوَ أَقْرَبُ ۚ\n(And the matter of the Hour is not but as a twinkling of the eye, or even nearer)(16:77), and\nيَوْمَ يَدْعُوكُمْ فَتَسْتَجِيبُونَ بِحَمْدِهِ وَتَظُنُّونَ إِنْ لَبِثْتُمْ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا\n(On the Day when He will call you, and you will answer (His call) with (words of) His praise and obedience, and you will think that you have stayed (in this world) but a little while!)(17:52) which means, 'We will issue but one command, and all of them will be gathered together.'\nفَالْيَوْمَ لَا تُظْلَمُ نَفْسٌ شَيْئًا\n(This Day, none will be wronged in anything,) means, with regard to his deeds.\nوَلَا تُجْزَوْنَ إِلَّا مَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ\n(nor will you be requited anything except that which you used to do.)","href":"/tafsir/36?verse=51","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:36:55","title":"Ibn Kathir · 36:55–58","text":"Verily, the dwellers of the Paradise, that Day, will be busy with joyful things (55)They and their wives will be in pleasant shade, reclining on thrones (56)They will have therein fruits and all that they ask for (57)(It will be said to them): \"Salam (Peace!)\" – a Word from the Lord, Most Merciful (58)\nThe Life of the People of Paradise\nAllah tells us that on the Day of Resurrection, when the people of Paradise have reached the arena of judgement, and have settled in the gardens of Paradise, they will be too preoccupied with their own victory and new life of eternal delights to worry about anyone else. Al-Hasan Al-Basri and Isma'il bin Abi Khalid said, \"They will be too busy to think about the torment which the people of Hell are suffering. Mujahid said:\nفِي شُغُلٍ فَاكِهُونَ\n(will be busy with joyful things.) \"With the delights which they are enjoying.\" This was also the view of Qatadah. Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"This means that they will be rejoicing.\"\nهُمْ وَأَزْوَاجُهُمْ\n(They and their wives) Mujahid said, \"Their spouses,\nفِي ظِلَالٍ\n(will be in pleasant shade,) means, in the shade of trees.\"\nعَلَى الْأَرَائِكِ مُتَّكِئُونَ\n(reclining on thrones.) Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Muhammad bin Ka'b, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, As-Suddi and Khusayf said:\nالْأَرَائِكِ\n(throne) means beds beneath canopies.\nلَهُمْ فِيهَا فَاكِهَةٌ\n(They will have therein fruits) means, of all kinds.\nوَلَهُمْ مَا يَدَّعُونَ\n(and all that they ask for.) means, whatever they ask for, they will find it, all kinds and types.\nسَلَامٌ قَوْلًا مِنْ رَبٍّ رَحِيمٍ\n(\"Salam (Peace!)\" – a Word from the Lord (Allah), Most Merciful.) Ibn Jurayj said, \"Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, concerning this Ayah, Allah Himself, Who is the Peace (As-Salam) will grant peace to the people of Paradise. This view of Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, is like the Ayah:\nتَحِيَّتُهُمْ يَوْمَ يَلْقَوْنَهُ سَلَامٌ ۚ\n(Their greeting on the Day they shall meet Him will be \"Salam\")(33:44).","href":"/tafsir/36?verse=55","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:36:59","title":"Ibn Kathir · 36:59–62","text":"(It will be said): \"And O you the criminals! Get you apart this Day. (59)\"Did I not command you, O Children of Adam, that you should not worship Shaytan? Verily, he is a plain enemy to you. (60)\"And that you should worship Me. That is the straight path. (61)\"And indeed he did lead astray a great multitude of you. Did you not then understand? (62)\nThe Isolation of the Disbelievers and Their Rebuke on the Day of Resurrection\nAllah tells us what the end of the disbelievers will be on the Day of Resurrection, when He commands them to get apart from the believers, i.e., to stand apart from the believers. This is like the Ayat:\nوَيَوْمَ نَحْشُرُهُمْ جَمِيعًا ثُمَّ نَقُولُ لِلَّذِينَ أَشْرَكُوا مَكَانَكُمْ أَنْتُمْ وَشُرَكَاؤُكُمْ ۚ فَزَيَّلْنَا بَيْنَهُمْ ۖ\n(And the Day whereon We shall gather them all together, then We shall say to those who did set partners in worship with Us: \"Stop at your place! You and your partners.\" Then We shall separate them)(10:28).\nوَيَوْمَ تَقُومُ السَّاعَةُ يَوْمَئِذٍ يَتَفَرَّقُونَ\n(And on the Day when the Hour will be established – that Day shall they be separated.)(30:14)\nيَوْمَئِذٍ يَصَّدَّعُونَ\n(On that Day they shall be divided)(30:43) which means, they will be divided into two separate groups.\nاحْشُرُوا الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا وَأَزْوَاجَهُمْ وَمَا كَانُوا يَعْبُدُونَ - مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ فَاهْدُوهُمْ إِلَىٰ صِرَاطِ الْجَحِيمِ\n((It will be said to the angels): \"Assemble those who did wrong, together with their companions and what they used to worship, instead of Allah, and lead them on to the way of flaming Fire (Hell).\")(37:22-23).\nأَلَمْ أَعْهَدْ إِلَيْكُمْ يَا بَنِي آدَمَ أَنْ لَا تَعْبُدُوا الشَّيْطَانَ ۖ إِنَّهُ لَكُمْ عَدُوٌّ مُبِينٌ\n(Did I not command you, O Children of Adam, that you should not worship Shaytan? Verily, he is a plain enemy to you.) This is a rebuke from Allah to the disbelievers among the sons of Adam, those who obey the Shaytan even though he was a plain enemy to them, and they disobeyed Ar-Rahman Who created them and granted them provision. Allah says:\nوَأَنِ اعْبُدُونِي ۚ هَٰذَا صِرَاطٌ مُسْتَقِيمٌ\n(And that you should worship Me. That is the straight path.) meaning, 'I commanded you in the world to disobey the Shaytan, and I commanded you to worship Me, and this is the straight path, but you followed a different path and you followed the commands of the Shaytan.' Allah says:\nوَلَقَدْ أَضَلَّ مِنْكُمْ جِبِلًّا كَثِيرًا ۖ\n(And indeed he did lead astray a great multitude of you.) meaning, a large number of people. This was the view of Mujahid, Qatadah, As-Suddi and Sufyan bin 'Uyaynah.\nأَفَلَمْ تَكُونُوا تَعْقِلُونَ\n(Did you not then understand?) means, 'did you not have any understanding, when you went against the command of your Lord to worship Him alone, with no partner or associate, and you preferred to follow the Shaytan?'","href":"/tafsir/36?verse=59","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:36:63","title":"Ibn Kathir · 36:63–67","text":"This is Hell which you were promised (63)Burn (enter) therein this Day, for that you used to disbelieve (64)This Day, We shall seal up their mouths, and their hands will speak to Us, and their legs will bear witness to what they used to earn (65)And if it had been Our will, We would surely have wiped out their eyes, so that they would struggle for the path, how then would they see (66)And if it had been Our will, We could have transformed them in their places. Then they would have been unable to go forward (move about) nor they could have turned back (67)\nOn the Day of Resurrection, it will be said to the disbelievers among the sons of Adam, after Hell has been shown to them as a rebuke; and warning:\nهَٰذِهِ جَهَنَّمُ الَّتِي كُنْتُمْ تُوعَدُونَ\n(This is Hell which you were promised!) meaning, 'this is what the Messengers warned you about, and you did not believe them.'\nاصْلَوْهَا الْيَوْمَ بِمَا كُنْتُمْ تَكْفُرُونَ\n(Burn (enter) therein this Day, for that you used to disbelieve). This is like the Ayah:\nيَوْمَ يُدَعُّونَ إِلَىٰ نَارِ جَهَنَّمَ دَعًّا - هَٰذِهِ النَّارُ الَّتِي كُنْتُمْ بِهَا تُكَذِّبُونَ - أَفَسِحْرٌ هَٰذَا أَمْ أَنْتُمْ لَا تُبْصِرُونَ\n(The Day when they will be pushed down by force to the fire of Hell, with a horrible, forceful pushing. This is the Fire which you used to belie. Is this magic or do you not see?)(52:13-15)\nThe Mouths of the Disbelievers will be sealed on the Day of Resurrection\nالْيَوْمَ نَخْتِمُ عَلَىٰ أَفْوَاهِهِمْ وَتُكَلِّمُنَا أَيْدِيهِمْ وَتَشْهَدُ أَرْجُلُهُمْ بِمَا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ\n(This Day, We shall seal up their mouths, and their hands will speak to Us, and their legs will bear witness to what they used to earn.)\nThis will be the state of the disbelievers and hypocrites on the Day of Resurrection, when they deny the sins they committed in this world and swear that they did not do that. Allah will seal their mouths and cause their limbs to speak about what they did.\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that Anas bin Malik, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"We were with the Prophet ﷺ and he smiled so broadly that his molar could be seen, then he ﷺ said:\nأَتَدْرُونَ مِمَّ أَضْحَكُ؟\n(Do you know why I am smiling?) We said, 'Allah and His Messenger know best.' He ﷺ said:\nمِنْ مُجَادَلَةِ الْعَبْدِ رَبَّهُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ، يَقُولُ: رَبِّ أَلَمْ تُجِرْنِي مِنَ الظُّلْمِ؟ فَيَقُولُ: بَلَى، فَيَقُولُ: لَا أُجِيزُ عَلَيَّ إِلَّا شَاهِدًا مِنْ نَفْسِي، فَيَقُولُ: كَفَى بِنَفْسِكَ الْيَوْمَ عَلَيْكَ حَسِيبًا، وَبِالْكِرَامِ الْكَاتِبِينَ شُهُودًا، فَيُخْتَمُ عَلَى فِيهِ، وَيُقَالُ لِأَرْكَانِهِ: انْطِقِي فَتَنْطِقَ بِعَمَلِهِ، ثُمَّ يُخَلَّى بَيْنَهُ وَبَيْنَ الْكَلَامِ، فَيَقُولُ: بُعْدًا لَكُنَّ وَسُحْقًا، فَعَنْكُنَّ كُنْتُ أُنَاضِلُ\n(Because of the way a servant will argue with his Lord on the Day of Resurrection. He will say, \"O Lord, will You not protect me from injustice?\" [Allah] will say, \"Of course.\" He will say, \"I will not accept any witness against me except from myself.\" [Allah] will say, \"Today you will be a sufficient witness against yourself, and the honorable scribes will serve as witnesses against you.\" Then his mouth will be sealed, and it will be said to his faculties, \"Speak!\" So they will speak of what he did. Then he will be permitted to speak, and he will say, \"May you be doomed! It was for you that I was fighting.\")\"\nThis was recorded by Muslim and An-Nasa'i.\nIbn Jarir narrated that Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The believer will be called to account on the Day of Resurrection, and his Lord will show him his deeds, just between him and His Lord. He will admit it and will say, 'Yes, O Lord, I did do that.' Then Allah will forgive him his sins and conceal them, and no creature on earth will see any of those sins, but his good deeds will be seen, and he will want all the people to see them. Then the disbeliever and the hypocrite will be brought to account, and his Lord will show him his deeds and he will deny them, saying, 'O Lord, by Your glory, this angel has written down things that I did not do.' The angel will say to him, 'Did you not do such and such on such a day and in such a place?' He will say, 'No, by Your glory, I did not do that.' When he says this, Allah will seal his mouth.\" Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"I think that the first part of his body to speak will be his right thigh.\" Then he recited:\nالْيَوْمَ نَخْتِمُ عَلَىٰ أَفْوَاهِهِمْ وَتُكَلِّمُنَا أَيْدِيهِمْ وَتَشْهَدُ أَرْجُلُهُمْ بِمَا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ\n(This Day, We shall seal up their mouths, and their hands will speak to Us, and their legs will bear witness to what they used to earn).\nوَلَوْ نَشَاءُ لَطَمَسْنَا عَلَىٰ أَعْيُنِهِمْ فَاسْتَبَقُوا الصِّرَاطَ فَأَنَّىٰ يُبْصِرُونَ\n(And if it had been Our will, We would surely have wiped out their eyes, so that they would struggle for the path, how then would they see?)\nAli bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, explained it: \"Allah says, 'If We willed, We could have misguided them all away from true guidance, so how could they be guided?\" And on one occasion he said, \"We could have blinded them.\" Al-Hasan Al-Basri said, \"If Allah willed, He could have covered their eyes and made them blind, stumbling about.\" Mujahid, Abu Salih, Qatadah and As-Suddi said, \"So that they would struggle for the path, i.e., the right way.\" Ibn Zayd said, \"The meaning of path here is the truth – 'How could they see when We have covered their eyes?'\" Al-'Awfi reported that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him said:\nفَأَنَّىٰ يُبْصِرُونَ\n(how then would they see?) \"They would not see the truth.\"\nوَلَوْ نَشَاءُ لَمَسَخْنَاهُمْ عَلَىٰ مَكَانَتِهِمْ\n(And if it had been Our will, We could have transformed them in their places.)\nAl-'Awfi reported that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said; \"We could have destroyed them.\" As-Suddi said, \"We could have changed their form.\" Abu Salih said, \"We could have turned them to stone.\" Al-Hasan Al-Basri and Qatadah said, \"We could have caused them to sit on their feet.\" Allah says:\nفَمَا اسْتَطَاعُوا مُضِيًّا\n(Then they would have been unable to go forward) meaning, move to the front,\nوَلَا يَرْجِعُونَ\n(nor they could have turned back.) meaning, move backwards. They would have remained static, unable to move forwards or backwards.","href":"/tafsir/36?verse=63","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:36:68","title":"Ibn Kathir · 36:68–70","text":"And he whom We grant long life – We reverse him in creation. Will they not then understand (68)And We have not taught him poetry, nor is it suitable for him. This is only a Reminder and a plain Qur'an (69)That he or it may give warning to him who is living, and that Word may be justified against the disbelievers (70)\nAllah tells us that the longer the son of Adam lives, the more he becomes weak after being strong, and incapable after being able and active This is like the Ayah:\nاللَّهُ الَّذِي خَلَقَكُمْ مِنْ ضَعْفٍ ثُمَّ جَعَلَ مِنْ بَعْدِ ضَعْفٍ قُوَّةً ثُمَّ جَعَلَ مِنْ بَعْدِ قُوَّةٍ ضَعْفًا وَشَيْبَةً ۚ يَخْلُقُ مَا يَشَاءُ ۖ وَهُوَ الْعَلِيمُ الْقَدِيرُ\n(Allah is He Who created you in (a state of) weakness, then gave you strength after weakness, then after strength gave weakness and gray hair. He creates what He wills. And it is He Who is the All-Knowing, the All-Powerful.)(30:54). And Allah says:\nوَمِنْكُمْ مَنْ يُرَدُّ إِلَىٰ أَرْذَلِ الْعُمُرِ لِكَيْلَا يَعْلَمَ مِنْ بَعْدِ عِلْمٍ شَيْئًا\n(And among you there is he who is brought back to the miserable old age, so that he knows nothing after having known)(22:5).\nThe meaning here – and Allah knows best – is that Allah is telling us that this world is transient and will come to an end, it is not eternal and lasting. Allah says:\nأَفَلَا يَعْقِلُونَ\n(Will they not then understand?) meaning, will they not think about how they were created, then they become gray-haired, then they become old and senile, so that they may know that they were created for another world that is not transient and will not pass away, and from which there is no way out, which is the Hereafter.\nAllah does not teach His Messenger (ﷺ) Poetry\nوَمَا عَلَّمْنَاهُ الشِّعْرَ وَمَا يَنْبَغِي لَهُ ۚ\n(And We have not taught him poetry, nor is it suitable for him.) Allah tells us that He has not taught His Prophet Muhammad ﷺ poetry.\nوَمَا يَنْبَغِي لَهُ\n(nor is it suitable for him.) means, he did not know how to compose it, he did not like it and he had no natural inclination towards it. It was narrated that he ﷺ never memorized a stanza of poetry with the correct meter or rhyme – he would transpose words or memorize it incompletely.\nIn Ad-Dala'il, Al-Bayhaqi recorded that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said to Al-'Abbas bin Mirdas As-Sulami, may Allah be pleased with him:\nأَنْتَ الْقَائِلُ: أَتَجْعَلُ نَهْبِي وَنَهْبَ الْعُبَيدِ بَيْنَ الْأَقْرَعِ وَعُيَيْنَةَ\n(You are the one who said: \"Do you distribute my booty and the booty of the servants between Al-Aqra' and 'Uyainah.\") He said, \"It is 'Uyainah and Al-Aqra'.\" He ﷺ said:\nالْكُلُّ سَوَاءٌ\n(It is all the same.) i.e., it means the same thing. And Allah knows best. This is because Allah taught him the Qur'an, which\nلَا يَأْتِيهِ الْبَاطِلُ مِنْ بَيْنِ يَدَيْهِ وَلَا مِنْ خَلْفِهِ ۖ تَنْزِيلٌ مِنْ حَكِيمٍ حَمِيدٍ\n(Falsehood cannot come to it from before it or behind it; sent down by the All-Wise, Worthy of all praise.)(41:42).\nThis is not poetry, as some of the ignorant disbelievers of the Quraysh claimed; neither is it sorcery, a fabrication or a magic spell, as the misguided and ignorant people variously suggested. The Prophet ﷺ was naturally disinclined to compose verse, and was forbidden to do so by Divine Law.\nإِنْ هُوَ إِلَّا ذِكْرٌ وَقُرْآنٌ مُبِينٌ\n(This is only a Reminder and a plain Qur'an.) means, it is clear and self-explanatory to the one who ponders and comprehends its meanings, Allah says:\nلِيُنْذِرَ مَنْ كَانَ حَيًّا\n(That he or it may give warning to him who is living,) meaning, so that this plain Qur'an might warn every living person on the face of the earth. This is like the Ayat:\nلِأُنْذِرَكُمْ بِهِ وَمَنْ بَلَغَ\n(that I may therewith warn you and whomsoever it may reach)(6:19).\nوَمَنْ يَكْفُرْ بِهِ مِنَ الْأَحْزَابِ فَالنَّارُ مَوْعِدُهُ ۚ\n(but those of the sects that reject it, the Fire will be their promised meeting place)(11:17). Those who will benefit from his warning will be those whose hearts are alive and who have enlightened insight, as Qatadah said, \"Alive of heart and alive of insight.\" Ad-Dahhak said, \"This means wise.\"\nوَيَحِقَّ الْقَوْلُ عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ\n(and that Word may be justified against the disbelievers.) means, it is a mercy to the believers and evidence against the disbelievers.","href":"/tafsir/36?verse=68","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:36:71","title":"Ibn Kathir · 36:71–73","text":"Do they not see that We have created for them of what Our Hands have fashioned, the cattle, so that they are their owners (71)And We have subdued them unto them so that some of them they have for riding and some they eat (72)And they have (other) benefits from them, and (they get to) drink. Will they not then be grateful (73)\nThere is a Sign and a Blessing in Cattle\nAllah mentions the blessing that He has bestowed upon His creation by subjugating these cattle for their use.\nفَهُمْ لَهَا مَالِكُونَ\n(so that they are their owners.) Qatadah said, \"They are their masters.\" Meaning, He has made them subdue them. So they are submissive towards them and do not resist them; even if a young child comes to a camel he can make it kneel down, and if he wants to, he can make it stand up and can drive it, and it will meekly be led by him. Even if the train consists of a hundred or more camels, they could all be led by a young child.\nفَمِنْهَا رَكُوبُهُمْ وَمِنْهَا يَأْكُلُونَ\n(some of them they have for riding and some they eat.) means, some of them they ride on their journeys, and use them to carry their burdens to all regions.\nوَمِنْهَا يَأْكُلُونَ\n(and some they eat.) means, if they want to, and they slaughter and sacrifice them.\nوَلَهُمْ فِيهَا مَنَافِعُ\n(And they have (other) benefits from them,) means, from their wool, fur, and hair, furnishings and articles of convenience, comfort for a time.\nوَمَشَارِبُ ۖ\n(and (they get to) drink.) means, their milk, and their urine for those who need it as medicine, and so on.\nأَفَلَا يَشْكُرُونَ\n(Will they not then be grateful?) means, 'will they not worship the Creator and Subduer of that, without showing gratitude to others?'","href":"/tafsir/36?verse=71","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:36:74","title":"Ibn Kathir · 36:74–76","text":"And they have taken besides Allah, gods, hoping that they might be helped (74)They cannot help them, but they will be brought forward as a troop (against those who worshipped them)(75)So, let not their speech then grieve you. Verily, We know what they conceal and what they reveal (76)\nThe gods of the Idolators are not able to help Them\nAllah denounces the idolators for taking the idols as gods alongside Allah, hoping that those gods will help them and provide for them and bring them closer to Allah. Allah says:\nلَا يَسْتَطِيعُونَ نَصْرَهُمْ\n(They cannot help them,) meaning, those gods cannot help their worshippers; they are too weak, too insignificant and too powerless. Rather they cannot even help themselves or take revenge on those who want to harm them, because they are inanimate and can neither hear nor comprehend. Allah's saying:\nوَهُمْ لَهُمْ جُنْدٌ مُحْضَرُونَ\n(but they will be brought forward as a troop.) means, at the time of Reckoning according to the view of Mujahid. This means that those idols will be gathered together and will be present when their worshippers are brought to account, as this will add to their grief and will be more effective in establishing proof against them. Qatadah said:\nلَا يَسْتَطِيعُونَ نَصْرَهُمْ\n(They cannot help them,) means the gods.\nوَهُمْ لَهُمْ جُنْدٌ مُحْضَرُونَ\n(but they will be brought forward as a troop.) \"The idolators used to get angry for the sake of their gods in this world, but they could not do them any benefit or protect them from any harm, for they were merely idols.\" This was also the view of Al-Hasan Al-Basri. This is a good opinion, and was the view favored by Ibn Jarir, may Allah have mercy on him.\nConsolation for the Mercy to the Worlds\nفَلَا يَحْزُنْكَ قَوْلُهُمْ ۘ\n(So, let not their speech then grieve you.) means, 'their denying you and their disbelief in Allah.'\nإِنَّا نَعْلَمُ مَا يُسِرُّونَ وَمَا يُعْلِنُونَ\n(Verily, We know what they conceal and what they reveal.) means, 'We know everything about them, and We will punish them for their false claims and deal with them accordingly on the Day when none of their deeds, great or small, major or minor, will be overlooked, and every deed they did throughout their worldly lives will be laid open for examination.'","href":"/tafsir/36?verse=74","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:36:77","title":"Ibn Kathir · 36:77–80","text":"Does not man see that We have created him from Nutfah. Yet behold he (stands forth) as an open opponent (77)And he puts forth for Us a parable, and forgets his own creation. He says: \"Who will give life to these bones after they are rotten and have become dust? (78 )Say: \"He will give life to them Who created them for the first time! And He is the All-Knower of every creation! (79)He Who produces for you fire out of the green tree, when behold you kindle therewith (80)\nThe Denial of Life after Death, and the Refutation of this Idea\nMujahid, 'Ikrimah, 'Urwah bin Az-Zubayr, As-Suddi and Qatadah said, \"Ubayy bin Khalaf, may Allah curse him, came to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ with a dry bone in his hand, which he was crumbling and scattering in the air, saying, 'O Muhammad! Are you claiming that Allah will resurrect this?' He ﷺ said:\nنَعَمْ، يُمِيتُكَ اللهُ تَعَالَى، ثُمَّ يَبْعَثُكَ، ثُمَّ يَحْشُرُكَ إِلَى النَّارِ\n(Yes, Allah, may He be exalted, will cause you to die, then He will resurrect you and will gather you into the Fire.)\" Then these Ayat at the end of Surah Ya Sin were revealed:\nأَوَلَمْ يَرَ الْإِنْسَانُ أَنَّا خَلَقْنَاهُ مِنْ نُطْفَةٍ\n(Does not man see that We have created him from Nutfah.) – until the end of the Surah.\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"Al-'As bin Wa'il took a bone from the bed of a valley and crumbled it in his hand, then he said to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ: 'Will Allah bring this back to life after it has disintegrated?' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nنَعَمْ، يُمِيتُكَ اللهُ، ثُمَّ يُحْيِيكَ، ثُمَّ يُدْخِلُكَ جَهَنَّمَ\n(Yes, Allah will cause you to die, then He will bring you back to life, then He will make you enter Hell.) Then the Ayat at the end of Surah Ya Sin were revealed.\" This was recorded by Ibn Jarir from Sa'id bin Jubayr.\nWhether these Ayat were revealed about Ubayy bin Khalaf or Al-'As bin Wa'il, or both of them, they apply to all those who deny the resurrection after death. The definite article \"Al\" in\nأَوَلَمْ يَرَ الْإِنْسَانُ\n(Does not man (Al-Insan) see...) is generic, applying to all those who deny the Resurrection.\nأَنَّا خَلَقْنَاهُ مِنْ نُطْفَةٍ فَإِذَا هُوَ خَصِيمٌ مُبِينٌ\n(that We have created him from Nutfah. Yet behold he (stands forth) as an open opponent.) means, the one who is denying the resurrection, cannot see that the One Who initiated creation can re-create it. For Allah initiated the creation of man from semen of despised fluid, creating him from something insignificant, weak and despised, as Allah says:\nأَلَمْ نَخْلُقْكُمْ مِنْ مَاءٍ مَهِينٍ - فَجَعَلْنَاهُ فِي قَرَارٍ مَكِينٍ - إِلَىٰ قَدَرٍ مَعْلُومٍ\n(Did We not create you from a despised water? Then We placed it in a place of safety, for a known period?)(77:20-22)\nإِنَّا خَلَقْنَا الْإِنْسَانَ مِنْ نُطْفَةٍ أَمْشَاجٍ\n(Verily, We have created man from Nutfah)(76:2). which means, from a mixture of different fluids. The One Who created man from this weak Nutfah is not unable to re-create him after his death.\nImam Ahmad recorded in his Musnad that Bishr bin Jahhash said, \"One day the Messenger of Allah ﷺ spat in his hand and put his finger on it, then the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nقَالَ اللهُ تَعَالَى: ابْنَ آدَمَ أَنَّى تُعْجِزُنِي وَقَدْ خَلَقْتُكَ مِنْ مِثْلِ هَذِهِ، حَتّٰى إِذَا سَوَّيْتُكَ وَعَدَلْتُكَ، مَشَيْتَ بَيْنَ بُرْدَيْكَ، وَلِلْأَرْضِ مِنْكَ وَئِيدٌ، فَجَمَعْتَ وَمَنَعْتَ، حَتّٰى إِذَا بَلَغَتِ التَّرَاقِيَ قُلْتَ: أَتَصَدَّقُ، وَأَنَّى أَوَانُ الصَّدَقَةِ؟\n(Allah, may He be exalted, says: \"Son of Adam, how can you outrun Me when I have created you from something like this, and when I have fashioned you and formed you, you walk in your cloak on the earth and it groans beneath your tread. You accumulate and do not spend until the death rattle reaches your throat, then you say, 'I want to give in charity,' but it is too late for charity.\")\" It was also recorded by Ibn Majah. Allah says:\nوَضَرَبَ لَنَا مَثَلًا وَنَسِيَ خَلْقَهُ ۖ قَالَ مَنْ يُحْيِي الْعِظَامَ وَهِيَ رَمِيمٌ\n(And he puts forth for Us a parable, and forgets his own creation. He says: \"Who will give life to these bones after they are rotten and have become dust?\") meaning, he thinks it unlikely that Allah, the Almighty Who created the heavens and the earth, will re-create these bodies and dry bones. Man forgets about himself, that Allah created him from nothing and brought him into existence, and he knows by looking at himself that there is something greater than that which he denies and thinks impossible. Allah says:\nقُلْ يُحْيِيهَا الَّذِي أَنْشَأَهَا أَوَّلَ مَرَّةٍ ۖ وَهُوَ بِكُلِّ خَلْقٍ عَلِيمٌ\n(Say: \"He will give life to them Who created them for the first time! And He is the All-Knower of every creation!\") meaning, He knows about the bones in all areas and regions of the earth, where they have gone when they disintegrated and dispersed.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Rib'i said: \"\"Uqbah bin 'Amr said to Hudhayfah, may Allah be pleased with him, 'Will you not tell us what you heard from the Messenger of Allah ﷺ?' He said, 'I heard him ﷺ say:\nإِنَّ رَجُلًا حَضَرَهُ الْمَوْتُ، فَلَمَّا أَيِسَ مِنَ الْحَيَاةِ أَوْصَى أَهْلَهُ: إِذَا أَنَا مُتُّ فَاجْمَعُوا لِي حَطَبًا كَثِيرًا جَزْلًا، ثُمَّ أَوْقِدُوا فِيهِ نَارًا، حَتّٰى إِذَا أَكَلَتْ لَحْمِي، وَخَلَصَتْ إِلَى عَظْمِي فَامْتُحِشْتُ، فَخُذُوهَا فَدُقُّوهَا فَذَرُّوهَا فِي الْيَمِّ، فَفَعَلُوا، فَجَمَعَهُ اللهُ تَعَالَى إِلَيْهِ، ثُمَّ قَالَ لَهُ: لِمَ فَعَلْتَ ذَلِكَ؟ قَالَ: مِنْ خَشْيَتِكَ، فَغَفَرَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ لَهُ\n(Death approached a man and when there was no longer any hope for him, he said to his family, \"When I die, gather a lot of firewood, then set it ablaze until my flesh is consumed and it reaches my bones and they become brittle. Then take them and grind them, and scatter them in the sea.\" So they did that, but Allah gathered him together and said to him: \"Why did you do that\" He said, \"Because I feared You.\" So Allah forgave him.)' 'Uqbah bin 'Amr said, 'I heard him ﷺ say that, and the man was a gravedigger.'\"\nMany versions of this Hadith were recorded in the Two Sahihs. One of these versions mentions that he commanded his sons to burn him and then grind his remains into small pieces, and then scatter half of them on land and half of them on the sea on a windy day. So they did that, then Allah commanded the sea to gather together whatever remains were in it, and He commanded the land to do likewise, then he said to him, \"Be!\", and he was a man, standing. Allah said to him. \"What made you do what you did?\" He said, \"The fear of You, and You know best.\" Straight away He forgave him.\nالَّذِي جَعَلَ لَكُمْ مِنَ الشَّجَرِ الْأَخْضَرِ نَارًا فَإِذَا أَنْتُمْ مِنْهُ تُوقِدُونَ\n(He Who produces for you fire out of the green tree, when behold you kindle therewith.) means, the One Who initiated the creation of this tree from water, when it has become green and beautiful, bearing fruit, then He changes it until it becomes dry wood with which fires are lit. For He does whatever He wills and He is able to do whatever He wills, and none can stop Him. Qatadah said concerning the Ayah:\nالَّذِي جَعَلَ لَكُمْ مِنَ الشَّجَرِ الْأَخْضَرِ نَارًا فَإِذَا أَنْتُمْ مِنْهُ تُوقِدُونَ\n(He Who produces for you fire out of the green tree, when behold you kindle therewith.) this means, the One Who brought forth this fire from this tree is able to resurrect him. It was said that this refers to the Markh tree and the 'Afar tree, which grow in the Hijaz. If one wants to light a fire but has no kindling with him, then he takes two green branches from these trees and rubs one against the other, and fire is produced from them. So they are just like kindling. This was reported from Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him.","href":"/tafsir/36?verse=77","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:36:81","title":"Ibn Kathir · 36:81–83","text":"Is not He Who created the heavens and the earth, able to create the like of them? Yes, indeed! He is the All-Knowing Supreme Creator (81)Verily, His command, when He intends a thing, is only that He says to it, \"Be!\" – and it is (82)So glorified be He and exalted (above all that they associate with Him), and in Whose Hand is the dominion of all things, and to Him you shall be returned (83)\nAllah points out His great might and power in that He created the seven heavens with all their stars and planets, and the seven earths with everything  in them of mountains,sands, oceans and wildernesses, and everything in between He tells us to find the proof that He will re-create our bodies in His creation of these mighty things. This is like the Ayah:\nلَخَلْقُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ أَكْبَرُ مِنْ خَلْقِ النَّاسِ\n(The creation of the heavens and the earth is indeed greater than the creation of mankind)(40:57). And Allah says here:\nأَوَلَيْسَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ بِقَادِرٍ عَلَىٰ أَنْ يَخْلُقَ مِثْلَهُمْ ۚ\n(Is not He Who created the heavens and the earth, able to create the like of them?) meaning, the like of mankind. So, He will re-create them as He created them in the first place. Ibn Jarir said, \"This Ayah is like the Ayah:\nأَوَلَمْ يَرَوْا أَنَّ اللَّهَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ وَلَمْ يَعْيَ بِخَلْقِهِنَّ بِقَادِرٍ عَلَىٰ أَنْ يُحْيِيَ الْمَوْتَىٰ ۚ بَلَىٰ إِنَّهُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ\n(Do they not see that Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth, and was not wearied by their creation, is able to give life to the dead? Yes, He surely is able to do all things.)(46:33)\" And Allah says here:\nبَلَىٰ وَهُوَ الْخَلَّاقُ الْعَلِيمُ - إِنَّمَا أَمْرُهُ إِذَا أَرَادَ شَيْئًا أَنْ يَقُولَ لَهُ كُنْ فَيَكُونُ\n(Yes, indeed! He is the All-Knowing Supreme Creator. Verily, His command, when He intends a thing, is only that He says to it, \"Be!\"– and it is!) meaning, He only needs to command a thing once; it does not need to be repeated or confirmed.\nWhen Allah wants a thing to happen, He only says to it: \"Be!\" once, and it is.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Abu Dharr, may Allah be pleased with him, said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nإِنَّ اللهَ تَعَالَى يَقُولُ: يَا عِبَادِي، كُلُّكُمْ مُذْنِبٌ إِلَّا مَنْ عَافَيْتُ، فَاسْتَغْفِرُونِي أَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ، وَكُلُّكُمْ فَقِيرٌ إِلَّا مَنْ أَغْنَيْتُ، إِنِّي جَوَادٌ مَاجِدٌ وَاجِدٌ أَفْعَلُ مَا أَشَاءُ، عَطَائِي كَلَامٌ، وَعَذَابِي كَلَامٌ، إِذَا أَرَدْتُ شَيْئًا فَإِنَّمَا أَقُولُ لَهُ كُنْ فَيَكُونُ\n(Allah, may He be exalted, says: \"O My servants, all of you are sinners apart from those whom I protect from sin. Seek My forgiveness and I will forgive you. All of you are in need except for those whom I make independent. I am Most Generous, Majestic, and I do whatever I will. My giving is a word and My punishment is a word. When I want a thing to happen I merely say to it 'Be!' and it is.\")\nفَسُبْحَانَ الَّذِي بِيَدِهِ مَلَكُوتُ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ وَإِلَيْهِ تُرْجَعُونَ\n(So glorified be He and exalted (above all that they associate with Him), and in Whose Hand is the dominion of all things, and to Him you shall be returned.) means, glorified and exalted and sanctified above any evil be the Ever Living, the Self-Sufficient, in Whose hand is the control of the heavens and the earth, to Whom all matters return. His is the power to create and command, and to Him all mankind will return on the Day of Resurrection. Then He will reward or punish each one according to his deeds, and He is the Just, the Generous Bestower, the Graciously Disposed. The meaning of this Ayah,\nفَسُبْحَانَ الَّذِي بِيَدِهِ مَلَكُوتُ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ\n(So glorified be He and exalted (above all that they associate with Him), and in Whose Hand is the sovereignty (Malakut) of all things) is like the Ayat:\nقُلْ مَنْ بِيَدِهِ مَلَكُوتُ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ\n(Say: \"In Whose Hand is the sovereignty (Malakut) of everything?\")(23:88)\nتَبَارَكَ الَّذِي بِيَدِهِ الْمُلْكُ\n(Blessed be He in Whose Hand is the dominion (Al-Mulk))(67:1)\nAl-Mulk and Al-Malakut mean the same thing, although some people claim that Al-Mulk has to do with the physical realm and Al-Malakut has to do with the spiritual realm. But the former view is the one which is correct, and this is the opinion of the majority of the scholars of Tafsir and others.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Hudhayfah bin Al-Yaman, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"I stood in prayer with the Messenger of Allah ﷺ one night and he recited the seven long Surahs in seven Rak'ahs. When he raised his head from bowing, he said,\nسَمِعَ اللهُ لِمَنْ حَمِدَهُ\n(Allah hears the one who praises Him.) Then he said;\nالْحَمْدُ للهِ ذِي الْمَلَكُوتِ وَالْجَبَرُوتِ وَالْكِبْرِيَاءِ وَالْعَظَمَةِ\n(Praise be to Allah, the Owner of Malakut, might, pride and greatness.)\nHis bowing was as long as his standing position, and his prostration was as long as his bowing. Then he finished and my legs were nearly broken.\"\nAbu Dawud recorded that 'Awf bin Malik Al-Ashja'i, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"I stood in prayer with the Messenger of Allah ﷺ one night and he recited Al-Baqarah. He did not reach any Ayah that mentioned mercy but he paused and asked for it, and he did not reach any Ayah that mentioned punishment but he paused and sought refuge from it. Then he bowed for as long as he had stood, and while bowing he said,\nسُبْحَانَ ذِي الْجَبَرُوتِ وَالْمَلَكُوتِ وَالْكِبْرِيَاءِ وَالْعَظَمَةِ\n(Glory be to Allah, the Owner of might, Malakut, pride and greatness.)\nThen he prostrated for as long as he had bowed, and said something similar while prostrating. Then he stood and recited Al 'Imran, then he recited one Surah after another.\" This was recorded by At-Tirmidhi in Ash-Shama'il and An-Nasa'i.\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surah Ya Sin. All praise and thanks are due to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/36?verse=81","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:37:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 37:1–5","text":"The Virtues of Surat As-Saffat\nAn-Nasa'i recorded that 'Abdullah bin 'Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to command us to make our prayers short and he used to recite As-Saffat when he lead us in prayer.\" This was recorded by An-Nasa'i only.\nبِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nوَالصَّافَّاتِ صَفًّا - فَالزَّاجِرَاتِ زَجْرًا - فَالتَّالِيَاتِ ذِكْرًا - إِنَّ إِلَٰهَكُمْ لَوَاحِدٌ - رَبُّ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا وَرَبُّ الْمَشَارِقِ\n(1. By those ranged in ranks.)(2. By those who drive the clouds in a good way.)(3. By those who bring the Dhikr.)(4. Verily, your God is indeed One;)(5. Lord of the heavens and of the earth, and all that is between them, and Lord of every point of the sun's risings.)\nThe angels witness to the Oneness of Allah.It was reported that 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud, may Allah be pleased with him, said:\nوَالصَّافَّاتِ صَفًّا\n\"(By those ranged in ranks.) – they are the angels;\nفَالزَّاجِرَاتِ زَجْرًا\n(By those who drive the clouds in a good way.) they are the angels;\nفَالتَّالِيَاتِ ذِكْرًا\n(By those who bring the Dhikr.) they are the angels.\" This was also the view of Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, Masruq, Sa'id bin Jubayr, 'Ikrimah, Mujahid, As-Suddi, Qatadah and Ar-Rabi' bin Anas. Qatadah said, \"The angels form ranks in the heavens.\" Muslim recorded that Hudhayfah, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nفُضِّلْنَا عَلَى النَّاسِ بِثَلَاثٍ: جُعِلَتْ صُفُوفُنَا كَصُفُوفِ الْمَلَائِكَةِ، وَجُعِلَتْ لَنَا الْأَرْضُ كُلُّهَا مَسْجِدًا، وَجُعِلَ لَنَا تُرَابُهَا طَهُورًا، إِذَا لَمْ نَجِدِ الْمَاءَ\n(We have been favored over the rest of mankind in three ways: our ranks have been made like the ranks of the angels; the entire earth has been made a Masjid for us; and its soil has been made a means of purification for us if we cannot find water.)\"\nMuslim, Abu Dawud, An-Nasa'i and Ibn Majah recorded that Jabir bin Samurah, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nأَلَا تَصُفُّونَ كَمَا تَصُفُّ الْمَلَائِكَةُ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِمْ؟\n(Will you not form ranks as the angels form ranks in the presence of their Lord?)\nWe said, 'How do the angels form ranks in the presence of their Lord?' He ﷺ said:\nيُتِمُّونَ الصُّفُوفَ الْمُتَقَدِّمَةَ، وَيَتَرَاصُّونَ فِي الصَّفِّ\n(They complete the rows nearer the front and they consolidate the rows.)\" As-Suddi and others said that the Ayah\nفَالزَّاجِرَاتِ زَجْرًا\n(By those who drive the clouds in a good way.) means that they drive the clouds.\nفَالتَّالِيَاتِ ذِكْرًا\n(By those who bring the Dhikr.) As-Suddi said, \"The angels bring the Scriptures and the Qur'an from Allah to mankind.\"\nThe One True God is Allah\nإِنَّ إِلَٰهَكُمْ لَوَاحِدٌ - رَبُّ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ\n(Verily, your God is indeed One, Lord of the heavens and the earth,) This is the One by Whom the oath is sworn, stating that there is no God worthy of worship but He, Lord of the heavens and the earth,\nوَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا\n(and all that is between them,) means, of created beings.\nوَرَبُّ الْمَشَارِقِ\n(and Lord of every point of the sun's risings.) means, He is the Sovereign Who is controlling His creation by subjugating it and all that is in it of stars, planets and heavenly bodies which appear from the east and set in the west. Mentioning the east is sufficient and there is no need for the west to be mentioned too, because it is implied in what is said. This has also been stated clearly elsewhere, in the Ayat:\nفَلَا أُقْسِمُ بِرَبِّ الْمَشَارِقِ وَالْمَغَارِبِ إِنَّا لَقَادِرُونَ\n(So I swear by the Lord of all the points of sunrise and sunset in the east and the west that surely We are able.)(70:40)\nرَبُّ الْمَشْرِقَيْنِ وَرَبُّ الْمَغْرِبَيْنِ\n((He is) the Lord of the two easts and the Lord of the two wests.)(55:17) which refers to the rising and setting points of the sun and the moon in both winter and summer.","href":"/tafsir/37?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:37:6","title":"Ibn Kathir · 37:6–10","text":"Verily, We have adorned the near heaven with the stars (6)And to guard against every rebellious Shaytan (7)They cannot listen to the higher group for they are pelted from every side (8)Outcast, and theirs is a constant torment (9)Except such as snatch away something by stealing, and they are pursued by a flaming fire of piercing brightness (10)\nThe Adornment and Protection of the Heaven comes from Allah\nAllah tells us that He has adorned the lowest heaven with the heavenly bodies for those among the people of the earth who look at it. The stars and planets in the sky give light to the people of earth, as Allah says:\nوَلَقَدْ زَيَّنَّا السَّمَاءَ الدُّنْيَا بِمَصَابِيحَ وَجَعَلْنَاهَا رُجُومًا لِلشَّيَاطِينِ ۖ وَأَعْتَدْنَا لَهُمْ عَذَابَ السَّعِيرِ\n(And indeed We have adorned the nearest heaven with lamps, and We have made such lamps (as) missiles to drive away the Shayatin, and have prepared for them the torment of the blazing Fire.)(67:5),\nوَلَقَدْ جَعَلْنَا فِي السَّمَاءِ بُرُوجًا وَزَيَّنَّاهَا لِلنَّاظِرِينَ - وَحَفِظْنَاهَا مِنْ كُلِّ شَيْطَانٍ رَجِيمٍ - إِلَّا مَنِ اسْتَرَقَ السَّمْعَ فَأَتْبَعَهُ شِهَابٌ مُبِينٌ\n(And indeed, We have put the big stars in the heaven and We beautified it for the beholders. And We have guarded it from every outcast Shaytan. Except him who steals the hearing then he is pursued by a clear flaming fire.)(15:16-18). And Allah says here:\nوَحِفْظًا\n(And to guard) meaning, to protect as it should be protected,\nمِنْ كُلِّ شَيْطَانٍ مَارِدٍ\n(against every rebellious Shaytan.) means, every insolent and impudent devil, when he wants to eavesdrop (on news in the heavens), a piercing fire comes and burns him. Allah, may He be glorified, says:\nلَا يَسَّمَّعُونَ إِلَى الْمَلَإِ الْأَعْلَىٰ\n(They cannot listen to the higher group) meaning, they cannot reach the higher group – which refers to the heavens and the angels in them – when they speak of what has been revealed by Allah of His Laws and decrees. We have already mentioned this when explaining the Hadiths quoted when we discussed the Ayah,\nحَتَّىٰ إِذَا فُزِّعَ عَنْ قُلُوبِهِمْ قَالُوا مَاذَا قَالَ رَبُّكُمْ ۖ قَالُوا الْحَقَّ ۖ وَهُوَ الْعَلِيُّ الْكَبِيرُ\n(when fear is banished from their hearts, they say: \"What is it that your Lord has said?\" They say: \"The truth. And He is the Most High, the Most Great.)(34:23). Allah says:\nوَيُقْذَفُونَ\n(for they are pelted) meaning, they are hit,\nمِنْ كُلِّ جَانِبٍ\n(from every side.) means, from all directions from which they try to reach the heaven.\nدُحُورًا ۖ\n(Outcast,) means, they are rejected, and are repelled and prevented from reaching it, and they are pelted.\nوَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ وَاصِبٌ\n(and theirs is a constant torment.) means, in the Hereafter, they will have an ongoing, everlasting and painful torment, as Allah says:\nوَأَعْتَدْنَا لَهُمْ عَذَابَ السَّعِيرِ\n(and [We] have prepared for them the torment of the blazing Fire)(67:5).\nإِلَّا مَنْ خَطِفَ الْخَطْفَةَ\n(Except such as snatch away something by stealing,) means, except for the one among the Shayatin who manages to get something, which is a word he has heard from the heaven. Then he throws it down to the one who is beneath him, who in turn throws it down to the one who is beneath him. Perhaps the flaming fire will strike him before he is able to throw it down, or perhaps he will throw it – by the decree of Allah – before the flaming fire strikes him and burns him. So the other devil takes it to the soothsayer, as we have seen previously in the Hadith. Allah says:\nإِلَّا مَنْ خَطِفَ الْخَطْفَةَ فَأَتْبَعَهُ شِهَابٌ ثَاقِبٌ\n(Except such as snatch away something by stealing, and they are pursued by a flaming fire of piercing brightness.) meaning, shining brightly.\nIbn Jarir recorded that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Shayatin had places where they sat in the heavens listening to what was being revealed by Allah. The stars did not move and the Shayatin were not struck. When they heard the revelation, they would come down to earth and to every word they would add nine of their own. When the Messenger of Allah ﷺ was sent, if a Shaytan wanted to take his seat in the heavens, the flaming fire would come and would not miss him; it would burn him every time. They complained about this to Iblis, may Allah curse him, and he said, 'Something must have happened.' He sent his troops out and they found the Messenger of Allah ﷺ standing in prayer between the two mountains of Nakhlah.\" – Waki' said, \"This means in the valley of Nakhlah.\" – \"They went back to Iblis and told him about that, and he said, 'This is what has happened.'\"","href":"/tafsir/37?verse=6","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:37:11","title":"Ibn Kathir · 37:11–19","text":"Then ask them: \"Are they harder to create, or those whom We have created?\" Verily, We created them of a sticky clay (11)Nay, you wondered while they mock (12)And when they are reminded, they pay no attention (13)And when they see an Ayah (a sign) from Allah, they mock at it (14)And they say: \"This is nothing but evident magic! (15)\"When we are dead and have become dust and bones, shall we verily be resurrected? (16)\"And also our fathers of old? (17)Say : \"Yes, and you shall then be humiliated. (18)It will be a single Zajrah, and behold, they will be staring (19)\nThe Certainty of Life after Death\nAllah says: 'Ask these people, those who deny the resurrection, which is harder to create? Are they more difficult to create or the heavens, the earth, the angels, devils, the mighty creatures – everything in between them?' Ibn Mas'ud said that they admitted that these things were harder to create than they were. If this is the case, then why do they deny the resurrection, when they see things that are greater than that which they deny? As Allah says:\nلَخَلْقُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ أَكْبَرُ مِنْ خَلْقِ النَّاسِ وَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ\n(The creation of the heavens and the earth is indeed greater than the creation of mankind; yet, most of mankind know not)(40:57) Then Allah explains that they were created from something weak, as He says:\nإِنَّا خَلَقْنَاهُمْ مِنْ طِينٍ لَازِبٍ\n(Verily, We created them of a sticky clay.) Mujahid, Sa'id bin Jubayr and Ad-Dahhak said, \"This is the useful kind of mud which sticks to itself.\" Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, and 'Ikrimah said, \"It is sticky and useful.\" Qatadah said, \"It is that which sticks to the hand.\"\nبَلْ عَجِبْتَ وَيَسْخَرُونَ\n(Nay, you wondered while they mock.) means, 'you were astounded, O Muhammad, at these people who denied the resurrection whilst you were certain that it is true, when they disbelieved in what Allah told you of this wondrous matter, which is the re-creation of their bodies after they have disintegrated. They oppose what you say because of their intense disbelief and they make fun of what you tell them about that.'\nQatadah said, \"Muhammad ﷺ was astounded by the mockery of the misguided ones among the sons of Adam.\"\nوَإِذَا رَأَوْا آيَةً\n(And when they see an Ayah) means, clear evidence and proof,\nيَسْتَسْخِرُونَ\n(they mock at it.) Mujahid and Qatadah said, \"They make fun of it.\"\nوَقَالُوا إِنْ هَٰذَا إِلَّا سِحْرٌ مُبِينٌ\n(And they say: \"This is nothing but evident magic!\") means, 'this that you have brought is nothing but plain magic.'\nأَإِذَا مِتْنَا وَكُنَّا تُرَابًا وَعِظَامًا أَإِنَّا لَمَبْعُوثُونَ - أَوَآبَاؤُنَا الْأَوَّلُونَ\n(When we are dead and have become dust and bones, shall we (then) verily be resurrected And also our fathers of old?) They thought that this was unlikely to happen, and they did not believe it.\nقُلْ نَعَمْ وَأَنْتُمْ دَاخِرُونَ\n(Say: \"Yes, and you shall then be humiliated\".) means, 'tell them, O Muhammad: Yes, you will be raised up on the Day of Resurrection, after you have become dust and bones, and you will be humiliated,' i.e., put to shame before His great might. This is like the Ayat:\nوَكُلٌّ أَتَوْهُ دَاخِرِينَ\n(And all shall come to Him, humbled)(27:87), and\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ عَنْ عِبَادَتِي سَيَدْخُلُونَ جَهَنَّمَ دَاخِرِينَ\n(Verily, those who scorn My worship, they will surely enter Hell in humiliation!)(40:60) Then Allah says:\nفَإِنَّمَا هِيَ زَجْرَةٌ وَاحِدَةٌ فَإِذَا هُمْ يَنْظُرُونَ\n(It will be a single Zajrah, and behold, they will be staring!) means, it will be a single command from Allah, He will call them once to come forth from the earth, then they will be standing before Him, staring at the horrors of the Day of Resurrection. And Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/37?verse=11","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:37:20","title":"Ibn Kathir · 37:20–26","text":"They will say: \"Woe to us! This is the Day of Recompense! (20)(It will be said:) \"This is the Day of Judgement which you used to deny. (21)(It will be said to the angels:) Assemble those who did wrong, together with their companions and what they used to worship (22)Instead of Allah, and lead them on to the way of flaming Fire (Hell)(23)But stop them, verily, they are to be questioned (24)\"What is the matter with you? Why do you not help one another? (25)Nay, but that Day they shall surrender (26)\nThe Day of Recompense\nAllah tells us what the disbeliever will say on the Day of Resurrection, how they will blame themselves and admit that they wronged themselves in this world. When they see the horrors of the Day of Resurrection with their own eyes, they will be filled with regret at the time when regret will not avail them anything.\nوَقَالُوا يَا وَيْلَنَا هَٰذَا يَوْمُ الدِّينِ\n(They will say: \"Woe to us! This is the Day of Recompense!\") And the angels and the believers will say:\nهَٰذَا يَوْمُ الْفَصْلِ الَّذِي كُنْتُمْ بِهِ تُكَذِّبُونَ\n(This is the Day of Judgement which you used to deny.) This will be said to them as a rebuke and reproof. Allah will command the angels to separate the disbeliever from the believers in the place where they are standing. Allah says:\nاحْشُرُوا الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا وَأَزْوَاجَهُمْ\n((It will be said to the angels:) Assemble those who did wrong, together with their companions) An-Nu'man bin Bashir, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"Their companions means their counterparts, those who are like them.\" This was also the view of Ibn 'Abbas, Sa'id bin Jubayr, 'Ikrimah, Mujahid, As-Suddi, Abu Salih, Abu Al-'Aliyah and Zayd bin Aslam.\" Sharik said, narrating from Simak, from An-Nu'man: \"I heard 'Umar say:\nاحْشُرُوا الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا وَأَزْوَاجَهُمْ\n(Assemble those who did wrong, together with their companions) means, 'Those who are like them. So those who committed Zina will be gathered with others who committed Zina, those who dealt in Riba will be gathered with others who dealt in Riba, those who drank wine will be gathered with others who drank wine.' Mujahid and Sa'id bin Jubayr narrated from Ibn 'Abbas:\nوَأَزْوَاجَهُمْ\n(their companions) means \"Their friends.\"\nوَمَا كَانُوا يَعْبُدُونَ - مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ\n(and what they used to worship. Instead of Allah,) means, instead of Allah, i.e., their idols and false gods will be gathered together with them in the same place.\nفَاهْدُوهُمْ إِلَىٰ صِرَاطِ الْجَحِيمِ\n(and lead them on to the way of flaming Fire.) means, take them to the way to Hell. This is like the Ayah:\nوَنَحْشُرُهُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ عَلَىٰ وُجُوهِهِمْ عُمْيًا وَبُكْمًا وَصُمًّا ۖ مَأْوَاهُمْ جَهَنَّمُ ۖ كُلَّمَا خَبَتْ زِدْنَاهُمْ سَعِيرًا\n(and We shall gather them together on the Day of Resurrection on their faces, blind, dumb and deaf; their abode will be Hell; whenever it abates, We shall increase for them the fierceness of the Fire)(17:97).\nوَقِفُوهُمْ ۖ إِنَّهُمْ مَسْئُولُونَ\n(But stop them, verily, they are to be questioned.) means, stop them so that they may be questioned about the things they did and said in this world. As Ad-Dahhak said, narrating from Ibn 'Abbas, this means, 'detain them, for they are to be brought to account.' 'Abdullah bin Al-Mubarak said, \"I heard 'Uthman bin Za'idah say, 'The first thing about which a man will be asked is the company that he kept. Then by way of rebuke, it will be said to them:\nمَا لَكُمْ لَا تَنَاصَرُونَ\n(What is the matter with you? Why do you not help one another?).'\" meaning, 'as you claimed that you would all help one another.'\nبَلْ هُمُ الْيَوْمَ مُسْتَسْلِمُونَ\n(Nay, but that Day they shall surrender.) means, they will be subjected to the command of Allah, and they will not be able to resist it or avoid it. And Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/37?verse=20","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:37:27","title":"Ibn Kathir · 37:27–37","text":"And they will turn to one another and question one another (27)They will say: \"It was you who used to come to us from the right side. (28)They will reply: \"Nay, you yourselves were not believers. (29)\"And we had no authority over you. Nay! But you were a transgressing people. (30)\"So now the Word of our Lord has been justified against us, that we shall certainly taste (the torment). (31)\"So we led you astray because we were ourselves astray. (32)Then verily, that Day, they will (all) share in the torment (33)Certainly, that is how We deal with the criminals (34)Truly, when it was said to them: \"La ilaha illallah,\" they puffed themselves up with pride (35)And (they) said: \"Are we going to abandon our gods for the sake of a mad poet? (36)Nay! he has come with the truth and he confirms the Messengers (37)\nThe arguing of the Idolators on the Day of Resurrection\nAllah tells us that the disbeliever will blame one another in the arena of Resurrection, just as they will argue with one another in the levels of Hell:\nفَيَقُولُ الضُّعَفَاءُ لِلَّذِينَ اسْتَكْبَرُوا إِنَّا كُنَّا لَكُمْ تَبَعًا فَهَلْ أَنْتُمْ مُغْنُونَ عَنَّا نَصِيبًا مِنَ النَّارِ - قَالَ الَّذِينَ اسْتَكْبَرُوا إِنَّا كُلٌّ فِيهَا إِنَّ اللَّهَ قَدْ حَكَمَ بَيْنَ الْعِبَادِ\n(The weak will say to those who were arrogant: \"Verily, we followed you, can you then take from us some portion of the Fire?\" Those who were arrogant will say: \"We are all (together) in this (Fire)! Verily, Allah has judged between (His) servants!\")(40:47-48)\nوَلَوْ تَرَىٰ إِذِ الظَّالِمُونَ مَوْقُوفُونَ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِمْ يَرْجِعُ بَعْضُهُمْ إِلَىٰ بَعْضٍ الْقَوْلَ يَقُولُ الَّذِينَ اسْتُضْعِفُوا لِلَّذِينَ اسْتَكْبَرُوا لَوْلَا أَنْتُمْ لَكُنَّا مُؤْمِنِينَ - قَالَ الَّذِينَ اسْتَكْبَرُوا لِلَّذِينَ اسْتُضْعِفُوا أَنَحْنُ صَدَدْنَاكُمْ عَنِ الْهُدَىٰ بَعْدَ إِذْ جَاءَكُمْ ۖ بَلْ كُنْتُمْ مُجْرِمِينَ - وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ اسْتُضْعِفُوا لِلَّذِينَ اسْتَكْبَرُوا بَلْ مَكْرُ اللَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ إِذْ تَأْمُرُونَنَا أَنْ نَكْفُرَ بِاللَّهِ وَنَجْعَلَ لَهُ أَنْدَادًا ۚ وَأَسَرُّوا النَّدَامَةَ لَمَّا رَأَوُا الْعَذَابَ وَجَعَلْنَا الْأَغْلَالَ فِي أَعْنَاقِ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا ۚ هَلْ يُجْزَوْنَ إِلَّا مَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ\n(But if you could see when the wrongdoers will be made to stand before their Lord, how they will cast the (blaming) word one to another! Those who were deemed weak will say to those who were arrogant: \"Had it not been for you, we should certainly have been believers!\" And those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed weak: \"Did we keep you back from guidance after it had come to you? Nay, but you were criminals.\" Those who were deemed weak will say to those who were arrogant: \"Nay, but it was your plotting by night and day, when you ordered us to disbelieve in Allah and set up rivals to Him!\" And each of them (parties) will conceal their own regrets, when they behold the torment. And We shall put iron collars round the necks of those who disbelieved. Are they requited aught except what they used to do?)(34:31-33)\nSimilarly, they are described here as saying:\nإِنَّكُمْ كُنْتُمْ تَأْتُونَنَا عَنِ الْيَمِينِ\n(It was you who used to come to us from the right side.) Ad-Dahhak reported that Ibn 'Abbas said; \"They will say, 'You used to force us because of your position of power over us, for we were weak and you were strong.'\" Qatadah said, \"Men will say to the Jinn, 'You used to come to us from the right side to block every good deed, and you told us not to do it and you tried to put obstacles in our way.'\" As-Suddi said, \"You used to come to us to block the truth, and you made falsehood look attractive to us, and you prevented us from seeing the truth.\" Ibn Zayd said, it means: \"You stood in the way between us and goodness, and you repelled us from Islam and faith and doing the good deeds that we had been commanded to do.\" Yazid Ar-Rishk said, \"from La ilaha illallah.\"\nقَالُوا بَلْ لَمْ تَكُونُوا مُؤْمِنِينَ\n(They will reply: \"Nay, you yourselves were not believers.\") The leaders of the Jinn and mankind will say to their followers, \"It is not as you say; your hearts denied faith and were open to disbelief and sin.\"\nوَمَا كَانَ لَنَا عَلَيْكُمْ مِنْ سُلْطَانٍ ۖ\n(And we had no authority over you.) means, 'we had no proof of the truth of that to which we called you.'\nبَلْ كُنْتُمْ قَوْمًا طَاغِينَ\n(Nay! But you were a transgressing people.) 'You yourselves were evildoers and transgressors against the truth, so you responded to us and neglected the truth which the Prophets brought with proof, and you went against them.'\nفَحَقَّ عَلَيْنَا قَوْلُ رَبِّنَا ۖ إِنَّا لَذَائِقُونَ - فَأَغْوَيْنَاكُمْ إِنَّا كُنَّا غَاوِينَ\n(So now the Word of our Lord has been justified against us, that we shall certainly (have to) taste (the torment). So we led you astray because we were ourselves astray.) Those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed weak, 'the Word of Allah has been justified against us, that we are among the doomed who will taste the punishment of the Day of Resurrection.'\nفَأَغْوَيْنَاكُمْ\n(So we led you astray) means, 'so we called you to misguidance,'\nإِنَّا كُنَّا غَاوِينَ\n(because we were ourselves astray.) means, 'we called you to follow the path which we were on, and you responded.' Allah says:\nفَإِنَّهُمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ فِي الْعَذَابِ مُشْتَرِكُونَ\n(Then verily, that Day, they will (all) share in the torment.) means, all of them will be in Hell, each according to what he deserves.\nإِنَّا كَذَٰلِكَ نَفْعَلُ بِالْمُجْرِمِينَ - إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا إِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا اللَّهُ يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ\n(Certainly, that is how We deal with criminals. Truly, when it was said to them: \"La ilaha illallah,\" they puffed themselves up with pride.) means, in this world they were too arrogant to say these words as the believers said them. Ibn Abi Hatim narrated that Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nأُمِرْتُ أَنْ أُقَاتِلَ النَّاسَ حَتّٰى يَقُولُوا: لَا إِلَهَ إِلَّا اللهُ، فَمَنْ قَالَ: لَا إِلَهَ إِلَّا اللهُ، فَقَدْ عَصَمَ مِنِّي مَالَهُ وَنَفْسَهُ إِلَّا بِحَقِّهِ، وَحِسَابُهُ عَلَى اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ\n(I have been commanded to fight the people until they say La ilaha ill-Allah. Whoever says La ilaha illallah, he and his property are safe from me except for his obligation, and his reckoning will be with Allah, may He be glorified.) Allah revealed in His Book the story of people who were arrogant, as He says:\nإِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا إِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا اللَّهُ يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ - وَيَقُولُونَ أَئِنَّا لَتَارِكُو آلِهَتِنَا لِشَاعِرٍ مَجْنُونٍ\n(Truly, when it was said to them: \"La ilaha illallah,\" they puffed themselves up with pride. And (they) said: \"Are we going to abandon our gods for the sake of a mad poet?\") meaning, 'Shall we stop worshipping our gods and the gods of our forefathers just because of the words of this mad poet?' – meaning the Messenger of Allah ﷺ. Allah said in refutation of their attitude:\nبَلْ جَاءَ بِالْحَقِّ\n(Nay! he has come with the truth) meaning, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ has brought the truth with all that Allah has revealed to him of stories and commandments.\nوَصَدَّقَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ\n(and he confirms the Messengers.) means, he fulfills their prophecies of his praiseworthy characteristics and his perfect way, and he tells people of the Laws and commands of Allah, as they said he would.\nمَا يُقَالُ لَكَ إِلَّا مَا قَدْ قِيلَ لِلرُّسُلِ مِنْ قَبْلِكَ ۚ\n(Nothing is said to you except what was said to the Messengers before you)(41:43).","href":"/tafsir/37?verse=27","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:37:38","title":"Ibn Kathir · 37:38–49","text":"Verily, you are going to taste the painful torment (38)And you will be requited nothing except for what you used to do (39)Save the chosen servants of Allah (40)For them there will be a known provision (41)Fruits; and they shall be honored (42)In the Gardens of Delight (43)Facing one another on thrones (44)Round them will be passed a cup of pure win (45)White, delicious to the drinkers (46)Neither will they have Ghawl from that nor will they suffer intoxication therefrom (47)And beside them will be Qasirat-At-Tarf with (wide and beautiful) eyes (48)as if they were Bayd Maknun (49)\nThe Punishment of the Idolators and the Reward of the sincere Believers\nAllah says, addressing the people:\nإِنَّكُمْ لَذَائِقُو الْعَذَابِ الْأَلِيمِ - وَمَا تُجْزَوْنَ إِلَّا مَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ\n(Verily, you are going to taste the painful torment; and you will be requited nothing except for what you used to do.) Then He makes an exception in the case of His sincerely believing servants. This is like the Ayat:\nوَالْعَصْرِ - إِنَّ الْإِنْسَانَ لَفِي خُسْرٍ - إِلَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ\n(By the Time. Verily, man is in loss, Except those who believe and do righteous deeds...)(103:1-3),\nلَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا الْإِنْسَانَ فِي أَحْسَنِ تَقْوِيمٍ - ثُمَّ رَدَدْنَاهُ أَسْفَلَ سَافِلِينَ - إِلَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ\n(Verily, We created man in the best stature. Then We reduced him to the lowest of the low. Save those who believe and do righteous deeds)(95:4-6).\nوَإِنْ مِنْكُمْ إِلَّا وَارِدُهَا ۚ كَانَ عَلَىٰ رَبِّكَ حَتْمًا مَقْضِيًّا - ثُمَّ نُنَجِّي الَّذِينَ اتَّقَوْا وَنَذَرُ الظَّالِمِينَ فِيهَا جِثِيًّا\n(There is not one of you but will pass over it (Hell); this is with your Lord, a decree which must be accomplished. Then We shall save those who have Taqwa. And We shall leave the wrongdoers therein to their knees.)(19:71-72); and\nكُلُّ نَفْسٍ بِمَا كَسَبَتْ رَهِينَةٌ - إِلَّا أَصْحَابَ الْيَمِينِ\n(Every person is a pledge for what he has earned, except those on the right)(74:38-39). Allah says here:\nإِلَّا عِبَادَ اللَّهِ الْمُخْلَصِينَ\n(Save the chosen servants of Allah.) meaning, they will not taste the painful torment nor will they be brought to account. Their evil acts, if there are any, will be overlooked, and each good deed will be rewarded in multiples of between ten and seven hundred, or as much as Allah wills.\nأُولَٰئِكَ لَهُمْ رِزْقٌ مَعْلُومٌ\n(For them there will be a known provision,) Qatadah and As-Suddi said, \"This means Paradise.\" It is explained further in the next Ayah:\nفَوَاكِهُ ۖ\n(Fruits) meaning, of different kinds.\nوَهُمْ مُكْرَمُونَ\n(and they shall be honored,) means, they will be served and will live a life of luxury.\nفِي جَنَّاتِ النَّعِيمِ - عَلَىٰ سُرُرٍ مُتَقَابِلِينَ\n(In the Gardens of Delight, facing one another on thrones.) Mujahid said, \"One of them will not look at one another's backs.\"\nيُطَافُ عَلَيْهِمْ بِكَأْسٍ مِنْ مَعِينٍ - بَيْضَاءَ لَذَّةٍ لِلشَّارِبِينَ - لَا فِيهَا غَوْلٌ وَلَا هُمْ عَنْهَا يُنْزَفُونَ\n(Round them will be passed a cup of pure wine – white, delicious to the drinkers. Neither will they have Ghawl from that nor will they suffer intoxication therefrom.) This is like the Ayah:\nيَطُوفُ عَلَيْهِمْ وِلْدَانٌ مُخَلَّدُونَ - بِأَكْوَابٍ وَأَبَارِيقَ وَكَأْسٍ مِنْ مَعِينٍ - لَا يُصَدَّعُونَ عَنْهَا وَلَا يُنْزِفُونَ\n(Immortal boys will go around them (serving), with cups, and jugs, and a glass of flowing wine, from which they will get neither any aching of the head nor any intoxication.)(56:17-19).\nAllah refined the wine of Paradise from the bad effects of the wine of this world, which causes headaches and stomach aches – which is the meaning of Ghawl – causing people to lose their minds completely. So He says here:\nيُطَافُ عَلَيْهِمْ بِكَأْسٍ مِنْ مَعِينٍ\n(Round them will be passed a cup of pure wine) meaning, wine from a flowing stream which they do not fear will ever be cut off or cease. Malik narrated that Zayd bin Aslam said, \"White flowing wine,\" meaning, with a bright, shining color, unlike the wine of this earth with its ugly, repulsive colors of red, black, yellow and turbid shades, and other features which are repugnant to anyone of a sound nature.\nلَذَّةٍ لِلشَّارِبِينَ\n(delicious to the drinkers.) means, its taste will be as good as its color, and a good taste indicates that it has a good smell, unlike the wine of this world.\nلَا فِيهَا غَوْلٌ\n(Neither will they have Ghawl from that) means, it will not have any effects on them such as causing stomach aches. This was the view of Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, Mujahid, Qatadah and Ibn Zayd. This is unlike the wine of this world, which causes colic and so on, because it is too watery.\nوَلَا هُمْ عَنْهَا يُنْزَفُونَ\n(nor will they suffer intoxication therefrom.) Mujahid said, \"It will not cause them to lose their minds.\" This was also the view of Ibn 'Abbas, Muhammad bin Ka'b, Al-Hasan. 'Ata' bin Abi Muslim Al-Khurasani, As-Suddi and others. Ad-Dahhak reported that Ibn Abbas said, \"Wine causes four things: intoxication, headache, vomiting and urine.\" So, when Allah mentions the wine of Paradise, He states that it is free of these characteristics, as mentioned in Surat As-Saffat.\nوَعِنْدَهُمْ قَاصِرَاتُ الطَّرْفِ\n(And beside them will be Qasirat At-Tarf) means, chaste females, who will not look at anyone other than their husbands, as Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, Zayd bin Aslam, Qatadah, As-Suddi and others said.\nعِينٌ\n(with (wide and beautiful) eyes) means, with beautiful eyes. It was also said that it means with wide eyes, which is connected to the first meaning. They are wide-eyed and beautiful, and their eyes are described as being beautiful and chaste. Allah says:\nوَعِنْدَهُمْ قَاصِرَاتُ الطَّرْفِ عِينٌ\n(And beside them will be Qasirat At-Tarf, with (wide and beautiful) eyes.)\nكَأَنَّهُنَّ بَيْضٌ مَكْنُونٌ\n(as if they were Bayd Maknun.) Their bodies are described as having the most perfect color. 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him:\nكَأَنَّهُنَّ بَيْضٌ مَكْنُونٌ\n(as if they were Bayd Maknun.) means, as if they were hidden pearls. Al-Hasan said:\nكَأَنَّهُنَّ بَيْضٌ مَكْنُونٌ\n(as if they were Bayd Maknun.) means, protected, never touched by any hands. As-Suddi said, \"The well preserved egg in its nest.\" Sa'id bin Jubayr said:\nكَأَنَّهُنَّ بَيْضٌ مَكْنُونٌ\n(as if they were Bayd Maknun.) means, \"The inside of the egg.\" 'Ata' Al-Khurasani said, \"It is the membrane which is between its outer shell and its inner contents.\" As-Suddi said:\nكَأَنَّهُنَّ بَيْضٌ مَكْنُونٌ\n(as if they were Bayd Maknun.) means, \"The white of the egg when its shell is removed.\" Ibn Jarir's view concerning the meaning of Maknun (well preserved) is that the outer shell is touched by the wing of the bird and the nest, and by people's hands, unlike the interior of the egg. And Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/37?verse=38","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:37:50","title":"Ibn Kathir · 37:50–61","text":"Then they will turn to one another, mutually questioning (50)A speaker of them will say: \"Verily, I had a companion (in the world), (51)\"Who used to say: 'Are you among those who believe (52)(That) when we die and become dust and bones, shall we indeed be indebted (Madinun)?' (53)(The speaker) said: \"Will you look down? (54)So he looked down and saw him in the midst of the Fire (55)He said: \"By Allah! You have nearly ruined me. (56)\"Had it not been for the grace of my Lord, I would certainly have been among those brought forth (to Hell). (57)\"Are we then not to die (any more)? (58)\"Except our first death, and we shall not be punished? (59)Truly, this is the supreme success (60)For the like of this let the workers work (61)\nThe gathering of the People of Paradise, and the exchange between One of Them and His Counterpart in Hell, and His Gratitude for the Blessings of Allah\nAllah tells us how the people of Paradise will turn to one another, asking one another about their situation, how they were in this world and what they suffered. This is part of their conversation when they get together to converse and drink, sitting on their thrones, servants coming and going, bringing all kinds of good food, drink, clothes and other delights no eye has seen, no ear has heard, never having comprehend the mind of man.\nقَالَ قَائِلٌ مِنْهُمْ إِنِّي كَانَ لِي قَرِينٌ\n(A speaker of them will say: \"Verily, I had a companion...\") Al-'Awfi reported that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him said, \"This refers to an idolator man who had a companion among the believers in this world.\"\nيَقُولُ أَإِنَّكَ لَمِنَ الْمُصَدِّقِينَ\n(Who used to say: \"Are you among those who believe...\") means, 'do you believe in the resurrection after death, and the Reckoning and reward or punishment?' He used to say that by way of astonishment, disbelief and stubbornness.\nأَإِذَا مِتْنَا وَكُنَّا تُرَابًا وَعِظَامًا أَإِنَّا لَمَدِينُونَ\n((That) when we die and become dust and bones, shall we indeed be indebted (Madinun).) Mujahid and As-Suddi said, \"Brought to account.\" Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, and Muhammad bin Ka'b Al-Qurazi said, \"Rewarded or punished according to our deeds.\" Both views are correct.\nقَالَ هَلْ أَنْتُمْ مُطَّلِعُونَ\n((The speaker) said: \"Will you look down?\") meaning, look over. The believer will say this to his companions among the people of Paradise.\nفَاطَّلَعَ فَرَآهُ فِي سَوَاءِ الْجَحِيمِ\n(So he looked down and saw him in the midst of the Fire.) Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Khulayd Al-'Usari, Qatadah, As-Suddi and 'Ata' Al-Khurasani said, \"This means, in the middle of Hell.\" Al-Hasan Al-Basri said, \"In the middle of Hell as if he were a burning star.\"\nقَالَ تَاللَّهِ إِنْ كِدْتَ لَتُرْدِينِ\n(He said: \"By Allah! You have nearly ruined me.\") The believer will say, addressing the disbeliever: 'By Allah, you nearly caused me to be doomed, if I had obeyed you.'\nوَلَوْلَا نِعْمَةُ رَبِّي لَكُنْتُ مِنَ الْمُحْضَرِينَ\n(Had it not been for the grace of my Lord, I would certainly have been among those brought forth (to Hell).) means, 'Were it not for the favor of my Lord towards me, I would have been like you in the middle of Hell where you are, brought forth with you for punishment. But He bestowed His grace upon me, had mercy upon me and guided me to faith and to belief in Him Alone.'\nوَمَا كُنَّا لِنَهْتَدِيَ لَوْلَا أَنْ هَدَانَا اللَّهُ\n(and never could we have found guidance, were it not that Allah had guided us!)(7:43)\nأَفَمَا نَحْنُ بِمَيِّتِينَ - إِلَّا مَوْتَتَنَا الْأُولَىٰ وَمَا نَحْنُ بِمُعَذَّبِينَ\n(Are we then not to die (any more)? Except our first death, and we shall not be punished?)\nThis is what the believers will say when they feel joy at what Allah has given them, and they realize that they are to remain in Paradise forever with no punishment and no death to come. Allah says:\nإِنَّ هَٰذَا لَهُوَ الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ\n(Truly, this is the supreme success!) Al-Hasan Al-Basri said, \"They know that death brings an end to every delight, so they will say,\nأَفَمَا نَحْنُ بِمَيِّتِينَ - إِلَّا مَوْتَتَنَا الْأُولَىٰ وَمَا نَحْنُ بِمُعَذَّبِينَ\n(Are we then not to die? Except our first death, and we shall not be punished?) It will be said, \"No,\nإِنَّ هَٰذَا لَهُوَ الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ\n(Truly, this is the supreme success!).\"\nلِمِثْلِ هَٰذَا فَلْيَعْمَلِ الْعَامِلُونَ\n(For the like of this let the workers work.) Ibn Jarir said, \"These are the Words of Allah, and it means: for the like of this pleasure and this success, let the workers work in this world, so that they may attain it in the Hereafter.\nThe Story of Two Israelites\nThey mentioned the story of two men among the Children of Israel who were partners and who are included in the meaning of this Ayah. Abu Ja'far bin Jarir recorded that Furat bin Tha'labah Al-Bahrani said concerning the Ayah,\nإِنِّي كَانَ لِي قَرِينٌ\n(Verily, I had a companion) \"There were two men who were partners and had collected eight thousand Dinars. One of them had a craft and the other did not. The one who had a craft said to the other, 'You do not have a craft, so I think I will divide the money with you and leave you.' So he left him. Then the man bought a house, belonging to a king who had died, for the price of one thousand Dinars. He called his companion and showed him the house, saying, 'What do you think of this house? I bought it for one thousand Dinars.' He said, 'How beautiful it is.' When he went out he said, 'O Allah, this companion of mine has bought this house for one thousand Dinars; I ask You for one of the houses of Paradise – and he gave one thousand Dinars in charity.' Then as much time passed as Allah willed should pass.\nThe first man married a woman with a dowry of one thousand Dinars, and invited his companion and made food for him. When he came, he said, 'I have married this woman with a dowry of one thousand Dinars.' He replied; 'How beautiful this is.' And when he left, he said, 'O Lord, my companion has married a woman with a dowry of one thousand Dinars; I ask you for a wife from among Al-Hur Al-'Iyn' – and he gave one thousand Dinars in charity. Then as much time passed as Allah willed should pass.\nThen the first man bought two gardens for two thousand Dinars, then he called his companion and showed them to him. He said, 'I have bought these two gardens for two thousand Dinars.' He replied, 'How beautiful this is.' When he came out, he said, 'O Lord, my companion has bought two gardens for two thousand Dinars; I ask you for two gardens in Paradise' – and he gave two thousand Dinars in charity.\nThen the angel came to them and took their souls in death. He took the one who had given his money in charity and put him in a house that he liked. There, there was a woman who was so beautiful that the ground shinned under her, then he (the angel) took him to two gardens and gave him other things which are known only to Allah. The man said, 'This is like a man who has such and such.' The angel said, 'That is exactly what it is; this house, these gardens and this wife are all for you.' The man said, 'I had a companion who used to say: Are you among those who believe?' It was said to him, 'He is in Hell.' He said, 'Will you look down?' So he looked down and saw him in the midst of Hell. At this, he said:\nتَاللَّهِ إِنْ كِدْتَ لَتُرْدِينِ - وَلَوْلَا نِعْمَةُ رَبِّي لَكُنْتُ مِنَ الْمُحْضَرِينَ\n(By Allah! You have nearly ruined me. Had it not been for the grace of my Lord, I would certainly have been among those brought forth (to Hell).)\"","href":"/tafsir/37?verse=50","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:37:62","title":"Ibn Kathir · 37:62–70","text":"Is that (Paradise) better entertainment or the tree of Zaqqum (62)Truly, We have made it (as) a trial for the wrongdoers (63)Verily, it is a tree that springs out of the bottom of Hell-fire (64)The shoots of its fruit stalks are like the heads of Shayatin (65)Truly, they will eat thereof and fill their bellies therewith (66)Then on the top of that they will be given boiling Hamim (67)Then thereafter, verily, their return is to the flaming fire of Hell (68)Verily, they found their fathers on the wrong path (69)So they (too) hastened in their footsteps (70)\nThe Tree of Zaqqum and its Companions\nHere Allah asks: 'Is that which He has mentioned of the delights of Paradise with its food, drink, companions and other joys better entertainment, or\nأَمْ شَجَرَةُ الزَّقُّومِ\n(or the tree of Zaqqum) which is in Hell?' The meaning here is a specific kind of tree which is called Zaqqum. This is like the Ayah:\nوَشَجَرَةً تَخْرُجُ مِنْ طُورِ سَيْنَاءَ تَنْبُتُ بِالدُّهْنِ وَصِبْغٍ لِلْآكِلِينَ\n(And a tree that springs forth from Mount Sinai, that grows (produces) oil, and (it is a) relish for the eaters.)(23:20) – which is the olive tree. This is supported by the Ayah:\nثُمَّ إِنَّكُمْ أَيُّهَا الضَّالُّونَ الْمُكَذِّبُونَ - لَآكِلُونَ مِنْ شَجَرٍ مِنْ زَقُّومٍ\n(Then moreover, verily, – you the erring-ones, the deniers! You, verily, will eat of the trees of Zaqqum.)(56:51-52).\nإِنَّا جَعَلْنَاهَا فِتْنَةً لِلظَّالِمِينَ\n(Truly, We have made it (as) a trial for the wrongdoers.) Qatadah said, \"The tree of Zaqqum is mentioned as a test for those who are misguided. They said, 'Your companion tells you that in the Fire there is a tree, but fire consumes trees.' Then Allah revealed the words:\nإِنَّهَا شَجَرَةٌ تَخْرُجُ فِي أَصْلِ الْجَحِيمِ\n(Verily, it is a tree that springs out of the bottom of Hell-fire.) meaning, it is nourished by the fire, for it was created from fire.\" Mujahid said:\nإِنَّا جَعَلْنَاهَا فِتْنَةً لِلظَّالِمِينَ\n(Truly, We have made it (as) a trial for the wrongdoers.)\nAbu Jahl, may Allah curse him, said, \"Zaqqum means dates and butter which I eat [Atazaqqamuhu].\"\nI say that the meaning of the Ayah is, \"We have told you, O Muhammad, of the tree of Zaqqum as a trial with which We test the people to see who will believe and who will disbelieve.\" This is like the Ayah:\nوَمَا جَعَلْنَا الرُّؤْيَا الَّتِي أَرَيْنَاكَ إِلَّا فِتْنَةً لِلنَّاسِ وَالشَّجَرَةَ الْمَلْعُونَةَ فِي الْقُرْآنِ ۚ وَنُخَوِّفُهُمْ فَمَا يَزِيدُهُمْ إِلَّا طُغْيَانًا كَبِيرًا\n(And We made not the vision which we showed you but a trial for mankind, and the accursed tree in the Qur'an. We warn and make them afraid but it only increases them in naught save great disbelief, oppression and disobedience to Allah)(17:60).\nإِنَّهَا شَجَرَةٌ تَخْرُجُ فِي أَصْلِ الْجَحِيمِ\n(Verily, it is a tree that springs out of the bottom of Hell-fire.) means, its roots grow at the bottom of Hell.\nطَلْعُهَا كَأَنَّهُ رُءُوسُ الشَّيَاطِينِ\n(The shoots of its fruit stalks are like the heads of Shayatin.) this is a description of how ugly and repulsive it is. It is likened to\nرُءُوسُ الشَّيَاطِينِ\n(the heads of Shayatin ), even though they have never seen them, because it is a well-established idea in people's minds that devils are ugly in appearance.\nفَإِنَّهُمْ لَآكِلُونَ مِنْهَا فَمَالِئُونَ مِنْهَا الْبُطُونَ\n(Truly, they will eat thereof and fill their bellies therewith.) Allah mentions that they will eat of this extremely ugly tree even though its fruit tastes and smells so bad; they will be forced to eat from it because they will not find anything else to eat except this tree and similar things, as Allah says:\nلَيْسَ لَهُمْ طَعَامٌ إِلَّا مِنْ ضَرِيعٍ - لَا يُسْمِنُ وَلَا يُغْنِي مِنْ جُوعٍ\n(No food will there be for them but a poisonous thorny plant, Which will neither nourish nor avail against hunger.)(88:6 -7).\nثُمَّ إِنَّ لَهُمْ عَلَيْهَا لَشَوْبًا مِنْ حَمِيمٍ\n(Then on the top of that they will be boiling Hamim)\nIbn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"This means they will be given boiling Hamim to drink after they have eaten from Zaqqum.\" According to another report, he said that this means a mixture made from boiling water. Someone else said that it means boiling water will be mixed with pus and offensive discharges that leak from their private parts and eyes.\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that Sa'id bin Jubayr said, \"When the people of Hell get hungry, they will ask for food from the tree of Zaqqum. They will eat from it, then the skin of their faces will fall off, If someone were to pass by, he would recognize them from their faces. Then thirst will be sent upon them, so they will ask to be given something to drink, and they will be given water like boiling oil that has been heated to the ultimate degree. When it is brought near to their mouths, the flesh of their faces from which the skin has fallen off will be baked by its heat, and whatever is in their stomachs will melt. They will walk with their guts falling out and with their skin falling off, then they will be beaten with hooked rods of iron. Then every part of their bodies will burst into loud lamentations.\nثُمَّ إِنَّ مَرْجِعَهُمْ لَإِلَى الْجَحِيمِ\n(Then thereafter, verily, their return is to the flaming fire of Hell.) means, after that interval, they will be sent back to the burning fire, searing heat and scorching flames, and they will rotate between the one and the other. This is like the Ayah,\nيَطُوفُونَ بَيْنَهَا وَبَيْنَ حَمِيمٍ آنٍ\n(They will go between it (Hell) and the fierce boiling water!)(55:44). Qatadah recited this Ayah when discussing this Ayah. This is a good interpretation. 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud recited it differently, with the meaning \"Their return in the afternoon.\" 'Abdullah, may Allah be pleased with him, used to say: \"By the One in Whose Hand is my soul, midday on the Day of Resurrection will not come until the people of Paradise will be in Paradise and the people of Hell will be in Hell.\" Then he recited:\nأَصْحَابُ الْجَنَّةِ يَوْمَئِذٍ خَيْرٌ مُسْتَقَرًّا وَأَحْسَنُ مَقِيلًا\n(The dwellers of Paradise will, on that Day, have the best abode, and have the fairest of places for repose)(25:24). Allah's saying;\nإِنَّهُمْ أَلْفَوْا آبَاءَهُمْ ضَالِّينَ\n(Verily, they found their fathers on the wrong path;) means, 'We will punish them for that because they found their fathers following misguidance and they followed them with no evidence or proof.' Allah says:\nفَهُمْ عَلَىٰ آثَارِهِمْ يُهْرَعُونَ\n(So they (too) hastened in their footsteps!) Mujahid said, \"This is like running.\" Sa'id bin Jubayr said, \"They followed ignorance and foolishness.\"","href":"/tafsir/37?verse=62","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:37:71","title":"Ibn Kathir · 37:71–74","text":"And indeed most of the earlier ones went astray before them (71)And indeed We sent among them warners (72)Then see what was the end of those who were warned (73)Except the chosen servants of Allah (74)\nAllah tells us that most of the previous nations went astray, worshipping other gods alongside Allah. He states that He sent among them warners to alert them to the anger, wrath and vengeance of Allah towards those who disbelieve in Him and worship others besides Him. He tells us that they persisted in their opposition to their Messengers and their disbelief in them, so He destroyed those who disbelieved in Him and saved the believers and caused them to prevail. Allah says:\nفَانْظُرْ كَيْفَ كَانَ عَاقِبَةُ الْمُنْذَرِينَ - إِلَّا عِبَادَ اللَّهِ الْمُخْلَصِينَ\n(Then see what was the end of those who were warned. Except the chosen servants of Allah).","href":"/tafsir/37?verse=71","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:37:75","title":"Ibn Kathir · 37:75–82","text":"And indeed Nuh invoked Us, and We are the best of those who answer (75)And We rescued him and his family from the great distress (76)And, his progeny, them We made the survivors (77)And left for him (a goodly remembrance) among the later generation (78)\"Salam (peace!) be upon Nuh among the all creatures! (79)Verily, thus We reward the gooddoers (80)Verily, he [Nuh] was one of Our believing servants (81)Then We drowned the others (82)\nNuh and His People\nWhen Allah tells us about how most of the early people went astray from the path of salvation, He starts the detailed explanation of that with the story of Nuh and the rejection of his people. Only a few of Nuh's people believed in him, despite the long period of time he spent among them. He stayed among them for one thousand years less fifty, and after he stayed among them for so long and their disbelief became too much for him to bear – for every time he called them, they turned away from him even more – he prayed to his Lord saying, \"I have been overcome, so help (me)!\" So Allah became angry because Nuh was angry with them. He says:\nوَلَقَدْ نَادَانَا نُوحٌ فَلَنِعْمَ الْمُجِيبُونَ\n(And indeed Nuh invoked Us, and We are the best of those who answer.)\nوَنَجَّيْنَاهُ وَأَهْلَهُ مِنَ الْكَرْبِ الْعَظِيمِ\n(And We rescued him and his family from the great distress.) means, their disbelief and their insults.\nوَجَعَلْنَا ذُرِّيَّتَهُ هُمُ الْبَاقِينَ\n(And, his progeny, them We made the survivors.) 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, \"There was no one left apart from the offspring of Nuh, peace be upon him.\" Sa'id bin Abi 'Arubah said, narrating from Qatadah concerning the Ayah,\nوَجَعَلْنَا ذُرِّيَّتَهُ هُمُ الْبَاقِينَ\n(And, his progeny, them We made the survivors.) \"All people descended from the offspring of Nuh, peace be upon him.\" At-Tirmidhi, Ibn Jarir and Ibn Abi Hatim narrated from Samurah, may Allah be pleased with him, that the Prophet ﷺ said, concerning the Ayah,\nوَجَعَلْنَا ذُرِّيَّتَهُ هُمُ الْبَاقِينَ\n(And, his progeny, them We made the survivors):\nسَامُ، وَحَامُ، وَيَافِثُ\n(Sam, Ham and Yafith.) Imam Ahmad recorded from Samurah, may Allah be pleased with him, that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nسَامُ أَبُو الْعَرَبِ، وَحَامُ أَبُو الْحَبَشِ، وَيَافِثُ أَبُو الرُّومِ\n(Sam was the father of the Arabs, Ham was the father of the Ethiopians and Yafith was the father of the Romans.)\"\nThis was also recorded by At-Tirmidhi. What is meant here by Romans is the original Romans, i.e., the Greeks who claimed descent from Ruma (Roma) the son of Liti, the son of Yunan, the son of Yafith, the son of Nuh, peace be upon him.\nوَتَرَكْنَا عَلَيْهِ فِي الْآخِرِينَ\n(And left for him among the later generations.) Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"He is remembered in a good way.\" Mujahid said this means \"An honorable mention by all the Prophets.\" Qatadah and As-Suddi said, \"Allah caused him to be praised constantly by others.\" Ad-Dahhak said it means \"Salam and praise.\"\nسَلَامٌ عَلَىٰ نُوحٍ فِي الْعَالَمِينَ\n(Salam (peace!) be upon Nuh among the all creatures!) This explains for us the extent of the honorable mention and praise, for he is greeted with peace by all groups and nations.\nإِنَّا كَذَٰلِكَ نَجْزِي الْمُحْسِنِينَ\n(Verily, thus We reward the gooddoers.) means, 'This is how We reward those of Our servants who do deeds of obedience to Allah. We gave him an honorable mention so that after he died he is still remembered in a manner that befits his status.' Then Allah says:\nإِنَّهُ مِنْ عِبَادِنَا الْمُؤْمِنِينَ\n(Verily, he [Nuh] was one of Our believing servants.) meaning, one of the sincere believers in the Oneness of Allah, one of those who had certain faith.\nثُمَّ أَغْرَقْنَا الْآخَرِينَ\n(Then We drowned the others.) means, 'We destroyed them, and there was no trace whatsoever left of them, and they are only known by this unfavorable description.'","href":"/tafsir/37?verse=75","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:37:83","title":"Ibn Kathir · 37:83–87","text":"And verily, among those who followed his way was Ibrahim (83)When he came to his Lord with a Salim heart (84)When he said to his father and to his people: \"What is it that which you worship? (85)\"Is it a falsehood – gods other than Allah – that you desire? (86)\"Then what think you about the Lord of the all that exists? (87)\nThe Story of Ibrahim and His People\nAli bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him:\nوَإِنَّ مِنْ شِيعَتِهِ لَإِبْرَاهِيمَ\n(And verily, among those who followed his ways was Ibrahim.) means, he was one of the followers of his religion. Mujahid said, \"He was following his path and his way.\"\nإِذْ جَاءَ رَبَّهُ بِقَلْبٍ سَلِيمٍ\n(When he came to his Lord with a Salim heart.) Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"This means that he bore witness that none has the right to be worshipped except Allah.\"\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that 'Awf said, \"I said to Muhammad bin Sirin, 'What is the Salim heart?' He said, 'One which knows that Allah is true and that the Hour will undoubtedly come to pass, and that Allah will resurrect those who are in the graves.'\" Al-Hasan said, \"One that is free from Shirk.\" 'Urwah said, \"One that is not cursed.\"\nإِذْ قَالَ لِأَبِيهِ وَقَوْمِهِ مَاذَا تَعْبُدُونَ\n(When he said to his father and to his people: \"What is it that which you worship?\") He denounced his people for their worship of idols and false gods, Allah said:\nأَئِفْكًا آلِهَةً دُونَ اللَّهِ تُرِيدُونَ - فَمَا ظَنُّكُمْ بِرَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(Is it a falsehood – gods other than Allah – that you desire? Then what think you about the Lord of the all that exists?)\nQatadah said, \"This means, 'what do you think He will do with you when you meet Him, given that you worshipped others alongside Him?\"","href":"/tafsir/37?verse=83","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:37:88","title":"Ibn Kathir · 37:88–98","text":"Then he cast a glance at the stars (88)And he said: \"Verily, I am sick. (89)So they turned away from him and departed (90)Then he turned to their gods and said: \"Will you not eat? (91)\"What is the matter with you that you speak not? (92)Then he turned upon them, striking (them) with (his) right hand (93)Then they came hastily towards him (94)He said: \"Worship you that which you (yourselves) carve? (95)\"While Allah has created you and what you make! (96)They said: \"Build for him a building and throw him into the blazing fire! (97)So, they plotted a plot against him, but We made them the lowest (98)\nIbrahim, peace be upon him, said this to his people so that he could stay behind in the city when they went out for their festival. The time was approaching for them to go out to celebrate a festival of theirs, and he wanted to be alone with their gods so that he could break them, so he told them something that was true, for he was indeed sick of the implications of what they believed in.\nفَتَوَلَّوْا عَنْهُ مُدْبِرِينَ\n(So they turned away from him and departed.) Qatadah said, \"The Arabs say of one who thinks deeply that he is looking at the stars.\" What Qatadah meant is that he looked at the heavens thinking of a way to distract his people. So he said,\nإِنِّي سَقِيمٌ\n(Verily, I am sick.) meaning, weak. Ibn Jarir narrated here a Hadith from Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, stating that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nلَمْ يَكْذِبْ إِبْرَاهِيمُ عَلَيْهِ الصَّلَاةُ وَالسَّلَامُ غَيْرَ ثَلَاثَ كَذَبَاتٍ: ثِنْتَيْنِ فِي ذَاتِ اللهِ تَعَالَى، قَوْلُهُ: إِنِّي سَقِيمٌ وَقَوْلُهُ: بَلْ فَعَلَهُ كَبِيرُهُمْ هَٰذَا وَقَوْلُهُ فِي سَارَّةَ: هِيَ أُخْتِي\n(Ibrahim (peace and blessings be upon him) did not lie except in three cases. Two were for the sake of Allah: (one is) when he said, (Verily, I am sick); and (the second) when he said, (Nay, this one, the biggest (his wife) of them (idols) did it.) and (the third) when he said concerning (his wife) Sarah, \"She is my sister.\")\nThis Hadith is recorded in the books of the Sahih and Sunan with various chain of narrations. But this is not the kind of real lie for which a person is to be condemned – Allah forbid! One calls it a lie for lack of a better word, because it is abstruse speech used for a legitimate religious purpose, and it was said that what was meant by the words,\nإِنِّي سَقِيمٌ\n(Verily, I am sick) was, 'I am sick at heart of your worshipping idols instead of Allah.' Al-Hasan Al-Basri said, \"The people of Ibrahim went out to their festival and they wanted to make him go out too. So he lay down on his back and said,\nإِنِّي سَقِيمٌ\n(Verily, I am sick.) and he started looking at the sky. When they had gone out, he turned to their gods and broke them.\" This was recorded by Ibn Abi Hatim. Allah said:\nفَتَوَلَّوْا عَنْهُ مُدْبِرِينَ\n(So they turned away from him and departed.) meaning, he went to them after they had left, quickly and secretly.\nفَقَالَ أَلَا تَأْكُلُونَ\n(and said: \"Will you not eat?\") They had placed food before them as a sacrifice, so that the food might be blessed. When Ibrahim, peace be upon him, looked at the food that was before them, he said:\nأَلَا تَأْكُلُونَ - مَا لَكُمْ لَا تَنْطِقُونَ\n(Will you not eat? What is the matter with you that you speak not?)\nفَرَاغَ عَلَيْهِمْ ضَرْبًا بِالْيَمِينِ\n(Then he turned upon them, striking (them) with (his) right hand.)\nAl-Farra' said, \"This means, he started to hit them with his right hand.\" Qatadah and Al-Jawhari said, \"He turned to them, hitting them with his right hand.\" He struck them with his right hand because the right hand is stronger and more powerful. Then he left them broken to pieces, (all) except the biggest of them, that they might turn to it, as we have already seen in the Tafsir of Surat Al-Anbiya'.\nفَأَقْبَلُوا إِلَيْهِ يَزِفُّونَ\n(Then they came hastily towards him.) Mujahid and others said, \"This means, they came rushing. The story is told in brief here; in Surat Al-Anbiya', it is told in more detail. When they returned, they did not know at first who had done this, until they investigated and found out that Ibrahim, peace be upon him, was the one who had done it. When they came to rebuke him, he started rebuking and criticizing them and said:\nأَتَعْبُدُونَ مَا تَنْحِتُونَ\n(Worship you that which you carve?) meaning, 'do you worship instead of Allah idols which you yourselves carve and fashion with your own hands?'\nوَاللَّهُ خَلَقَكُمْ وَمَا تَعْمَلُونَ\n(While Allah has created you and what you make!) This may mean, 'Allah has created you and what you do;' or it may mean, 'Allah has created you and what you make.' Both views are synonymous. The former is more apparent because of the report recorded by Al-Bukhari in the Book Af'al Al-'Ibad from Hudhayfah, attributed to the Prophet ﷺ:\nإِنَّ اللهَ تَعَالَى يَصْنَعُ كُلَّ صَانِعٍ وَصَنْعَتَهُ\n(Allah has created every doer of deeds and what he does.) Thereupon he recited:\nوَاللَّهُ خَلَقَكُمْ وَمَا تَعْمَلُونَ\n(While Allah has created you and what you make!) When the proof had been established against them, they resolved to seize him by force and they said:\nابْنُوا لَهُ بُنْيَانًا فَأَلْقُوهُ فِي الْجَحِيمِ\n(Build for him a building (i.e., furnace) and throw him into the blazing fire!)\nThere happened what we have already discussed in our Tafsir of Surat Al-Anbiya', (21:68-70) and Allah saved him from the fire and caused him to prevail over them, making his proof supreme and supporting it. Allah says:\nفَأَرَادُوا بِهِ كَيْدًا فَجَعَلْنَاهُمُ الْأَسْفَلِينَ\n(So, they plotted a plot against him, but We made them the lowest.)","href":"/tafsir/37?verse=88","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:37:99","title":"Ibn Kathir · 37:99–113","text":"And he said: \"Verily, I am going to my Lord. He will guide me (99)\"My Lord! Grant me (offspring) from the righteous. (100)So, We gave him the glad tidings of a forbearing boy (101)And, when he (his son) was old enough to walk with him, he said: \"O my son! I have seen in a dream that I am slaughtering you. So look what you think!\" He said: \"O my father! Do that which you are commanded, if Allah wills, you shall find me of the patient. (102)Then, when they had both submitted themselves, and he had laid him prostrate on his forehead (103)We called out to him: \"O Ibrahim! (104)\"You have fulfilled the dream!\" Verily, thus do We reward the doers of good (105)Verily, that indeed was a manifest trial (106)And We ransomed him with a great sacrifice (107)And We left for him among the later generations (108)\"Salam (peace!) be upon Ibrahim! (109)Thus indeed do We reward the doers of good (110)Verily, he was one of Our believing servants (111)And We gave him the glad tidings of Ishaq – a Prophet from the righteous (112)We blessed him and Ishaq. And of their progeny are (some) that do right, and some that plainly wrong themselves (113)\nIbrahim's Emigration, the Test of the Sacrifice of Isma'il, and how Allah blessed Him\nAllah tells us that after He helped His close friend Ibrahim, peace be upon him, against his people, and after Ibrahim gave up hoping that they would ever believe despite all the mighty signs that they had witnessed, he emigrated away from them, and said:\nإِنِّي ذَاهِبٌ إِلَىٰ رَبِّي سَيَهْدِينِ - رَبِّ هَبْ لِي مِنَ الصَّالِحِينَ\n(Verily, I am going to my Lord. He will guide me! My Lord! Grant me (offspring) from the righteous.) meaning, obedient children, in compensation for his people and relatives whom he had left. Allah said:\nفَبَشَّرْنَاهُ بِغُلَامٍ حَلِيمٍ\n(So We gave him the glad tidings of a forbearing boy.) This child was Isma'il, peace be upon him, for he was the first child of whom glad tidings were given to Ibrahim, peace be upon him, and he was older than Ishaq. The Muslims and the People of the Book agree, and indeed it is stated in their Book, that Isma'il, peace be upon him, was born when Ibrahim, peace be upon him, was eighty-six years old, and Ishaq was born when Ibrahim was ninety-nine years old. According to their Book, Allah commanded Ibrahim to sacrifice his only son, and in another text it says his firstborn son. But here they falsely inserted the name of Ishaq. This is not right because it goes against what their own Scripture says. They inserted the name of Ishaq because he is their ancestor, while Isma'il is the ancestor of the Arabs. They were jealous of them, so they added this idea and changed the meaning of the phrase \"only son\" to mean 'the only son who is with you,' because Isma'il had been taken with his mother to Makkah. But this is a case of falsification and distortion, because the words \"only son\" cannot be said except in the case of one who has no other son. Furthermore, the firstborn son has a special status that is not shared by subsequent children, so the command to sacrifice him is a more exquisite test.\nفَلَمَّا بَلَغَ مَعَهُ السَّعْيَ\n(And, when he (his son) was old enough to walk with him,) means, when he grew up and started to go with his father and walk with him, for Ibrahim used to go every so often to check on his son and his mother in the land of Faran (i.e., Makkah), to see how they were doing. It was said that he used to ride on Al-Buraq, traveling there swiftly, and Allah knows best. It was reported from Ibn 'Abbas, peace be upon him, Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Sa'id bin Jubayr, 'Ata' Al-Khurasani, Zayd bin Aslam and others that\nفَلَمَّا بَلَغَ مَعَهُ السَّعْيَ\n(And, when he (his son) was old enough to walk with him,) means, when he became a young man and was able to work as his father did.\nفَلَمَّا بَلَغَ مَعَهُ السَّعْيَ قَالَ يَا بُنَيَّ إِنِّي أَرَىٰ فِي الْمَنَامِ أَنِّي أَذْبَحُكَ فَانْظُرْ مَاذَا تَرَىٰ ۚ\n(And, when he (his son) was old enough to walk with him, he said: \"O my son! I have seen in a dream that I am slaughtering you. So look what you think!\") 'Ubayd bin 'Umayr said, \"The dreams of the Prophets are revelation,\" then he recited this Ayah:\nقَالَ يَا بُنَيَّ إِنِّي أَرَىٰ فِي الْمَنَامِ أَنِّي أَذْبَحُكَ فَانْظُرْ مَاذَا تَرَىٰ\n(he said: \"O my son! I have seen in a dream that I am slaughtering you. So look what you think!\"). He told his son that in order to make it easier for him, and also to test his patience and resolve, at a young age, in obeying Allah and obeying his father.\nقَالَ يَا أَبَتِ افْعَلْ مَا تُؤْمَرُ ۖ\n(He said: \"O my father! Do that which you are commanded...\") meaning, 'obey the command of Allah and sacrifice me.'\nسَتَجِدُنِي إِنْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ مِنَ الصَّابِرِينَ\n(if Allah wills, you shall find me of the patient.) meaning, 'I will be patient and will seek the reward for that with Allah.' He, may peace and blessings be upon him, believed in what had been promised. Allah said:\nوَاذْكُرْ فِي الْكِتَابِ إِسْمَاعِيلَ ۚ إِنَّهُ كَانَ صَادِقَ الْوَعْدِ وَكَانَ رَسُولًا نَبِيًّا - وَكَانَ يَأْمُرُ أَهْلَهُ بِالصَّلَاةِ وَالزَّكَاةِ وَكَانَ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِ مَرْضِيًّا\n(And mention in the Book Isma'il. Verily, he was true to what he promised, and he was a Messenger, (and) a Prophet. And he used to enjoin on his family the Salah and the Zakah, and his Lord was pleased with him.)(19:54-55).\nفَلَمَّا أَسْلَمَا وَتَلَّهُ لِلْجَبِينِ\n(Then, when they had both submitted themselves, and he had laid him prostrate on his forehead;) means, when both of them had pronounced the Shahadah and remembered Allah – Ibrahim because he was about to offer a sacrifice and Isma'il because he was about to die. Or it was said that \"submitted themselves\" means that they submitted and followed the command of Allah; Ibrahim obeyed the command of Allah and Isma'il obeyed Allah and his father. This was the view of Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Qatadah, As-Suddi and Ibn Ishaq, and others.\nThe meaning of the phrase \"and he had laid him prostrate on his forehead\" is: he placed him facedown so that he could slaughter him from behind, and not have to see his face at the time of slaughter, so that it would be easier for him. Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, Mujahid, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Ad-Dahhak and Qatadah said:\nوَتَلَّهُ لِلْجَبِينِ\n(and he had laid him prostrate on his forehead;) means, \"He turned him upside down on his face.\" Imam Ahmad recorded that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"When the rituals were enjoined upon Ibrahim, peace be upon him, the Shaytan appeared to him at the Mas'a and raced with him, but Ibrahim got there first. Then Jibril, upon him be peace, took him to Jamrat Al-'Aqabah and the Shaytan appeared to him, so he stoned him with seven pebbles until he disappeared. Then he appeared him at Al-Jamrah Al-Wusta and he stoned him with seven pebbles. Then he laid him prostrate on his face. Isma'il, peace be upon him, was wearing a white shirt, and he said, 'O my father, I do not have any garment in which I can be shrouded apart from this; take it off me so that you can shroud me in it.' He started to take it off, then he was called from behind:\nأَنْ يَا إِبْرَاهِيمُ - قَدْ صَدَّقْتَ الرُّؤْيَا ۚ\n(O Ibrahim! You have fulfilled the dream!) Ibrahim turned, and saw a fine, horned, white ram.\" Ibn 'Abbas said, \"We used to look for similar types of rams.\" Hisham mentioned this Hadith at length in Al-Manasik.\nوَنَادَيْنَاهُ أَنْ يَا إِبْرَاهِيمُ - قَدْ صَدَّقْتَ الرُّؤْيَا ۚ\n(We called out to him: \"O Ibrahim! You have fulfilled the dream!\") means, 'the purpose of your dream has been fulfilled by your laying down your son to sacrifice him.' As-Suddi and others said that he passed the knife over Isma'il's neck, but it did not cut him at all, because a sheet of copper was placed between them. Ibrahim was called at that point, and it was said:\nقَدْ صَدَّقْتَ الرُّؤْيَا ۚ\n(You have fulfilled the dream!) Allah says;\nإِنَّا كَذَٰلِكَ نَجْزِي الْمُحْسِنِينَ\n(Verily, thus do We reward the doers of good.) means, 'this is how We deal with those who obey Us in things that are difficult for them; We make for them a way out.' As Allah says:\nوَمَنْ يَتَّقِ اللَّهَ يَجْعَلْ لَهُ مَخْرَجًا - وَيَرْزُقْهُ مِنْ حَيْثُ لَا يَحْتَسِبُ ۚ وَمَنْ يَتَوَكَّلْ عَلَى اللَّهِ فَهُوَ حَسْبُهُ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ بَالِغُ أَمْرِهِ ۚ قَدْ جَعَلَ اللَّهُ لِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدْرًا\n(And whosoever has Taqwa of Allah, He will make a way for him to get out (from every difficulty). And He will provide him from (sources) he never could imagine. And whosoever puts his trust in Allah, then He will suffice him. Verily, Allah will accomplish his purpose. Indeed Allah has set a measure for all things.)(65:2-3).\nOn the basis of this Ayah and this story, some of the scholars of Usul have stated that it is valid for a ruling to be abrogated before anyone is able to act upon it – unlike some of the Mu'tazilah. The evidence for this is obvious, because Allah commanded Ibrahim, peace be upon him, to sacrifice his son, then He abrogated that and pointed out the ransom. The purpose of His command had been primarily to reward His close Friend for his patience and resolve in sacrificing his son. Allah says:\nإِنَّ هَٰذَا لَهُوَ الْبَلَاءُ الْمُبِينُ\n(Verily, that indeed was a manifest trial.) meaning, it was clearly a test when he was commanded to sacrifice his son, so, he hastened to do it, in submission to the command of Allah and in obedience to Him. Allah said:\nوَإِبْرَاهِيمَ الَّذِي وَفَّىٰ\n(And of Ibrahim who fulfilled all that.)(53:37), and\nوَفَدَيْنَاهُ بِذِبْحٍ عَظِيمٍ\n(And We ransomed him with a great sacrifice). It was reported that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"A ram which had grazed in Paradise for forty years.\"\nImam Ahmad recorded that Safiyyah bint Shaybah said, \"A woman from Bani Sulaym, who was the midwife of most of the people in our household, told me that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ sent for 'Uthman bin Talhah, may Allah be pleased with him.\" On one occasion she said, \"I asked 'Uthman, 'Why did the Prophet ﷺ call you?' He said, 'The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said to me,\nإِنِّي كُنْتُ رَأَيْتُ قَرْنَيِ الْكَبْشِ حِينَ دَخَلْتُ الْبَيْتَ فَنَسِيتُ أَنْ آمُرَكَ أَنْ تُخَمِّرَهُمَا فَخَمِّرْهُمَا، فَإِنَّهُ لَا يَنْبَغِي أَنْ يَكُونَ فِي الْبَيْتِ شَيْءٌ يَشْغَلُ الْمُصَلِّيَ\n(I saw the horns of the ram when I entered the House [i.e., the Ka'bah], and I forgot to tell you to cover them up; cover them up, for there should not be anything in the House which could distract the worshipper.)'\" Sufyan said, \"The horns of the ram remained hanging in the House until it was burned, and they were burned too.\"\nThis offers independent evidence that the one who was to be sacrificed was Isma'il, peace be upon him. The Quraysh had inherited the horns of the ram that Ibrahim sacrificed, and they had been passed down from generation to generation, until the Messenger of Allah ﷺ was sent. And Allah knows best.\nReports which state that the One Who was to be sacrificed was Isma'il, and that this is Correct without a Doubt\nSa'id bin Jubayr, 'Amir Ash-Sha'bi, Yusuf bin Mihran, Mujahid, 'Ata' and others reported from Ibn 'Abbas that it was Isma'il, peace be upon him.\nIbn Jarir narrated that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"The one who was ransomed was Isma'il, peace be upon him. The Jews claimed that it was Ishaq, but the Jews lied.\"\nIt was reported that Ibn 'Umar said, \"The sacrifice was Isma'il.\" Ibn Abi Najih said, narrating from Mujahid, \"It was Isma'il, peace be upon him.\" This was also the view of Yusuf bin Mihran. Ash-Sha'bi said, \"It was Isma'il, peace be upon him, and I saw the horns of the ram in the Ka'bah.\"\nMuhammad bin Ishaq reported from Al-Hasan bin Dinar and 'Amr bin 'Ubayd from Al-Hasan Al-Basri that he did not doubt that the one of the two sons Ibrahim was commanded to sacrifice was Isma'il, peace be upon him. Ibn Ishaq said, \"I heard Muhammad bin Ka'b Al-Qurazi say, 'The one whom Allah commanded Ibrahim to sacrifice of his two sons was Isma'il.' We find this in the Book of Allah, because when Allah finishes the story of the one of the two sons of Ibrahim who was to be sacrificed, He then says:\nوَبَشَّرْنَاهُ بِإِسْحَاقَ نَبِيًّا مِنَ الصَّالِحِينَ\n(And We gave him the glad tidings of Ishaq – a Prophet from the righteous), and\nفَبَشَّرْنَاهَا بِإِسْحَاقَ وَمِنْ وَرَاءِ إِسْحَاقَ يَعْقُوبَ\n(So, We gave her glad tidings of Ishaq and after Ishaq, of Ya'qub)(11:71).\nHe mentions the son and the son of the son, but He would not have commanded him to sacrifice Ishaq when He had promised that this son would in turn have a son. The one whom He commanded him to sacrifice can only have been Isma'il.\" Ibn Ishaq said, \"I heard him say that often.\"\nIbn Ishaq reported from Buraydah bin Sufyan bin Farwah Al-Aslami that Muhammad bin Ka'b Al-Qurazi told them that he mentioned that to 'Umar bin 'Abd Al-'Aziz, may Allah be pleased with him, when he was Khalifah, while he was with him in Syria. 'Umar said to him, \"This is something about which I have never given any thought, but I see that it is as you say.\" Then he sent for a man who was with him in Syria, a Jew who had become a Muslim and was committed to Islam, and he thought that he had been one of their scholars. 'Umar bin 'Abd Al-'Aziz, may Allah be pleased with him, asked him about that.\nMuhammad bin Ka'b said, \"I was with 'Umar bin 'Abd Al-'Aziz. 'Umar said to him, 'Which of the two sons of Ibrahim was he commanded to sacrifice?' He said, 'Isma'il. By Allah, O Commander of the faithful, the Jews know this, but they were jealous of you Arabs because it was your father about whom Allah issued this command and the virtue that Allah mentioned was because of his patience in obeying the command. So they denied that and claimed that it was Ishaq, because he is their father.'\"\nAbdullah bin Al-Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal, may Allah have mercy on him, said, \"I asked my father about which son was to be sacrificed – was it Isma'il or Ishaq?\" He said, \"Isma'il.\" This was mentioned in Kitab Az-Zuhd.\nIbn Abi Hatim said, \"I heard my father say, 'The correct view is that the one who was to be sacrificed was Isma'il, peace be upon him.'\" He said, \"And it was narrated that 'Ali, Ibn 'Umar, Abu Hurayrah, Abu At-Tufayl, Sa'id bin Al-Musayyib, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Al-Hasan, Mujahid, Ash-Sha'bi, Muhammad bin Ka'b Al-Qurazi, Abu Ja'far Muhammad bin 'Ali and Abu Salih, may Allah be pleased with them all, said that the one who was to be sacrificed was Isma'il.\"\nAl-Baghawi said in his Tafsir, \"This was the view of 'Abdullah bin 'Umar, Sa'id bin Al-Musayyib, As-Suddi, Al-Hasan Al-Basri, Mujahid, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, Muhammad bin Ka'b Al-Qurazi and Al-Kalbi.\" This was also reported from Ibn 'Abbas and from Abu 'Amr bin Al-'Ala'.\nوَبَشَّرْنَاهُ بِإِسْحَاقَ نَبِيًّا مِنَ الصَّالِحِينَ\n(And We gave him the glad tidings of Ishaq – a Prophet from the righteous.) having given the glad tidings of the one who was to be sacrificed, who was Isma'il, Allah immediately follows that with mention of the glad tidings of his brother Ishaq. This is also mentioned in Surah Hud (11:71) and in Surat Al-Hijr (15:53-55).\nنَبِيًّا\n(a Prophet) means, from him there will come a righteous Prophet.\nوَبَارَكْنَا عَلَيْهِ وَعَلَىٰ إِسْحَاقَ ۚ وَمِنْ ذُرِّيَّتِهِمَا مُحْسِنٌ وَظَالِمٌ لِنَفْسِهِ مُبِينٌ\n(We blessed him and Ishaq. And of their progeny are (some) that do right, and some that plainly wrong themselves.) This is like the Ayah:\nقِيلَ يَا نُوحُ اهْبِطْ بِسَلَامٍ مِنَّا وَبَرَكَاتٍ عَلَيْكَ وَعَلَىٰ أُمَمٍ مِمَّنْ مَعَكَ ۚ وَأُمَمٌ سَنُمَتِّعُهُمْ ثُمَّ يَمَسُّهُمْ مِنَّا عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ\n(It was said: \"O Nuh! Come down (from the ship) with peace from Us and blessings on you and on the people who are with you, but people to whom We shall grant their pleasures (for a time), but in the end a painful torment will reach them from Us.\")(11:48)","href":"/tafsir/37?verse=99","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:37:114","title":"Ibn Kathir · 37:114–122","text":"And, indeed We gave Our grace to Musa and Harun (114)And We saved them and their people from the great distress (115)And helped them, so that they became the victors (116)And We gave them the clear Scripture (117)And guided them to the right path (118)And We left for them among the later generations (119)\"Salam (peace!) be upon Musa and Harun! (120)Verily, thus do We reward the doers of good (121)Verily, they were two of Our believing servants (122)\nMusa and Harun\nAllah tells us how He blessed Musa and Harun with prophethood and how He saved them, along with those who believed, from the oppression of Fir'awn and his people, who had persecuted them by killing their sons and sparing their women, and by forcing them to do the most menial tasks, then ultimately He caused them to prevail over them and to seize their lands and their wealth and all that they had spent their entire lives amassing. Then Allah revealed to Musa the Clear and Mighty Book, which is the Tawrah, as Allah says:\nوَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَا مُوسَىٰ وَهَارُونَ الْفُرْقَانَ وَضِيَاءً\n(And indeed We granted to Musa and Harun the criterion (of right and wrong), and a shining light)(21:48). And Allah says here:\nوَآتَيْنَاهُمَا الْكِتَابَ الْمُسْتَبِينَ - وَهَدَيْنَاهُمَا الصِّرَاطَ الْمُسْتَقِيمَ\n(And We gave them the clear Scripture; and guided them to the right path.) meaning, with regard to words and deeds.\nوَتَرَكْنَا عَلَيْهِمَا فِي الْآخِرِينَ\n(And We left for them among the later generations.) means, that after they died they would be mentioned in good terms and spoken of highly. Then Allah explain this further:\nسَلَامٌ عَلَىٰ مُوسَىٰ وَهَارُونَ - إِنَّا كَذَٰلِكَ نَجْزِي الْمُحْسِنِينَ - إِنَّهُمَا مِنْ عِبَادِنَا الْمُؤْمِنِينَ\n(Salam (peace!) be upon Musa and Harun! Verily, thus do We reward the doers of good. Verily, they were two of Our believing servants.)","href":"/tafsir/37?verse=114","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:37:123","title":"Ibn Kathir · 37:123–132","text":"And verily, Ilyas was one of the Messengers (123)When he said to his people: \"Will you not have Taqwa? (124)\"Will you call upon 'Ba'l and forsake the Best of creators (125)Allah, your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers? (126)But they denied him, so they will certainly be brought forth (127)Save the chosen servants of Allah (128)And We left for him among the later generations (129)\"Salam (peace!) be upon Ilyasin! (130)Verily, thus do We reward the doers of good (131)Verily, he was one of Our believing servants (132)\nIlyas\nQatadah and Muhammad bin Ishaq said, \"Ilyas is another name for Idris.\" Ibn Abi Hatim recorded that 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"Ilyas is Idris.\" This was also the view of Ad-Dahhak . Wahb bin Munabbih said, \"He is Ilyas bin Yasin bin Finhas bin Al-'Izar bin Harun bin 'Imran.\nAllah sent him to the Children of Israel after Hizqil (Ezekiel), may peace be upon them both. They had started to worship an idol called Ba'l, and he called them to Allah, may He be exalted, and forbade them to worship anyone besides Him. Their king believed in him, then he apostatized, and they persisted in their misguided ways, and not one person among them believed in him. So he prayed to Allah against them, and Allah withheld the rain from them for three years. Then they asked him to relieve them from that, and promised that they would believe in him if rain came to them. So he prayed to Allah for them, and the rains came, but they persisted in their evil ways of disbelief. So he asked Allah to take him to Him. Al-Yasa' bin Akhtub had grown up under his care, may peace be upon them both. So Ilyas was commanded to go to such and such a place, and whatever mount came to him, he was to ride on it and not to give it away. A horse of fire was brought to him, so he rode it, and Allah clothed him with light and covered him with feathers, and he used to fly with the angels as a human angel, heavenly yet also earthly. This is what was narrated by Wahb bin Munabbih from the People of the Book; Allah knows best how true it is.\nإِذْ قَالَ لِقَوْمِهِ أَلَا تَتَّقُونَ\n(When he said to his people: \"Will you not have Taqwa?\") means, 'do you not fear Allah when you worship others instead of Him?'\nأَتَدْعُونَ بَعْلًا وَتَذَرُونَ أَحْسَنَ الْخَالِقِينَ\n(Will you call upon Ba'l and forsake the Best of creators,) Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Qatadah and As-Suddi said that the word Ba'l means lord. 'Ikrimah and Qatadah said, \"This is the language of the people of Yemen.\" According to another report from Qatadah, it is the language of Azd Shanu'ah. 'Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam narrated from his father that it is the name of an idol which was worshipped by the people of a city called Ba'labak (Baalbek) which is to the west of Damascus. Ad-Dahhak said, \"It is an idol which they used to worship.\"\nأَتَدْعُونَ بَعْلًا\n(Will you call upon Ba'l) means, 'will you worship an idol,'\nوَتَذَرُونَ أَحْسَنَ الْخَالِقِينَ - اللَّهَ رَبَّكُمْ وَرَبَّ آبَائِكُمُ الْأَوَّلِينَ\n(and forsake the Best of creators, Allah, your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers?) means, 'He is the One Who is deserving of your worship alone, with no partners or associates.'\nفَكَذَّبُوهُ فَإِنَّهُمْ لَمُحْضَرُونَ\n(But they denied him, so they will certainly be brought forth,) means, for the punishment on the Day of Reckoning.\nإِلَّا عِبَادَ اللَّهِ الْمُخْلَصِينَ\n(Save the chosen servants of Allah.) means, those who believe in Him alone.\nوَتَرَكْنَا عَلَيْهِ فِي الْآخِرِينَ\n(And We left for him among the later generations.) means, he is praised and spoken of highly.\nسَلَامٌ عَلَىٰ إِلْ يَاسِينَ\n(Salam (peace!) be upon Ilyasin!) Similarly, one might say for Isma'il, Isma'in. This is the language (dialect) of Bani Asad; they say Mikal, Mika'il, and Mika'in. They say Ibrahim and Ibraham; Isra'il, Isra'in; Tur Sina', Tur Sinin. All of that is fine.\nإِنَّا كَذَٰلِكَ نَجْزِي الْمُحْسِنِينَ - إِنَّهُ مِنْ عِبَادِنَا الْمُؤْمِنِينَ\n(Verily, thus do We reward the doers of good. Verily, he was one of Our believing servants.) We have already discussed the meaning of this above. And Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/37?verse=123","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:37:133","title":"Ibn Kathir · 37:133–138","text":"And verily, Lut was one of the Messengers (133)When We saved him and his family, all (134)Except an old woman (his wife) who was among those who remained behind (135)Then We destroyed the rest (136)Verily, you pass by them in the morning (137)And at night; will you not then reflect (138)\nThe Destruction of the People of Lut (Lot)\nAllah tells us that He sent His servant and Messenger Lut, peace be upon him, to his people, and they denied him, so Allah saved him from among them, him and his family with the exception of his wife, who was destroyed along with her people. Allah destroyed them with different kinds of punishments, and made their vicinity a foul, stinking lake which is on a well-travelled route where people pass by night and day (i.e., the Dead Sea, which lays close to the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah on the highway between Arabia and Syria). Allah says:\nوَإِنَّكُمْ لَتَمُرُّونَ عَلَيْهِمْ مُصْبِحِينَ - وَبِاللَّيْلِ ۗ أَفَلَا تَعْقِلُونَ\n(Verily, you pass by them in the morning. And at night; will you not then reflect?) meaning, 'will you not learn a lesson from them and how Allah destroyed them, and realize that a similar end awaits the disbelievers.'","href":"/tafsir/37?verse=133","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:37:139","title":"Ibn Kathir · 37:139–148","text":"And verily, Yunus was one of the Messengers (139)When he ran to the laden ship (140)Then he (agreed to) cast lots, and he was among the losers (141)Then a (big) fish swallowed him as he had done an act worthy of blame (142)Had he not been of them who glorify Allah (143)He would have indeed remained inside its belly (the fish) till the Day of Resurrection (144)But We cast him forth on the naked shore while he was sick (45)And We caused a plant of gourd to grow over him (146)And We sent him to a hundred thousand (people) or even more (147)And they believed; so We gave them enjoyment for a while (148)\nThe Story of Yunus\nWe have already discussed the story of Yunus, peace be upon him, in Surat Al-Anbiya' (21:87-88). In the Two Sahihs it is reported that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nمَا يَنْبَغِي لِعَبْدٍ أَنْ يَقُولَ: أَنَا خَيْرٌ مِنْ يُونُسَ بْنِ مَتَّى\n(It is not right for any person to say I am better than Yunus bin Matta.)\nإِذْ أَبَقَ إِلَى الْفُلْكِ الْمَشْحُونِ\n(When he ran to the laden ship.) Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"It was filled with cargo.\nفَسَاهَمَ\n(Then he (agreed to) cast lots,) means, to draw lots.\"\nفَكَانَ مِنَ الْمُدْحَضِينَ\n(and he was among the losers.) means among those who have been overcome.\nThis was because the ship was being pounded by the waves on all sides, and they were at risk of drowning, so they drew lots, and whoever lost would be thrown overboard so as to lighten the load. The Prophet of Allah Yunus, peace be upon him, lost the draw three times, but they did not want to throw him overboard. He took off his garment so that he could throw himself into the sea, and they tried to stop him. Then Allah commanded a large fish from the Green Sea (i.e., Mediterranian Sea) to cleave the oceans and come and swallow Yunus, peace be upon him, without cutting his flesh or breaking his bones. The fish came and Yunus, peace be upon him, threw himself overboard, and the fish swallowed him and took him away, traveling through all the seas with him. When Yunus had stayed for some time in the fish's belly, he thought that he had died; then he moved his head and legs and arms, and saw that he was alive. He prayed in the belly of the fish, and one of the things he said in his main prayer was: \"O Lord, I have taken as a place of worship to You a place which no other person has reached.\" They differed as to how long he spent in the belly of the fish. Some said three days; this was the view of Qatadah. Some said seven days; this was the view of Ja'far As-Sadiq, may Allah be pleased with him. Some said forty days; this was the view of Abu Malik. Mujahid said, narrating from Ash-Sha'bi, \"It swallowed him in the morning and cast him forth in the evening.\" And Allah knows best how long exactly was. Allah says,\nفَلَوْلَا أَنَّهُ كَانَ مِنَ الْمُسَبِّحِينَ - لَلَبِثَ فِي بَطْنِهِ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ يُبْعَثُونَ\n(Had he not been of them who glorify Allah, He would have indeed remained inside its belly (the fish) till the Day of Resurrection.)\nIt was said that, if he had not already done righteous deeds during his time of ease. This was the view of Ad-Dahhak bin Qays, Abu Al-'Aliyah, Wahb bin Munabbih, Qatadah and others, and it was the view favored by Ibn Jarir. This is what is indicated in the authentic Hadith which we quote below, if Allah wills. In a Hadith narrated from Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, he ﷺ said:\nتَعَرَّفْ إِلَى اللهِ فِي الرَّخَاءِ، يَعْرِفْكَ فِي الشِّدَّةِ\n(Remember Allah during times of ease and He will remember you during times of difficulty.) And it was said that what was meant by the Ayah:\nفَلَوْلَا أَنَّهُ كَانَ مِنَ الْمُسَبِّحِينَ\n(Had he not been of them who glorify Allah,) was the meaning of the following Ayat:\nفَنَادَىٰ فِي الظُّلُمَاتِ أَنْ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا أَنْتَ سُبْحَانَكَ إِنِّي كُنْتُ مِنَ الظَّالِمِينَ - فَاسْتَجَبْنَا لَهُ وَنَجَّيْنَاهُ مِنَ الْغَمِّ ۚ وَكَذَٰلِكَ نُنْجِي الْمُؤْمِنِينَ\n(But he cried through the darkness (saying): \"La ilaha illa Anta, You are glorified! Truly, I have been of the wrongdoers.\" So We answered his call, and delivered him from the distress. And thus We do deliver the believers.)(21:87-88).\nThis was the view of Sa'id bin Jubayr and others. Ibn Abi Hatim recorded that Anas bin Malik, may Allah be pleased with him – and I do not know of anything narrated from Anas that he did not attribute to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ:\nإِنَّ يُونُسَ النَّبِيَّ عَلَيْهِ الصَّلَاةُ وَالسَّلَامُ حِينَ بَدَا لَهُ أَنْ يَدْعُوَ بِهَذِهِ الْكَلِمَاتِ وَهُوَ فِي بَطْنِ الْحُوتِ فَقَالَ: اللّٰهُمَّ لَا إِلَهَ إِلَّا أَنْتَ سُبْحَانَكَ إِنِّي كُنْتُ مِنَ الظَّالِمِينَ،فَأَقْبَلَتِ الدَّعْوَةُ تَحُفُّ بِالْعَرْشِ، قَالَتِ الْمَلَائِكَةُ: يَا رَبِّ هَذَا صَوْتٌ ضَعِيفٌ مَعْرُوفٌ مِنْ بِلَادٍ بَعِيدَةٍ غَرِيبَةٍ فَقَالَ اللهُ تَعَالَى: أَمَا تَعْرِفُونَ ذَلِكَ؟ قَالُوا: يَا رَبِّ وَمَنْ هُوَ؟ قَالَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ: عَبْدِي يُونُسُ، قَالُوا: عَبْدُكَ يُونُسُ الَّذِي لَمْ يَزَلْ يُرْفَعُ لَهُ عَمَلٌ مُتَقَبَّلٌ وَدَعْوَةٌ مُسْتَجَابَةٌ؟ قَالُوا: يَا رَبِّ أَوَلَا تَرْحَمُ مَا كَانَ يَصْنَعُ فِي الرَّخَاءِ فَتُنْجِيَهُ فِي الْبَلَاءِ، قَالَ: بَلَى، فَأَمَرَ الْحُوتَ فَطَرَحَهُ بِالْعَرَاءِ\n(When it occurred to the Prophet Yunus, upon him be peace, to call upon Allah in these words when he was in the belly of the great fish, he said, \"La ilaha illa Anta, Yo are glorified! Truly, I have been of the wrongdoers.\" This call went and hovered around the (mighty) Throne, and the angels said, \"O Lord, this is the voice of one who is weak but known, in a faraway strange land. Allah, may He be exalted, said, \"How do you know this?\" They said, \"O Lord, who is he?\" Allah, may He be exalted, said, \"My servant Yunus.\" They said, \"Your servant Yunus, from whom there kept coming acceptable deeds and supplications which were answered?!\" They said, \"O Lord, will You not have mercy on him for what he did during his time of ease, and save him from this trial and tribulation?\" He said, \"Of course.\" So, He commanded the great fish, and it cast him forth on the naked shore.) Allah says:\nفَنَبَذْنَاهُ\n(But We cast him forth) meaning, 'We threw him out,'\nبِالْعَرَاءِ\n(on the naked shore) Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, and others said that this refers to land in which there is no vegetation and no buildings.\nوَهُوَ سَقِيمٌ\n(while he was sick,) means, when he was weak of body.\nوَأَنْبَتْنَا عَلَيْهِ شَجَرَةً مِنْ يَقْطِينٍ\n(And We caused a plant of gourd to grow over him.) Ibn Mas'ud and Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with them both, Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Wahb bin Munabbih, Hilal bin Yasaf, 'Abdullah bin Tawus, As-Suddi, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak, 'Ata' Al-Khurasani and several others, all said that gourd means squash.\nSome of them mentioned that the squash has a number of benefits: it grows quickly, its leaves offer shade because of their large size and smooth texture, flies do not come near it, and its fruits provide good nourishment; they may be eaten raw or cooked, and both the pulp and the peel may be eaten. It was reported that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to like squash and would look for it wherever it was on the serving dish.\nوَأَرْسَلْنَاهُ إِلَىٰ مِائَةِ أَلْفٍ أَوْ يَزِيدُونَ\n(And We sent him to a hundred thousand (people) or even more.) It is as if he was commanded, after he came forth from the fish, to go back to those to whom he had been sent in the first place, and they all believed in him.\nأَوْ يَزِيدُونَ\n(or even more.) Makhul said, \"They numbered one hundred and ten thousand. This was reported by Ibn Abi Hatim. Ibn Jarir said, \"Some of the scholars of Arabic, the people of Basrah, said that this means up to one hundred thousand or more.\" Ibn Jarir interpreted this Ayah as he interpreted the Ayat:\nثُمَّ قَسَتْ قُلُوبُكُمْ مِنْ بَعْدِ ذَٰلِكَ فَهِيَ كَالْحِجَارَةِ أَوْ أَشَدُّ قَسْوَةً ۚ\n(Then, after that, your hearts were hardened and became as stones or even worse in hardness)(2:74).\nإِذَا فَرِيقٌ مِنْهُمْ يَخْشَوْنَ النَّاسَ كَخَشْيَةِ اللَّهِ أَوْ أَشَدَّ خَشْيَةً\n(Behold! a section of them fear men as they fear Allah or even more)(4:77), and\nفَكَانَ قَابَ قَوْسَيْنِ أَوْ أَدْنَىٰ\n(And was at a distance of two bows' length or (even) nearer)(53:9). The meaning is, not less than that, but rather more.\nفَآمَنُوا\n(And they believed;) means, these people to whom Yunus, peace be upon him, had been sent all believed.\nفَمَتَّعْنَاهُمْ إِلَىٰ حِينٍ\n(so We gave them enjoyment for a while.) means, until the time of their appointed end. This is like the Ayah,\nفَلَوْلَا كَانَتْ قَرْيَةٌ آمَنَتْ فَنَفَعَهَا إِيمَانُهَا إِلَّا قَوْمَ يُونُسَ لَمَّا آمَنُوا كَشَفْنَا عَنْهُمْ عَذَابَ الْخِزْيِ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَمَتَّعْنَاهُمْ إِلَىٰ حِينٍ\n(Was there any town (community) that believed, and its faith (at that moment) saved it? – except the people of Yunus; when they believed, We removed from them the torment of disgrace in the life of the (present) world, and permitted them to enjoy for a while.)(10:98)","href":"/tafsir/37?verse=139","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:37:149","title":"Ibn Kathir · 37:149–160","text":"Now ask them: \"Are there (only) daughters for your Lord and sons for them? (149)Or did We create the angels female while they were witnesses (150)Verily, it is of their falsehood that they say (151)\"Allah has begotten.\" And, verily, they are liars (152)Has He (then) chosen daughters rather than sons (153)What is the matter with you? How do you decide (154)Will you not then remember (155)Or is there for you a plain authority (156)Then bring your Book if you are truthful (157)And they have invented a kinship between Him and the Jinn, but the Jinn know well that they have indeed to appear (before Him)(158)Glorified be Allah! (He is free) from what they attribute unto Him (159)Except the servants of Allah, whom He chooses (160)\nRefutation of Those Who attribute Children to Allah and say that the Angels are His Daughters\nAllah denounces those idolators who attribute daughters to Allah – exalted be He above that – and attributed to themselves what they desired, i.e., they wanted male offspring to themselves.\nوَإِذَا بُشِّرَ أَحَدُهُمْ بِالْأُنْثَىٰ ظَلَّ وَجْهُهُ مُسْوَدًّا وَهُوَ كَظِيمٌ\n(And when the news of (the birth of) a female (child) is brought to any of them, his face becomes dark, and he is filled with inward grief!)(16:58), i.e., that upsets him, and he would only choose sons for himself. Allah says: 'Then how can they attribute to Allah the share that they would not choose for themselves?' Allah says:\nفَاسْتَفْتِهِمْ\n(Now ask them) means, quiz them by way of denunciation,\nأَلِرَبِّكَ الْبَنَاتُ وَلَهُمُ الْبَنُونَ\n(Are there (only) daughters for your Lord and sons for them?) This is like the Ayah:\nأَلَكُمُ الذَّكَرُ وَلَهُ الْأُنْثَىٰ - تِلْكَ إِذًا قِسْمَةٌ ضِيزَىٰ\n(Is it for you the males and for Him the females? That indeed is a division most unfair!)(53:21-22).\nأَمْ خَلَقْنَا الْمَلَائِكَةَ إِنَاثًا وَهُمْ شَاهِدُونَ\n(Or did We create the angels female while they were witnesses?) means, how did they decide that the angels are female when they did not witness their creation? This is like the Ayah:\nوَجَعَلُوا الْمَلَائِكَةَ الَّذِينَ هُمْ عِبَادُ الرَّحْمَٰنِ إِنَاثًا ۚ أَشَهِدُوا خَلْقَهُمْ ۚ سَتُكْتَبُ شَهَادَتُهُمْ وَيُسْأَلُونَ\n(And they make the angels females who themselves are servants of the Most Gracious. Did they witness their creation? Their testimony will be recorded, and they will be questioned!)(43:19), which means, they will be questioned about that on the Day of Resurrection.\nأَلَا إِنَّهُمْ مِنْ إِفْكِهِمْ\n(Verily, it is of their falsehood) means, it is a part of the lies they tell.\nلَيَقُولُونَ - وَلَدَ اللَّهُ\n(that they say: \"Allah has begotten.\") meaning, that offspring have been born to Him.\nوَإِنَّهُمْ لَكَاذِبُونَ\n(And verily, they are liars!) Allah mentions three of the things they said about the angels, which formed the utmost disbelief and falsehood. They said that they were the daughters of Allah and that Allah had offspring – exalted and sanctified be He above that. Then they made these offspring female, then they worshipped them instead of Allah, exalted and sanctified be He – any of which on its own would be sufficient to condemn them to spend eternity in Hell. Then Allah says, denouncing them:\nأَصْطَفَى الْبَنَاتِ عَلَى الْبَنِينَ\n(Has He (then) chosen daughters rather than sons?) meaning, what would make Him choose daughters rather than sons? This is like the Ayah,\nأَفَأَصْفَاكُمْ رَبُّكُمْ بِالْبَنِينَ وَاتَّخَذَ مِنَ الْمَلَائِكَةِ إِنَاثًا ۚ إِنَّكُمْ لَتَقُولُونَ قَوْلًا عَظِيمًا\n(Has then your Lord preferred for you sons, and taken for Himself from among the angels daughters? Verily, you indeed utter an awful saying.)(17:40) Allah says:\nمَا لَكُمْ كَيْفَ تَحْكُمُونَ\n(What is the matter with you? How do you decide?) meaning, 'what kind of reasoning makes you say that?'\nأَفَلَا تَذَكَّرُونَ - أَمْ لَكُمْ سُلْطَانٌ مُبِينٌ\n(Will you not then remember? Or is there for you a plain authority?) means, 'evidence to prove what you say.'\nفَأْتُوا بِكِتَابِكُمْ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ صَادِقِينَ\n(Then bring your Book if you are truthful!) means, 'produce evidence for that derived from a Book revealed from heaven by Allah, to prove that He has taken what you say (i.e., offspring). What you say is totally irrational.'\nوَجَعَلُوا بَيْنَهُ وَبَيْنَ الْجِنَّةِ نَسَبًا ۚ\n(And they have invented a kinship between Him and the Jinn,) Mujahid said, \"The idolators said that the angels were the daughters of Allah. Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, said, 'Then who are their mothers?' They said, 'The daughters of the leaders of the Jinn.'\" Qatadah and Ibn Zayd also said this. Allah – may He be blessed and exalted – says:\nوَلَقَدْ عَلِمَتِ الْجِنَّةُ\n(but the jinn know) meaning, those to whom this is attributed\nإِنَّهُمْ لَمُحْضَرُونَ\n(know well that they have indeed to appear (before Him).) means, that those who say that will be brought forth for punishment on the Day of Reckoning, because of the lies and falsehood that they uttered without knowledge.\nسُبْحَانَ اللَّهِ عَمَّا يَصِفُونَ\n(Glorified be Allah! (He is free) from what they attribute unto Him!) means, exalted, sanctified and glorified be He far above having any offspring and far above what the wrongdoers and heretics attribute to Him.\nإِلَّا عِبَادَ اللَّهِ الْمُخْلَصِنَ\n(Except the servants of Allah, whom He chooses.) The pronoun in the verb translated as \"they attribute\" refers to all of mankind, then He excludes those whom He chooses, who are the ones who follow the truth revealed to every Prophet who was sent.","href":"/tafsir/37?verse=149","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:37:161","title":"Ibn Kathir · 37:161–170","text":"So, verily you and those whom you worshi (161)Cannot lead astray (162)Except those who are predestined to burn in Hell (163)And there is not one of us (angels) but has his known place (164)And verily, we (angels), we stand in rows (165)And verily, we (angels) indeed are those who glorify (166)And indeed they used to say (167)\"If we had a reminder as had the men of old, (168)\"We would have indeed been the chosen servants of Allah! (169)But (now) they disbelieve therein, so they will come to know (170)\nNo One believes what the Idolators say except Those Who are even more misguided than They\nAllah says, addressing the idolators:\nفَإِنَّكُمْ وَمَا تَعْبُدُونَ - مَا أَنْتُمْ عَلَيْهِ بِفَاتِنِينَ -  إِلَّا مَنْ هُوَ صَالِ الْجَحِيمِ\n(So, verily you and those whom you worship cannot lead astray, except those who are predestined to burn in Hell!) meaning, 'the only ones who will believe what you say and follow your misguided ways of false worship are those who are more misguided than you and are created for Hell.'\nلَهُمْ قُلُوبٌ لَا يَفْقَهُونَ بِهَا وَلَهُمْ أَعْيُنٌ لَا يُبْصِرُونَ بِهَا وَلَهُمْ آذَانٌ لَا يَسْمَعُونَ بِهَا ۚ أُولَٰئِكَ كَالْأَنْعَامِ بَلْ هُمْ أَضَلُّ ۚ أُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْغَافِلُونَ\n(They have hearts wherewith they understand not, and they have eyes wherewith they see not, and they have ears wherewith they hear not (the truth). They are like cattle, nay even more astray; those! They are the heedless ones.)(7:179).\nThis is the parable of the people who follow the belief and ideas of Shirk, disbelief and misguidance, as Allah says:\nإِنَّكُمْ لَفِي قَوْلٍ مُخْتَلِفٍ - يُؤْفَكُ عَنْهُ مَنْ أُفِكَ\n(Certainly, you have different ideas. Turned aside therefrom is he who is turned aside (by the decree of Allah).)(51:8-9) meaning, the one who is misled by it is the one who is turned aside.\nThe Place of the Angels and Their Ranks glorify Allah\nThen Allah says, declaring the angels to be above the position attributed to them by those who disbelieved in them and told lies about them – that they are the daughters of Allah –\nوَمَا مِنَّا إِلَّا لَهُ مَقَامٌ مَعْلُومٌ\n(And there is not one of us (angels) but has his known place;) meaning, each one has his own place in the heavens and in the places of worship, which he does not overstep. Ad-Dahhak said in his Tafsir:\nوَمَا مِنَّا إِلَّا لَهُ مَقَامٌ مَعْلُومٌ\n\"(And there is not one of us (angels) but has his known place;) Masruq used to narrate that 'A'ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, said, 'The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nمَا مِنَ السَّمَاءِ الدُّنْيَا مَوْضِعٌ إِلَّا عَلَيْهِ مَلَكٌ سَاجِدٌ أَوْ قَائِمٌ\n(There is no place in the lower heaven without an angel standing or prostrating in it.) This is what Allah says:\nوَمَا مِنَّا إِلَّا لَهُ مَقَامٌ مَعْلُومٌ\n(And there is not one of us (angels) but has his known place (or position)).\" It was reported that Ibn Mas'ud said, \"In the heavens there is one heaven in which there is no space a hand span wide but there is the forehead or the foot of an angel on it. \" Then he recited:\nوَمَا مِنَّا إِلَّا لَهُ مَقَامٌ مَعْلُومٌ\n(And there is not one of us (angels) but has his known place;) Sa'id bin Jubayr similarly said:\nوَإِنَّا لَنَحْنُ الصَّافُّونَ\n(And we (angels), we stand in rows.) means, we stand in rows to worship, as we have already seen in the Ayah\nوَالصَّافَّاتِ صَفًّا\n(By those ranged in ranks (or rows)) Abu Nadrah said, \"When the Iqamah had been given, 'Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, would turn to face the people and say: 'Make your rows straight, for Allah wants you to follow the ways of the angels.' Then he would say,\nوَإِنَّا لَنَحْنُ الصَّافُّونَ\n(And verily, we stand in rows;) 'Move back, O so-and-so, move forward, O so-and-so.' Then he would go forward and say 'Allahu Akbar'.\" This was recorded by Ibn Abi Hatim and Ibn Jarir.\nIn Sahih Muslim it is narrated that Hudhayfah, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nفُضِّلْنَا عَلَى النَّاسِ بِثَلَاثٍ: جُعِلَتْ صُفُوفُنَا كَصُفُوفِ الْمَلَائِكَةِ،وَجُعِلَتْ لَنَا الْأَرْضُ مَسْجِدًا، وَتُرْبَتُهَا طَهُورًا\n(We have been favored above mankind in three things: our rows have been made like the rows of the angels; the whole earth has been made a place of prayer for us; and its soil is a means of purification for us.)\"\nوَإِنَّا لَنَحْنُ الْمُسَبِّحُونَ\n(And verily, we indeed are those who glorify.) means, 'we stand in rows and glorify the Lord, praising Him, sanctifying Him and declaring Him to be above any faults or shortcomings. We are servants of Him and in need of Him, humbling ourselves before Him.'\nThe Quraysh wished that They could have a Reminder as had the Men of old\nوَإِنْ كَانُوا لَيَقُولُونَ - لَوْ أَنَّ عِنْدَنَا ذِكْرًا مِنَ الْأَوَّلِينَ - لَكُنَّا عِبَادَ اللَّهِ الْمُخْلَصِينَ\n(And indeed they used to say: \"If we had a reminder as had the men of old, we would have indeed been the chosen servants of Allah!\") means, 'they used to wish – before you, O Muhammad, came to them – that they would have someone to remind them about Allah and what happened in earlier times, and to bring them the Book of Allah.' This is like the Ayat:\nوَأَقْسَمُوا بِاللَّهِ جَهْدَ أَيْمَانِهِمْ لَئِنْ جَاءَهُمْ نَذِيرٌ لَيَكُونُنَّ أَهْدَىٰ مِنْ إِحْدَى الْأُمَمِ ۖ فَلَمَّا جَاءَهُمْ نَذِيرٌ مَا زَادَهُمْ إِلَّا نُفُورًا\n(And they swore by Allah their most binding oath that if a warner came to them, they would be more guided than any of the nations (before them); yet when a warner came to them, it increased in them naught but flight (from the truth).)(35:42), and\nأَنْ تَقُولُوا إِنَّمَا أُنْزِلَ الْكِتَابُ عَلَىٰ طَائِفَتَيْنِ مِنْ قَبْلِنَا وَإِنْ كُنَّا عَنْ دِرَاسَتِهِمْ لَغَافِلِينَ - أَوْ تَقُولُوا لَوْ أَنَّا أُنْزِلَ عَلَيْنَا الْكِتَابُ لَكُنَّا أَهْدَىٰ مِنْهُمْ ۚ فَقَدْ جَاءَكُمْ بَيِّنَةٌ مِنْ رَبِّكُمْ وَهُدًى وَرَحْمَةٌ ۚ فَمَنْ أَظْلَمُ مِمَّنْ كَذَّبَ بِآيَاتِ اللَّهِ وَصَدَفَ عَنْهَا ۗ سَنَجْزِي الَّذِينَ يَصْدِفُونَ عَنْ آيَاتِنَا سُوءَ الْعَذَابِ بِمَا كَانُوا يَصْدِفُونَ\n(Lest you should say: \"The Book was sent down only to two sects before us, and for our part, we were in fact unaware of what they studied.\" Or lest you should say: \"If only the Book had been sent down to us, we would surely have been better guided than they.\" So now has come unto you a clear proof from your Lord, and a form of guidance and a mercy. Who then does more wrong than one who rejects the Ayat of Allah and turns away therefrom? We shall requite those who turn away from Our Ayat with an evil torment, because of their turning away.)(6:156-157) Allah says here:\nفَكَفَرُوا بِهِ ۖ فَسَوْفَ يَعْلَمُونَ\n(But they disbelieve therein, so they will come to know!) This is a definite and stern threat because of their disbelief in their Lord and their rejection of His Messenger ﷺ.","href":"/tafsir/37?verse=161","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:37:171","title":"Ibn Kathir · 37:171–179","text":"And, verily, Our Word has gone forth of old for Our servants, the Messengers (171)That they verily would be made triumphant (172)And that Our hosts! they verily would be the victors (173)So, turn away from them for a while (174)And watch them and they shall see (175)Do they seek to hasten on Our torment (176)Then, when it descends in their courtyard, evil will be the morning for those who had warned (177)So, turn away from them for a while (178)And watch and they shall see (179)\nThe Promise of Victory and the Command to turn away from Idolators\nAllah says,\nوَلَقَدْ سَبَقَتْ كَلِمَتُنَا لِعِبَادِنَا الْمُرْسَلِينَ\n(And, verily, Our Word has gone forth of old for Our servants, the Messengers,) meaning, it has already been stated in the first decree that the Messengers and their followers will ultimately prevail in this world and the Hereafter. This is like the Ayah:\nكَتَبَ اللَّهُ لَأَغْلِبَنَّ أَنَا وَرُسُلِي ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ قَوِيٌّ عَزِيزٌ\n(Allah has decreed: \"Verily, it is I and My Messengers who shall be the victorious.\" Verily, Allah is All-Powerful, Almighty.)(58:21), and\nإِنَّا لَنَنْصُرُ رُسُلَنَا وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَيَوْمَ يَقُومُ الْأَشْهَادُ\n(Verily, We will indeed make victorious Our Messengers and those who believe in this world's life and on the Day when the witnesses will stand forth.)(40:51).\nوَلَقَدْ سَبَقَتْ كَلِمَتُنَا لِعِبَادِنَا الْمُرْسَلِينَ - إِنَّهُمْ لَهُمُ الْمَنْصُورُونَ\n(And, verily, Our Word has gone forth of old for Our servants, the Messengers, that they verily would be made triumphant,) meaning, 'in this world and in the Hereafter, as We have already stated that they would prevail over their people who disbelieved in them and went against them, and how Allah destroyed the disbelievers and saved His believing servants.'\nوَإِنَّ جُنْدَنَا لَهُمُ الْغَالِبُونَ\n(And that Our hosts they verily would be the victors.) means, that they would ultimately prevail.\nفَتَوَلَّ عَنْهُمْ حَتَّىٰ حِينٍ\n(So turn away from them for a while,) means, 'bear their annoyance with patience and wait until an appointed time, when We shall cause you to prevail and will grant you victory.'\nوَأَبْصِرْهُمْ فَسَوْفَ يُبْصِرُونَ\n(And watch them and they shall see!) means, 'watch them and see what will happen to them by way of punishment for their opposition towards you and their disbelief in you.' Allah said, as a threat and a warning,\nفَسَوْفَ يُبْصِرُونَ\n(and they shall see!). Then Allah says:\nأَفَبِعَذَابِنَا يَسْتَعْجِلُونَ\n(Do they seek to hasten on Our torment?) meaning, 'they seek to hasten on the punishment because they disbelieve in you, and Allah is angry with them because of that and will make them suffer the consequences, and because of their disbelief and stubbornness, He will hasten on the punishment.'\nفَإِذَا نَزَلَ بِسَاحَتِهِمْ فَسَاءَ صَبَاحُ الْمُنْذَرِينَ\n(Then, when it descends in their courtyard, evil will be the morning for those who had been warned!) means, when the punishment comes down to the place where they are, terrible will be the day of their punishment and destruction. As-Suddi said:\nفَإِذَا نَزَلَ بِسَاحَتِهِمْ\n(Then, when it descends in their courtyard,) means, in their homes;\nفَسَاءَ صَبَاحُ الْمُنْذَرِينَ\n(evil will be the morning for those who had been warned!) means, how terrible that morning will be for them. It was reported in the Two Sahihs that Anas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"On the morning of Khaybar, when the people came out with their tools (to go about their daily work) and saw the (Muslim) army, they went back and said, 'Muhammad by Allah! Muhammad and the army!' The Prophet ﷺ said:\nاللهُ أَكْبَرُ، خَرِبَتْ خَيْبَرُ، إِنَّا إِذَا نَزَلْنَا بِسَاحَةِ قَوْمٍ فَسَاءَ صَبَاحُ الْمُنْذَرِينَ\n(Allahu Akbar! Khaybar has been destroyed. Then, when it descends in the courtyard of any people, evil will be the morning for those who had been warned!)\"\nوَتَوَلَّ عَنْهُمْ حَتَّىٰ حِينٍ - وَأَبْصِرْ فَسَوْفَ يُبْصِرُونَ\n(So turn away from them for a while, and watch and they shall see!) This is a reiteration of the command stated above. And Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/37?verse=171","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:37:180","title":"Ibn Kathir · 37:180–182","text":"Glorified be your Lord, the Lord of Al-'Izzah! (He is free) from what they attribute unto Him (180)And Salam (peace!) be on the Messengers (181)And all the praises and thanks be to Allah, Lord of all that exists (182)\nAllah glorified Himself and states that He is far above what the lying wrongdoers say about Him; glorified and sanctified and exalted be He far above what they say. Allah says:\nسُبْحَانَ رَبِّكَ رَبِّ الْعِزَّةِ\n(Glorified be your Lord, the Lord of Al-'Izzah!) meaning, the Owner of might and power Whom none can resist.\nعَمَّا يَصِفُونَ\n((He is free) from what they attribute unto Him!) means, from what these lying fabricators say.\nوَسَلَامٌ عَلَى الْمُرْسَلِينَ\n(And Salam be on the Messengers!) means, may the peace of Allah be upon them in this world and in the Hereafter, because what they say about their Lord is sound, correct and true.\nوَالْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(And all the praises and thanks be to Allah, Lord of all that exists.) means, praise be to Him at the beginning and end of all things. Because Tasbih (glorification) implies a declaration of being free from all shortcomings, the two ideas appear together here and in many places in the Qur'an. Allah says:\nسُبْحَانَ رَبِّكَ رَبِّ الْعِزَّةِ عَمَّا يَصِفُونَ - وَسَلَامٌ عَلَى الْمُرْسَلِينَ - وَالْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(Glorified be your Lord, the Lord of Al-'Izzah! (He is free) from what they attribute unto Him! And Salam (peace!) be on the Messengers! And all the praises and thanks be to Allah, Lord of all that exists.) Sa'id bin Abi 'Arubah narrated that Qatadah said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nإِذَا سَلَّمْتُمْ عَلَيَّ، فَسَلِّمُوا عَلَى الْمُرْسَلِينَ، فَأَنَا رَسُولٌ مِنَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ\n(When you send Salam on me, send Salam on all the Messengers, for I am one of the Messengers.)\" This was recorded by Ibn Jarir and Ibn Abi Hatim.\nAbu Muhammad Al-Baghawi recorded in his Tafsir that 'Ali, may Allah be pleased with him, said: \"Whoever wants a greater measure of reward on the Day of Resurrection, let him say at the end of any gathering,\nسُبْحَانَ رَبِّكَ رَبِّ الْعِزَّةِ عَمَّا يَصِفُونَ - وَسَلَامٌ عَلَى الْمُرْسَلِينَ - وَالْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(Glorified be your Lord, the Lord of honor, glory and power! (He is free) from what they attribute unto Him! And Salam (peace!) be on the Messengers! And all the praises and thanks be to Allah, Lord of all that exists).\"\nOther Hadiths concerning the expiation for any wrongs that may have occurred during a gathering prescribe saying the words: \"Glory be to You, O Allah, and praise. There is no God except You; I seek your forgiveness and I repent to you. \" I have written a chapter dealing exclusively with this topic.\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat As-Saffat. And Allah, may He be glorified and exalted, knows best.","href":"/tafsir/37?verse=180","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:38:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 38:1–3","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nص ۚ وَالْقُرْآنِ ذِي الذِّكْرِ - بَلِ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا فِي عِزَّةٍ وَشِقَاقٍ - كَمْ أَهْلَكْنَا مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ مِنْ قَرْنٍ فَنَادَوْا وَلَاتَ حِينَ مَنَاصٍ\n(1. Sad. By the Qur'an full of reminding.)(2. Those who disbelieve are in false pride and opposition.)(3. How many a generation have We destroyed before them! And they cried out when there was no longer time for escape.)\nWe have already discussed the separate letters in the the beginning of the Tafsir of Surat Al-Baqarah, and there is no need to repeat it here.\nوَالْقُرْآنِ ذِي الذِّكْرِ\n(By the Qur'an full of reminding.) means, by the Qur'an which includes all that is in it as a reminder and a benefit to people in this life and the Hereafter. Ad-Dahhak said that the Ayah,\nذِي الذِّكْرِ\n(full of reminding.) is like the Ayah,\nلَقَدْ أَنْزَلْنَا إِلَيْكُمْ كِتَابًا فِيهِ ذِكْرُكُمْ ۖ\n(Indeed, We have sent down for you (O mankind) a Book in which there is Dhikrukum)(21:10). i.e., your reminder. This was also the view of Qatadah and of Ibn Jarir. Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Isma'il bin Abi Khalid, Ibn 'Uyaynah, Abu Husayn, Abu Salih and As-Suddi said:\nذِي الذِّكْرِ\n(full of reminding.) \"Full of honor,\" i.e., of high standing. There is no contradiction between the two views, because it is a noble Book which includes reminders and leaves no excuse and brings warnings. The reason for this oath is to be found in the Ayah:\nإِنْ كُلٌّ إِلَّا كَذَّبَ الرُّسُلَ فَحَقَّ عِقَابِ\n(Not one of them but denied the Messengers; therefore My torment was justified.)(38:14). Qatadah said, \"The reason for it is to be found in the Ayah:\nبَلِ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا فِي عِزَّةٍ وَشِقَاقٍ\n(Nay, those who disbelieve are in false pride and opposition).\" This was the view favored by Ibn Jarir.\nبَلِ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا فِي عِزَّةٍ وَشِقَاقٍ\n(Nay, those who disbelieve are in false pride and opposition.) means, in this Qur'an there is a reminder for those who will be reminded and a lesson for those who will learn a lesson, but the disbelievers will not benefit from it because they\nفِي عِزَّةٍ\n(are in false pride) meaning, arrogance and tribalism,\nوَشِقَاقٍ\n(and opposition.) means, they are stubbornly opposed to it and go against it. Then Allah scares them with news of how the nations who came before them were destroyed because of their opposition to the Messengers and their disbelief in the Scriptures that were revealed from heaven. Allah says:\nكَمْ أَهْلَكْنَا مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ مِنْ قَرْنٍ\n(How many a generation have We destroyed before them!) meaning, disbelieving nations.\nفَنَادَوْا\n(And they cried out) means, when the punishment came to them, they called for help and cried out to Allah, but that did not save them at all. This is like the Ayat:\nفَلَمَّا أَحَسُّوا بَأْسَنَا إِذَا هُمْ مِنْهَا يَرْكُضُونَ - لَا تَرْكُضُوا وَارْجِعُوا إِلَىٰ مَا أُتْرِفْتُمْ فِيهِ وَمَسَاكِنِكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُسْأَلُونَ\n(Then, when they perceived (saw) Our torment, behold, they (tried to) flee from it. Flee not, but return to that wherein you lived a luxurious life, and to your homes, in order that you may be questioned.)(21:12-13).\nAbu Dawud At-Tayalisi recorded that At-Tamimi said, \"I asked Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, about the Ayah:\nفَنَادَوْا وَلَاتَ حِينَ مَنَاصٍ\n(And they cried out when there was no longer time for escape.) He said that it was not the time for them to call or flee or escape. Muhammad bin Ka'b said, concerning the Ayah:\nفَنَادَوْا وَلَاتَ حِينَ مَنَاصٍ\n(And they cried out when there was no longer time for escape.) \"They called for Tawhid when their lives were over, and they resorted to repentance when their lives were over.\"\nQatadah said, \"When they saw the punishment, they wanted to repent when there was no longer time to call out.\" Mujahid said:\nفَنَادَوْا وَلَاتَ حِينَ مَنَاصٍ\n(And they cried out when there was no longer time for escape.) \"It was not the time to flee or escape.\" Allah says:\nوَلَاتَ حِينَ مَنَاصٍ\n(when there was no longer time for escape.) meaning, there was no time to escape or run away; and Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/38?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:38:4","title":"Ibn Kathir · 38:4–11","text":"And they wonder that a warner has come to them from among themselves. And the disbelievers say: \"This is a sorcerer, a liar. (4)\"Has he made the gods into One God. Verily, this is a curious thing! (5)And the leaders among them went about (saying): \"Go on, and remain constant to your gods! Verily, this is a thing designed! (6)\"We have not heard (the like) of this in the religion of these later days. This is nothing but an invention! (7)\"Has the Reminder been sent down to him (alone) from among us?\" Nay, but they are in doubt about My Reminder! Nay, but they have not tasted (My) torment (8)Or have they the treasures of the mercy of your Lord, the Almighty, the Real Bestower (9)Or is it that the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them is theirs If so, let them ascend up with means (10)They will be a defeated host like the Confederates of the old times (11)\nThe Idolators were amazed at the Message, Tawhid and the Qur'an\nAllah tells us that the idolators wondered at the sending of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ as a bringer of glad tidings and a warner. This is like the Ayah:\nأَكَانَ لِلنَّاسِ عَجَبًا أَنْ أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَىٰ رَجُلٍ مِنْهُمْ أَنْ أَنْذِرِ النَّاسَ وَبَشِّرِ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَنَّ لَهُمْ قَدَمَ صِدْقٍ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِمْ ۗ قَالَ الْكَافِرُونَ إِنَّ هَٰذَا لَسَاحِرٌ مُبِينٌ\n(Is it a wonder for mankind that We have sent Our revelation to a man from among themselves (saying): \"Warn mankind, and give good news to those who believe that they shall have with their Lord the rewards of their good deeds?\" (But) the disbelievers say: \"This is indeed an evident sorcerer!\")(10:2). And Allah says here:\nوَعَجِبُوا أَنْ جَاءَهُمْ مُنْذِرٌ مِنْهُمْ ۖ\n(And they wonder that a warner has come to them from among themselves.) meaning, a human being like themselves.\nوَقَالَ الْكَافِرُونَ هَٰذَا سَاحِرٌ كَذَّابٌ - أَجَعَلَ الْآلِهَةَ إِلَٰهًا وَاحِدًا ۖ\n(And the disbelievers said: \"This is a sorcerer, a liar. Has he made the gods into One God?\") meaning, does he claim that the One Who is to worshipped is One and there is no god besides Him? The idolators – may Allah curse them – denounced that and were amazed at the idea of giving up Shirk, because they had learned from their forefathers to worship idols and their hearts were filled with love for that. When the Messenger ﷺ called them to rid their hearts of that and to worship Allah Alone, this was too much for them and they were astounded by it. They said:\nأَجَعَلَ الْآلِهَةَ إِلَٰهًا وَاحِدًا ۖ إِنَّ هَٰذَا لَشَيْءٌ عُجَابٌ - وَانْطَلَقَ الْمَلَأُ مِنْهُمْ\n(\"Has he made the gods into One God? Verily, this is a curious thing!\" And the leaders among them went about) meaning the chiefs and masters and nobles,\nامْشُوا\n((saying): \"Go on...\") meaning, 'persist in your religion,'\nوَاصْبِرُوا عَلَىٰ آلِهَتِكُمْ\n(and remain constant to your gods!), meaning, 'do not respond to Muhammad's call to Tawhid.'\nإِنَّ هَٰذَا لَشَيْءٌ يُرَادُ\n(Verily, this is a thing designed!) Ibn Jarir said, \"The Tawhid to which Muhammad is calling you is something by which he wishes to gain power over you, and exalt his own position, so that he will have followers among you, but we will not respond to him.\"\nThe Reason for the Revelation of These Ayat\nAbu Ja'far bin Jarir recorded that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"When Abu Talib fell sick, some of the people of the Quraysh, including Abu Jahl, entered upon him and said, 'Your brother's son is insulting our gods; he does such and such and says such and such. Why don't you send for him and tell him not to do that?' So he sent for the Prophet ﷺ and he entered the house. There was space enough for one man to sit between them and Abu Talib, and Abu Jahl, may Allah curse him, was afraid that if [the Prophet ﷺ] were to sit beside Abu Talib he would be more lenient with him, so he jumped up and sat in that spot, and the Messenger of Allah ﷺ could find nowhere to sit near his uncle, so he sat by the door. Abu Talib said to him, 'O son of my brother, why are your people complaining about you and claiming that you insult their gods and say such and such?' They made so many complaints against him. Thereupon, he ﷺ said,\nيَا عَمِّ إِنِّي أُرِيدُهُمْ عَلَى كَلِمَةٍ وَاحِدَةٍ يَقُولُونَهَا تَدِينُ لَهُمْ بِهَا الْعَرَبُ، وَتُؤَدِّي إِلَيْهِمْ بِهَا الْعَجَمُ الْجِزْيَةَ\n(O uncle, all I want from them is one word which, if they say it, the Arabs will become their followers and the non-Arabs will pay Jizyah to them.) They were worried about what he said, so they said, 'One word? Yes, by your father, (we will say) ten words! What is it?' Abu Talib said, 'What word is it, O son of my brother?' He ﷺ said,\nلَا إِلَهَ إِلَّا اللهُ\n(La ilaha illallah.) They stood up in agitation, brushing down their clothes, saying,\nأَجَعَلَ الْآلِهَةَ إِلَٰهًا وَاحِدًا ۖ إِنَّ هَٰذَا لَشَيْءٌ عُجَابٌ\n(Has he made the gods into One God. Verily, this is a curious thing!) Then this passage was revealed, from this Ayah to the Ayah:\nبَلْ لَمَّا يَذُوقُوا عَذَابِ\n(Nay, but they have not tasted (My) torment!)\" This is the wording of Abu Kurayb. Something similar was also recorded by Imam Ahmad and An-Nasa'i, and At-Tirmidhi said, \"Hasan.\"\nمَا سَمِعْنَا بِهَٰذَا فِي الْمِلَّةِ الْآخِرَةِ\n(We have not heard (the like) of this in the religion of these later days.) means, 'we have not heard anything like this Tawhid to which Muhammad calls us in the religion of these later days.'\nAl-'Awfi reported that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"We have not heard of this from the religion of these later days (meaning Christianity); if this Qur'an were true, the Christians would have told us about it.\"\nإِنْ هَٰذَا إِلَّا اخْتِلَاقٌ\n(This is nothing but an invention!) Mujahid and Qatadah said, \"A lie.\" Ibn 'Abbas said, \"A fabrication.\"\nأَأُنْزِلَ عَلَيْهِ الذِّكْرُ مِنْ بَيْنِنَا ۚ\n(Has the Reminder been sent down to him (alone) from among us?)\nThey thought it unlikely that he would be singled out from among them to receive the Qur'an. This is like the Ayat:\nلَوْلَا نُزِّلَ هَٰذَا الْقُرْآنُ عَلَىٰ رَجُلٍ مِنَ الْقَرْيَتَيْنِ عَظِيمٍ\n(And they say: \"Why is not this Qur'an sent down to some great man of the two towns?\")(43:31). Allah said:\nأَهُمْ يَقْسِمُونَ رَحْمَتَ رَبِّكَ ۚ نَحْنُ قَسَمْنَا بَيْنَهُمْ مَعِيشَتَهُمْ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا ۚ وَرَفَعْنَا بَعْضَهُمْ فَوْقَ بَعْضٍ دَرَجَاتٍ\n(Is it they who would portion out the mercy of your Lord? It is We Who portion out between them their livelihood in this world, and We raised some of them above others in ranks)(43:32).\nWhen they said this, it indicated their ignorance and lack of understanding since they thought it was unlikely that the Qur'an would be revealed to the Messenger ﷺ and not to somebody else.\nبَلْ لَمَّا يَذُوقُوا عَذَابِ\n(Nay, but they have not tasted (My) torment!) means, they say this because they have not yet tasted the punishment and vengeance of Allah. But they will come to know the consequences of what they say and what they rejected on the Day when they are herded into the fire of Hell. Then Allah points out that He is the One Who is in control of His Creation and Who does whatever He wills, Who gives whatever He wants to whomever He wants, and honors whomever He wants and humiliates whomever He wants, and guides whomever He wants and misguides whomever He wants, and sends the Ruh (Jibril) by His command upon whomsoever He wants among His servants, and seals the hearts of whomever He wants, so no one can guide him apart from Allah. His servants do not possess any power and have no control over His dominion, not even a speck of dust's weight; they do not possess even a thin membrane over a date stone. Allah says, denouncing them:\nأَمْ عِنْدَهُمْ خَزَائِنُ رَحْمَةِ رَبِّكَ الْعَزِيزِ الْوَهَّابِ\n(Or have they the treasures of the mercy of your Lord, the Almighty, the Real Bestower?) meaning, the Almighty Whose might cannot be overcome, the Bestower Who gives whatever He wills to whomsoever He wills. This Ayah is like the Ayah:\nأَمْ لَهُمْ نَصِيبٌ مِنَ الْمُلْكِ فَإِذًا لَا يُؤْتُونَ النَّاسَ نَقِيرًا - أَمْ يَحْسُدُونَ النَّاسَ عَلَىٰ مَا آتَاهُمُ اللَّهُ مِنْ فَضْلِهِ ۖ فَقَدْ آتَيْنَا آلَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ الْكِتَابَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ وَآتَيْنَاهُمْ مُلْكًا عَظِيمًا - فَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ آمَنَ بِهِ وَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ صَدَّ عَنْهُ ۚ وَكَفَىٰ بِجَهَنَّمَ سَعِيرًا\n(Or have they a share in the dominion? Then in that case they would not give mankind even a speck on the back of a date stone. Or do they envy men for what Allah has given them of His bounty? Then, We had already given the family of Ibrahim the Book and Al-Hikmah, and conferred upon them a great kingdom. Of them were (some) who believed in him, and of them were (some) who averted their faces from him; and enough is Hell for burning (them).)(4:53-55).\nقُلْ لَوْ أَنْتُمْ تَمْلِكُونَ خَزَائِنَ رَحْمَةِ رَبِّي إِذًا لَأَمْسَكْتُمْ خَشْيَةَ الْإِنْفَاقِ ۚ وَكَانَ الْإِنْسَانُ قَتُورًا\n(Say: \"If you possessed the treasure of the mercy of my Lord (wealth), then you would surely hold back for fear of (being exhausted), and man is ever miserly!\")(17:100).\nThis is after Allah tells us the story of how the disbeliever denied the sending of a human Messenger, as He tells us that the people of Salih, peace be upon him, said:\nأَأُلْقِيَ الذِّكْرُ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ بَيْنِنَا بَلْ هُوَ كَذَّابٌ أَشِرٌ - سَيَعْلَمُونَ غَدًا مَنِ الْكَذَّابُ الْأَشِرُ\n(\"Is it that the Reminder is sent to him alone from among us Nay, he is an insolent liar!\" Tomorrow they will come to know who is the liar, the insolent one!)(54:25-26)\nأَمْ لَهُمْ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا ۖ فَلْيَرْتَقُوا فِي الْأَسْبَابِ\n(Or is it that the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them is theirs? If so, let them ascend up with means.) means, if they have that, then let them ascend up with means. Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, Mujahid, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Qatadah and others said, \"The ways to the heaven.\"\nAd-Dahhak, said, \"Then let them ascend into the seventh heaven.\" Then Allah says,\nجُنْدٌ مَا هُنَالِكَ مَهْزُومٌ مِنَ الْأَحْزَابِ\n(they will be a defeated host like the Confederates of the old times.) meaning, these hosts of disbelievers who are in false pride and opposition will be defeated and overwhelmed and disgraced, just as the Confederates of the old times were disgraced before them. This Ayah is like the Ayah:\nأَمْ يَقُولُونَ نَحْنُ جَمِيعٌ مُنْتَصِرٌ - سَيُهْزَمُ الْجَمْعُ وَيُوَلُّونَ الدُّبُرَ\n(Or say they: \"We are a great multitude, victorious?\" Their multitude will be put to flight, and they will show their backs.)(54:44-45) – which is what happened on the day of Badr –\nبَلِ السَّاعَةُ مَوْعِدُهُمْ وَالسَّاعَةُ أَدْهَىٰ وَأَمَرُّ\n(Nay, but the Hour is their appointed time, and the Hour will be more grievous and more bitter.)(54:46)","href":"/tafsir/38?verse=4","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:38:12","title":"Ibn Kathir · 38:12–16","text":"Before them denied – the people of Nuh; and 'Ad; and Fir'awn the man of stakes (12)And Thamud, and the people of Lut, and the Dwellers of Al-Aykah; such were the Confederates (13)Not one of them but denied the Messengers; therefore My torment was justified (14)And these only wait for a single Sayhah there will be no pause or ending thereto (15)They say: \"Our Lord! Hasten to us Qittana before the Day of Reckoning! (16)Be patient of what they say.. ()\nA Reminder of Those Who were destroyed among the Previous Nations\nAllah tells us about those past nations and the punishment and vengeance that struck them for their going against the Messengers and disbelieving in the Prophets, peace be upon them. We have already seen their stories in detail in numerous places (in the Qur'an). Allah says:\nأُولَٰئِكَ الْأَحْزَابُ\n(such were the Confederates.) meaning, 'they were greater and stronger than you, they had more wealth and children, but that did not protect them from the punishment of Allah at all when the command of your Lord came to pass.' Allah says:\nإِنْ كُلٌّ إِلَّا كَذَّبَ الرُّسُلَ فَحَقَّ عِقَابِ\n(Not one of them but denied the Messengers; therefore My torment was justified.)\nThe reason for their destruction was their disbelief in the Messengers, so let those who are addressed here beware and be afraid.'\nوَمَا يَنْظُرُ هَٰؤُلَاءِ إِلَّا صَيْحَةً وَاحِدَةً مَا لَهَا مِنْ فَوَاقٍ\n(And these only wait for a single Sayhah there will be no pause or ending thereto.)\nMalik narrated from Zayd bin Aslam; \"There will none who can avert it,\" i.e., they will only wait for the Hour that it shall come upon them suddenly while they perceive not. But some of its portents have already come, i.e., it has drawn nigh. This Sayhah is the blast on the Trumpet when Allah will command Israfil to sound a long note, and there will be no one in the heaven or on earth but will be terrified, except those whom Allah spares.\nوَقَالُوا رَبَّنَا عَجِّلْ لَنَا قِطَّنَا قَبْلَ يَوْمِ الْحِسَابِ\n(They say: \"Our Lord! Hasten to us Qittana before the Day of Reckoning!\")\nHere Allah denounces the idolators for calling for the punishment to be hastened upon themselves. Qitt refers to a book or record, or it was said that it means one's allotted share or fortune. Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, Mujahid, Ad-Dahhak, Al-Hasan and others said, \"They asked for the punishment to be hastened.\" Qatadah added, this is like when they said:\nاللَّهُمَّ إِنْ كَانَ هَٰذَا هُوَ الْحَقَّ مِنْ عِنْدِكَ فَأَمْطِرْ عَلَيْنَا حِجَارَةً مِنَ السَّمَاءِ أَوِ ائْتِنَا بِعَذَابٍ أَلِيمٍ\n(\"O Allah! If this (the Qur'an) is indeed the truth from You, then rain down stones on us from the sky or bring on us a painful torment.\")(8:32).\nIt was also said that they asked for their share of Paradise to be hastened, if it really existed, so that they might have their share in this world; they said this because they thought it unlikely to exist and they disbelieved in it. Ibn Jarir said, \"They asked for whatever they deserved, good or bad, to be hastened for them in this world.\" What he said is good, and A-Dahhak and Isma'il bin Abi Khalid based their views on it. And Allah knows best. They said this by way of mockery and disbelief, so Allah commanded His Messenger ﷺ to be patient in the face of their insults, and He gave him the glad tidings that his patience would be rewarded with victory and success.","href":"/tafsir/38?verse=12","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:38:17","title":"Ibn Kathir · 38:17–20","text":"..And remember Our slave Dawud, endued with Al-Ayd. Verily, he was ever oft-returning in all matters and in repentance (17)Verily, We made the mountains to glorify Our praises with him in the 'Ashi and Ishraq (18)And (so did) the birds assembled, all obedient to him (19)We made his kingdom strong and gave him Al-Hikmah and sound judgement in speech and decision (20)\nDawud, peace be upon him\nAllah tells us that His servant and Messenger Dawud, peace be upon him, was endued with power. Al-Ayd means strength in knowledge and action. Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, As-Suddi and Ibn Zayd said, \"Al-Ayd means strength.\"\nMujahid said, \"Al-Ayd means strength in obedience to Allah.\" Qatadah said, \"Dawud, peace be upon him, was given strength in worship and the proper understanding of Islam.\" He told us that he, peace be upon him, used to spend a third of the night in prayer, and he fasted for half a lifetime. This was reported in the Two Sahihs, where it is recorded that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nأَحَبُّ الصَّلَاةِ إِلَى اللهِ تَعَالَى صَلَاةُ دَاوُدَ، وَأَحَبُّ الصِّيَامِ إِلَى اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ صِيَامُ دَاوُدَ، كَانَ يَنَامُ نِصْفَ اللَّيْلِ، وَيَقُومُ ثُلُثَهُ، وَيَنَامُ سُدُسَهُ، وَكَانَ يَصُومُ يَوْمًا وَيُفْطِرُ يَوْمًا، وَلَا يَفِرُّ إِذَا لَاقَى، وَأَنَّهُ كَانَ أَوَّابًا\n(The most beloved of prayer to Allah is the prayer of Dawud, and the most beloved of fasting to Allah is the fasting of Dawud. He used to sleep for half of the night, stand in prayer for a third of the night, then sleep for a sixth of the night, and he used to fast alternate days. He never fled from the battlefield, and he always turned to Allah.) which means that he turned to Allah with regard to all of his affairs.\nإِنَّا سَخَّرْنَا الْجِبَالَ مَعَهُ يُسَبِّحْنَ بِالْعَشِيِّ وَالْإِشْرَاقِ\n(Verily, We made the mountains to glorify Our praises with him in the 'Ashi and Ishraq.) means, Allah caused the mountains to glorify His praises with him at sunrise and at the end of the day. This is like the Ayah:\nيَا جِبَالُ أَوِّبِي مَعَهُ وَالطَّيْرَ ۖ\n(O you mountains. Glorify (Allah) with him! And you birds (also)!)(34:10).\nThe birds also used to glorify Allah's praises with him. If a bird flew by him and heard him chanting the Zabur, it would not go away; instead it would stay hovering in the air, glorifying Allah along with him. And the lofty mountains would respond to him and echo his glorification of Allah. Ibn Jarir recorded from 'Abdullah bin Al-Harith bin Nawfal that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, did not pray Ad-Duha. ['Abdullah said:] \"So I took him to Umm Hani, may Allah be pleased with her, and said to her, 'Tell him what you told me.' She said, 'The Messenger of Allah ﷺ entered my house on the day of the conquest of Makkah. He called for water to be poured into a large bowl, then he called for a garment which he used as a screen between me and him, and he washed himself. Then he sprinkled water around the house and prayed eight Rak'ahs. This was Ad-Duha, and its standing, bowing, prostration and sitting were all equal in brevity.' Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, left, saying, 'I have read the Qur'an from cover to cover, and I never knew about Salat Ad-Duha until now!' Then he recited:\nيُسَبِّحْنَ بِالْعَشِيِّ وَالْإِشْرَاقِ\n(glorify Our praises with him in the 'Ashi and Ishraq.) I used to say, \"What is Salat Al-Ishraq, but now I know what it is.\"\nوَالطَّيْرَ مَحْشُورَةً ۖ\n(And (so did) the birds assembled,) meaning, hovering in the air.\nكُلٌّ لَهُ أَوَّابٌ\n(all obedient to him.) means, they obeyed him and followed him in glorifying Allah. Sa'id bin Jubayr, Qatadah and Malik said, narrating from Zayd bin Aslam and Ibn Zayd:\nكُلٌّ لَهُ أَوَّابٌ\n(all obedient to him.) means, \"Following his commands.\"\nوَشَدَدْنَا مُلْكَهُ\n(We made his kingdom strong) means, 'We gave him complete dominion with all that kings need.' Ibn Abi Najih reported that Mujahid said, \"He was the strongest and most powerful of the people of this world.\"\nوَآتَيْنَاهُ الْحِكْمَةَ\n(and gave him Al-Hikmah) Mujahid said, \"This means understanding, reason and intelligence.\" Qatadah said, \"The Book of Allah and following what is in it.\" As-Suddi said:\nالْحِكْمَةَ\n(Al-Hikmah) \"Prophethood.\"\nوَفَصْلَ الْخِطَابِ\n(and sound judgement) Shurayh Al-Qadi and Ash-Sha'bi said, \"Sound judgement is testimony and oaths.\" Qatadah said, \"Two witnesses for the plaintiff or an oath on the part of the defendant is meaning of sound judgement.\" This is the sound judgement which the Prophets and Messengers judged and the believers and righteous accepted. This is the basis of this Ummah's judicial system until the Day of Resurrection. This was the view of Abu 'Abdur-Rahman As-Sulami. Mujahid and As-Suddi said, \"It means passing the right judgement and understanding the case.\" Mujahid also said, \"It is soundness in speech and in judgement, and this includes all of the above.\" This is what is meant, and this is the view favored by Ibn Jarir.","href":"/tafsir/38?verse=17","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:38:21","title":"Ibn Kathir · 38:21–25","text":"And has the news of the litigants reached you? When they climbed over the wall into (his) Mihrab (private chamber of worship)(21)When they entered in upon Dawud, he was terrified of them. They said: \"Fear not! (We are) two litigants, one of us has wronged the other, therefore judge between us with truth, and treat us not with injustice, and guide us to the right way (22)Verily, this my brother (in religion) has ninety-nine ewes, while I have (only) one ewe, and he says: \"Hand it over to me, and he overpowered me in speech. (23)[Dawud] said: \"He has wronged you in demanding your ewe in addition to his ewes. And, verily, many partners oppress one another, except those who believe and do righteous good deeds, and they are few.\" And Dawud guessed that We have tried him and he sought forgiveness of his Lord, and he fell down prostrate and turned (to Allah) in repentance (24)So, We forgave him that, and verily, for him is a near access to Us, and a good place of return (25)\nThe Story of the Two Litigants\nIn discussing this passage, the scholars of Tafsir mention a story which is mostly based upon Isra'iliyat narrations. Nothing has been reported about this from the Infallible Prophet ﷺ that we could accept as true. But Ibn Abi Hatim narrated a Hadith whose chain of narration cannot be regarded as Sahih because it is reported by Yazid Ar-Raqashi from Anas, may Allah be pleased with him. Although Yazid was one of the righteous, his Hadiths are regarded as weak by the Imams. So, it is better to speak briefly of this story and refer knowledge of it to Allah, may He be exalted. For the Qur'an is true and what it contains is also true.\nفَفَزِعَ مِنْهُمْ\n(he was terrified of them.) This was because he was in his Mihrab (private chamber). That was the noblest part of his house, where he commanded that no one should enter upon him that day. So, he did not realize that these two people had climbed the fence surrounding his Mihrab (private chamber) to ask him about their case.\nوَعَزَّنِي فِي الْخِطَابِ\n(and he overpowered me in speech.) means, 'he defeated me.'\nوَظَنَّ دَاوُودُ أَنَّمَا فَتَنَّاهُ\n(And Dawud guessed that We have tried him)\nAli bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas said that this means, \"We tested him.\"\nوَخَرَّ رَاكِعًا وَأَنَابَ\n(and he fell down prostrate and turned (to Allah) in repentance.)\nفَغَفَرْنَا لَهُ ذَٰلِكَ ۖ\n(So, We forgave him that,)\nThe Sajdah in Surah Sad\nThe performance of Sajdah in Surah Sad is not one of the obligatory locations; it is a prostration of thanks (Sajdat Shukr). The evidence for it is the report recorded by Imam Ahmad from Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, who said; \"The prostration in Surah Sad is not one of the obligatory prostrations; I saw the Messenger of Allah ﷺ prostrating in this Surah.\" This was also recorded by Al-Bukhari, Abu Dawud, At-Tirmidhi, and An-Nasa'i in his Tafsir. At-Tirmidhi said, \"Hasan Sahih.\" In his Tafsir of this Ayah, An-Nasa'i also recorded that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Prophet ﷺ prostrated in Sad, and he said:\nسَجَدَهَا دَاوُدُ عَلَيْهِ الصَّلَاةُ وَالسَّلَامُ تَوْبَةً، وَنَسْجُدُهَا شُكْرًا\n(Dawud prostrated as an act of repentance and we prostrate as an act of thanks.)\"\nThis was recorded only by An-Nasa'i. The men of its chain of narration are all reliable.\nIn his Tafsir of this Ayah, Al-Bukhari recorded that Al-'Awwam said that he asked Mujahid about the prostration in Surah Sad. He said, \"I asked Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, 'Why do you prostrate?' He said, 'Have you not read:\nوَمِنْ ذُرِّيَّتِهِ دَاوُودَ وَسُلَيْمَانَ\n(and among his [Nuh's] progeny Dawud, Sulayman)(6:84)\nأُولَٰئِكَ الَّذِينَ هَدَى اللَّهُ ۖ فَبِهُدَاهُمُ اقْتَدِهْ ۗ\n(They are those whom Allah had guided. So follow their guidance)(6:90). Dawud, peace be upon him, was one of those whom your Prophet ﷺ was commanded to follow. Dawud prostrated here so the Messenger of Allah ﷺ also prostrated here.'\"\nAbu Dawud recorded that Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ recited Sad while he was on the Minbar. When he reached the prostration, he came down from the Minbar and prostrated, and the people prostrated with him. On another occasion when he recited it, he reached the prostration and the people prepared to prostrate. He ﷺ said:\nإِنَّمَا هِيَ تَوْبَةُ نَبِيٍّ، وَلَكِنِّي رَأَيْتُكُمْ تَشَزَّنْتُمْ\n(This is repentance for a Prophet, but I see that you are preparing to prostrate.) Then he came down (from the Minbar) and prostrated.\" This was recorded only by Abu Dawud and its chain of narration meets the conditions of the Two Sahihs.\nوَإِنَّ لَهُ عِنْدَنَا لَزُلْفَىٰ وَحُسْنَ مَآبٍ\n(and verily, for him is a near access to Us, and a good place of (final) return.) means, on the Day of Resurrection, he will have good deeds by virtue of which he will be brought close to Allah, and he will have a good place of (final) return, which means the lofty levels of Paradise, because of his repentance and his perfect justice in his kingdom. As it says in the Sahih:\nالْمُقْسِطُونَ عَلَى مَنَابِرَ مِنْ نُورٍ عَنْ يَمِينِ الرَّحْمٰنِ، وَكِلْتَا يَدَيْهِ يَمِينٌ، الَّذِينَ يُقْسِطُونَ فِي أَهْلِيهِمْ وَمَا وَلُوا\n(Those who are fair and just with their families and those who are under their authority will be on Minbars of light on the right hand of Ar-Rahman, and both His Hands are right Hands.)\"","href":"/tafsir/38?verse=21","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:38:26","title":"Ibn Kathir · 38:26","text":"O Dawud! Verily, We have placed you as a successor on the earth; so judge you between men in truth (and justice) and follow not your desire – for it will mislead you from the path of Allah. Verily, those who wander astray from the path of Allah (shall) have a severe torment, because they forgot the Day of Reckoni (26)\nAdvice to Rulers and Leaders\nThis is advice from Allah, may He be exalted, to those who are in positions of authority. They should rule according to the truth and justice revealed from Him, they should not turn away from it and be led astray from the path of Allah. Allah has issued a stern warning of a severe punishment to those who go astray from His path and forget the Day of Resurrection.\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that Ibrahim Abu Zur'ah, who read the Scripture, reported that Al-Walid bin 'Abd Al-Malik said to him: \"Does anyone have the right to question the Khalifah? You have read the first Scripture and the Qur'an, and you have understood them.\" He replied, \"May I speak, O Commander of the faithful?\" He said, \"Speak, for you are under the protection of Allah.\" I said, \"O Commander of the faithful, are you more dear to Allah, or Dawud, peace be upon him For Allah gave him both prophethood and rulership, then He warned him in His Book:\nيَا دَاوُودُ إِنَّا جَعَلْنَاكَ خَلِيفَةً فِي الْأَرْضِ فَاحْكُمْ بَيْنَ النَّاسِ بِالْحَقِّ وَلَا تَتَّبِعِ الْهَوَىٰ فَيُضِلَّكَ عَنْ سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ ۚ\n(O Dawud ! Verily, We have placed you as a successor on the earth; so judge you between men in truth (and justice) and follow not your desire – for it will mislead you from the path of Allah).\" 'Ikrimah said:\nلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ شَدِيدٌ بِمَا نَسُوا يَوْمَ الْحِسَابِ\n((Those shall) have a severe torment, because they forgot the Day of Reckoning.) \"They will have a severe punishment on the Day of Reckoning because of what they forgot. \" As-Suddi said, \"They will have a severe punishment because of what they neglected to do for the sake of the Day of Reckoning.\" This interpretation is more in accordance with the apparent meaning of the Ayah. And Allah, may He be glorified and exalted, is the Guide to the Truth.","href":"/tafsir/38?verse=26","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:38:27","title":"Ibn Kathir · 38:27–29","text":"And We created not the heaven and the earth and all that is between them without purpose! That is the consideration of those who disbelieve! Then woe to those who disbelieve from the Fire (27)Shall We treat those who believe and do righteous good deeds as those who cause mischief on the earth? Or shall We treat those who have Taqwa as the evildoers (28)(This is) a Book which We have sent down to you, full of blessings, that they may ponder over its Verses, and that men of understanding may remember (29)\nThe Wisdom behind the Creation of This World\nAllah tells us that He did not create the creatures in vain; He created them to worship Him Alone, then He will gather them on the Day of Gathering and will reward the obedient and punish the disbelievers. Allah says:\nوَمَا خَلَقْنَا السَّمَاءَ وَالْأَرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا بَاطِلًا ۚ ذَٰلِكَ ظَنُّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا ۚ\n(And We created not the heaven and the earth and all that is between them without purpose! That is the consideration of those who disbelieve!) meaning, those who do not think that the resurrection and the place of return will occur, but they think that there is nothing after this world.\nفَوَيْلٌ لِلَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنَ النَّارِ\n(Then woe to those who disbelieve from the Fire!) means, woe to them on the Day when they will be resurrected, from the Fire that is prepared for them. Then Allah explains that because of His justice and wisdom, He does not treat the believers and the disbelievers equally. Allah says:\nأَمْ نَجْعَلُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ كَالْمُفْسِدِينَ فِي الْأَرْضِ أَمْ نَجْعَلُ الْمُتَّقِينَ كَالْفُجَّارِ\n(Shall We treat those who believe and do righteous good deeds as those who do mischief on the earth? Or shall We treat Those who have Taqwa as the evildoers?) meaning, 'We shall not do that.' They are not equal before Allah, and since this is the case, there must inevitably be another realm in which those who obey Allah will be rewarded and the wicked will be punished. This teaching indicates to those of a sound mind and upright nature that there must inevitably be a resurrection and recompense. We see evildoers and criminals are prospering and increasing in wealth, children and luxury, until they die in that state. We see oppressed believers dying of grief and distress, so by the wisdom of the All-Wise, All-Knowing, All-Just who does not do even a speck of dust's weight of injustice, there should be a time when the rights of the oppressed are restored with due justice. If this does not happen in this world, there must be another realm where recompense may be made and consolation may be found. The Qur'an teaches sound aims based on a rational way of thinking, so Allah says:\nكِتَابٌ أَنْزَلْنَاهُ إِلَيْكَ مُبَارَكٌ لِيَدَّبَّرُوا آيَاتِهِ وَلِيَتَذَكَّرَ أُولُو الْأَلْبَابِ\n((This is) a Book which We have sent down to you, full of blessings, that they may ponder over its Ayat, and that men of understanding may remember.) meaning, those who are possessed of wisdom and reason.","href":"/tafsir/38?verse=27","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:38:30","title":"Ibn Kathir · 38:30–33","text":"And to Dawud We gave Sulayman. How excellent a servant! Verily, he was ever turning in repentance (to Us)(30)When there were displayed before him, in the afternoon, well trained horses of the highest breed (31)He said: \"I did love the good instead of remembering my Lord,\" till the time was over, and (the sun) had hidden in the veil (of night)(32)Then he said: \"Bring them back to me.\" Then he began to pass his hand over their legs and their necks (33)\nSulayman the Son of Dawud\nAllah tells us that he gave Sulayman to Dawud as a Prophet, as He says elsewhere:\nوَوَرِثَ سُلَيْمَانُ دَاوُودَ ۖ\n(And Sulayman inherited Dawud)(27:16). meaning, he inherited prophethood from him. Dawud had other sons besides Sulayman, for he had one hundred free wives.\nنِعْمَ الْعَبْدُ ۖ إِنَّهُ أَوَّابٌ\n(How excellent a servant! Verily, he was ever oft-returning in repentance (to Us)!) This is praise for Sulayman, because he was very much obedient, worshipping Allah much and always turning to Allah in repentance.\nإِذْ عُرِضَ عَلَيْهِ بِالْعَشِيِّ الصَّافِنَاتُ الْجِيَادُ\n(When there were displayed before him, in the afternoon, well trained horses of the highest breed.) means, these well trained horses were shown to Sulayman, peace be upon him, in his capacity as king and ruler. Mujahid said, \"They were the kind of horses which stand on three legs and raise the fourth, and they were swift horses.\" This was also the view of several others among the Salaf. Abu Dawud recorded that 'A'ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ came back from the campaign of Tabuk or Khaybar, and there was a curtain covering her room. The wind came and lifted the curtain, revealing some toys belonging to 'A'ishah, may Allah be pleased with her. The Prophet ﷺ said:\nمَا هَذَا يَا عَائِشَةُ؟\n(What is this, O 'A'ishah?) She, may Allah be pleased with her, said, \"My toys.\" Among them he saw a horse with two wings made of cloth. He ﷺ said:\nمَا هَذَا الَّذِي أَرَى وَسَطَهُنَّ؟\n(What is this that I see in the midst of them?) She, may Allah be pleased with her, said, \"A horse.\" The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَا هَذَا الَّذِي عَلَيْهِ؟\n(And what is this on it?) She, may Allah be pleased with her, said, \"Wings.\" The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nفَرَسٌ لَهُ جَنَاحَانِ؟\n(A horse with two wings?) She, may Allah be pleased with her, said, \"Did you not hear that Sulayman, peace be upon him, had a horse that had wings?\" She, may Allah be pleased with her, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ smiled so broadly that I could see his molars.\"\nفَقَالَ إِنِّي أَحْبَبْتُ حُبَّ الْخَيْرِ عَنْ ذِكْرِ رَبِّي حَتَّىٰ تَوَارَتْ بِالْحِجَابِ\n(He said: \"I did love the good (i.e., horses) instead of remembering my Lord\" till the time was over, and (the sun) had hidden in the veil (of night))\nMore than one of the Salaf and scholars of Tafsir mentioned that he was so busy looking at the horses that he missed the time of 'Asr prayer. He did not miss it deliberately, but because of forgetfulness, as happened to the Prophet ﷺ on the day of Khandaq, when he was too busy to pray 'Asr and he prayed it after the sun had set. This was recorded in the Two Sahihs with more than one chain of narration, including the report from Jabir, may Allah be pleased with him, who said, \"On the day of Khandaq, 'Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, came after the sun had set and started cursing the disbelievers of the Quraysh. He said, 'O Messenger of Allah, I could not pray 'Asr until the sun had almost set.' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nوَاللهِ مَا صَلَّيْتُهَا\n(By Allah, I did not pray it either.)\" He (Jabir) said, \"So we got up and went to Buthan. Allah's Prophet ﷺ performed ablution for the prayer and we too performed ablution. He prayed 'Asr after the sun had set, then he prayed Maghrib after that.\"\nرُدُّوهَا عَلَيَّ ۖ فَطَفِقَ مَسْحًا بِالسُّوقِ وَالْأَعْنَاقِ\n(Then he said: \"Bring them (horses) back to me.\" Then he began to pass his hand over their legs and their necks.)\nAl-Hasan Al-Basri said, \"He said, 'No, by Allah, you will not keep me from worshipping my Lord again,' then he ordered that they should be slaughtered.\" This was also the view of Qatadah. As-Suddi said, \"Their necks and hamstrings were struck with swords.\"\nAli bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"He began patting the horses' heads and legs out of love for them.\" This is the view that was favored by Ibn Jarir. He said, \"Because he would not punish an animal by cutting its hamstrings or destroy his own wealth for no other reason than that he had been distracted from his prayer by looking at it, and it was not the animals' fault. \"\nThis view which Ibn Jarir thought more correct is subject to further review, because such action may have been permissible according to their law, especially since he got angry for the sake of Allah for being distracted by these horses until the time for prayer had lapsed. Then, since he dispensed with them for the sake of Allah, Allah compensated him with something better, the wind which blew gently by his order wherever he willed. Its morning lasted a month's (journey), and its afternoon lasted a month's (journey). This was faster and better than horses.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Abu Qatadah and Abu Ad-Dahma', who traveled a lot to the Ka'bah, said, \"We met a man from among the bedouins who said to us: 'The Messenger of Allah ﷺ took my hand and started teaching me some of that which Allah had taught him. He said,\nإِنَّكَ لَا تَدَعُ شَيْئًا اتِّقَاءَ اللهِ تَعَالَى إِلَّا أَعْطَاكَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ خَيْرًا مِنْهُ\n(You do not give up anything for the sake of Allah, but Allah will give you something better than it.)'\"","href":"/tafsir/38?verse=30","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:38:34","title":"Ibn Kathir · 38:34–40","text":"And indeed, We tried Sulayman and We placed on his throne Jasad (a body), and he returned (34)He said: \"My Lord! Forgive me, and bestow upon me a kingdom such as shall not belong to any other after me. Verily, You are the Bestower. (35)So, We subjected to him the wind; it blew gently by his order wherever he willed (36)And the Shayatin, from every kind of builder and diver (37)And also others bound in fetters (38)[Allah said to Sulayman]: \"This is Our gift, so spend you or withhold, no account will be asked of you. (39)And verily, for him is a near access to Us, and a good (final) return (40)\nHow Allah tested Sulayman then made Things easy for Him\nAllah says,\nوَلَقَدْ فَتَنَّا سُلَيْمَانَ\n(And indeed, We tried Sulayman) meaning, 'We tested him.'\nوَأَلْقَيْنَا عَلَىٰ كُرْسِيِّهِ جَسَدًا\n(and We placed on his throne Jasad (a body)).\nثُمَّ أَنَابَ\n(and he returned.) means, after this test, he turned back to Him and asked for forgiveness and to be given a kingdom such as shall not belong to any other after him.\nقَالَ رَبِّ اغْفِرْ لِي وَهَبْ لِي مُلْكًا لَا يَنْبَغِي لِأَحَدٍ مِنْ بَعْدِي ۖ إِنَّكَ أَنْتَ الْوَهَّابُ\n(He said: \"My Lord! Forgive me, and bestow upon me a kingdom such as shall not belong to any other after me. Verily, You are the Bestower.\")\nSome of them said, \"No one after me will have the right to ask Allah for such a kingdom.\" This is the apparent meaning from the context of the Ayah, and several Hadiths with a similar meaning have been narrated from the Messenger of Allah ﷺ.\nIn his Tafsir of this Ayah, Al-Bukhari recorded that Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, said that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nإِنَّ عِفْرِيتًا مِنَ الْجِنِّ تَفَلَّتَ عَلَيَّ الْبَارِحَةَ - أَوْ كَلِمَةً نَحْوَهَا - لِيَقْطَعَ عَلَيَّ الصَّلَاةَ فَأَمْكَنَنِي اللهُ تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَى مِنْهُ، وَأَرَدْتُ أَنْ أَرْبِطَهُ إِلَى سَارِيَةٍ مِنَ سَوَارِي الْمَسْجِدِ حَتّٰى تُصْبِحُوا،وَتَنْظُرُوا إِلَيْهِ كُلُّكُمْ، فَذَكَرْتُ قَوْلَ أَخِي سُلَيْمَانَ عَلَيْهِ الصَّلَاةُ وَالسَّلَامُ: رَبِّ اغْفِرْ لِي وَهَبْ لِي مُلْكًا لَا يَنْبَغِي لِأَحَدٍ مِنْ بَعْدِي\n(An 'Ifrit from among the Jinn came and bothered me last night – or he said something similar – trying to stop me from praying. Allah enabled me to overpower him, and I wanted to tie him to one of the pillars in the Masjid so that you could see him this morning. Then I remembered what my brother Sulayman said, (My Lord! Forgive me and bestow upon me a kingdom such as shall not belong to any other after me))\nRawh said, \"so he let him go, humiliated.\" ) This was also recorded by Muslim and An-Nasa'i. In his Sahih, Muslim recorded that Abu Ad-Darda', may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ stood up to pray and we heard him say,\nأَعُوذُ بِاللهِ مِنْكَ\n(I seek refuge with Allah from you.) Then he said,\nأَلْعَنُكَ بِلَعْنَةِ اللهِ\n(I curse you with the curse of Allah.) three times, and he stretched out his hand as if he was reaching out to take something. When he finished his prayer, we said, 'O Messenger of Allah, we heard you say something in your prayer which we have never heard you say before, and we saw you stretching out your hand.' He ﷺ said:\nإِنَّ عَدُوَّ اللهِ إِبْلِيسَ جَاءَ بِشِهَابٍ مِنْ نَارٍ لِيَجْعَلَهُ فِي وَجْهِي فَقُلْتُ: أَعُوذُ بِاللهِ مِنْكَ، ثَلَاثَ مَرَّاتٍ، ثُمَّ قُلْتُ: أَلْعَنُكَ بِلَعْنَةِ اللهِ التَّامَّةِ، فَلَمْ يَتَأَخَّرْ، ثَلَاثَ مَرَّاتٍ ثُمَّ أَرَدْتُ أَنْ آخُذَهُ،وَاللهِ لَوْلَا دَعْوَةُ أَخِينَا سُلَيْمَانَ لَأَصْبَحَ مُوثَقًا، يَلْعَبُ بِهِ صِبْيَانُ أَهْلِ الْمَدِينَةِ\n(The enemy of Allah Iblis came with a flame of fire to throw in my face, so I said, \"I seek refuge with Allah from you\" three times, then I said, \"I curse you with the complete curse of Allah,\" but he did not back off. I said it three times. Then I wanted to seize him. By Allah, if it were not for the words of our brother Sulayman, he would have been chained up and he would have become a plaything for the children of the people of Al-Madinah.)\" Allah says:\nفَسَخَّرْنَا لَهُ الرِّيحَ تَجْرِي بِأَمْرِهِ رُخَاءً حَيْثُ أَصَابَ\n(So, We subjected to him the wind; it blew gently by his order wherever he willed.) Al-Hasan Al-Basri, may Allah have mercy on him, said, \"When Sulayman, peace be upon him, slaughtered the horses out of anger for the sake of Allah, Allah compensated him with something better and swifter, the wind whose morning was a month's (journey), and its afternoon was a month's (journey).\"\nحَيْثُ أَصَابَ\n(wherever he willed.) means, wherever in the world he wanted.\nوَالشَّيَاطِينَ كُلَّ بَنَّاءٍ وَغَوَّاصٍ\n(And also the Shayatin, from every kind of builder and diver,) means, among them were some whom he used to build high rooms, images, basins as large as reservoirs, and cauldrons fixed (in their places), and other difficult tasks which humans were unable to do. And there was another group, who dived into the sea recovering pearls, jewels and other precious things which cannot be found anywhere else.\nوَآخَرِينَ مُقَرَّنِينَ فِي الْأَصْفَادِ\n(And also others bound in fetters.) means, tied up in chains. These were the ones who had rebelled and refused to work, or else their work was bad and they were wrongdoers.\nهَٰذَا عَطَاؤُنَا فَامْنُنْ أَوْ أَمْسِكْ بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ\n([Allah said to Sulayman]: \"This is Our Gift, so spend you or withhold, no account will be asked of you.\") means, 'this that We have given to you of kingship and perfect power, as you asked for, you may give to whomsoever you wish and deny to whomsoever you wish, and you will not be brought to account. Whatever you do is permissible for you, so however you judge, it will be right.' It was reported in the Two Sahihs that when the Messenger of Allah ﷺ was given the choice between being a servant and a Messenger – who does what he is commanded to do and distributes things among the people as Allah commands him to do – or being a Prophet and a king, who can give to whomever he wishes and withhold from whomever he wishes without being held accountable for anything, he chose the former. He consulted with Jibril, peace be upon him, who said, \"Be humble.\" So he chose the former because it has a greater value before Allah and brings a higher status in the Hereafter, even though the second option, prophethood combined with kingship, is also a great thing both in this world and in the Hereafter, when Allah tells us what He gave to Sulayman, peace be upon him, in this world, He tells us that he will have a great share with Allah on the Day of Resurrection. He says:\nوَإِنَّ لَهُ عِنْدَنَا لَزُلْفَىٰ وَحُسْنَ مَآبٍ\n(And verily, for him is a near access to Us, and a good (final) return.) meaning, in this world and the Hereafter.","href":"/tafsir/38?verse=34","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:38:41","title":"Ibn Kathir · 38:41–44","text":"And remember Our servant Ayyub, when he invoked his Lord (saying): \"Verily, Shaytan has afflicted me with distress and torment! (41)(Allah said to him): \"Strike the ground with your foot. This is (a spring of) water to wash in, cool and a drink. (42)And We gave him (back) his family, and along with them the like thereof, as a mercy from Us, and a reminder for those who understand (43)\"And take in your hand a bundle of thin grass and strike therewith (your wife), and break not your oath.\" Truly, We found him patient. How excellent a servant! Verily, he was ever oft-returning in repentance (to Us)(44)\nAyyub\nHere Allah tells us about His servant and Messenger Ayyub (Job) and how He tested him. These tests afflicted his body, his wealth and his children, until there was no part of his body that was healthy except his heart. Then he had nothing left in this world which he could use to help him deal with his sickness or the predicament he was in, besides his wife, who retained her devotion to him because of her faith in Allah and His Messenger. She used to work for people as a paid servant, and she fed and served him (Ayyub) for nearly eighteen years. Before that, he was very rich and had many children, being well off in worldly terms. All of that had been taken away until he ended up being thrown into the city dump where he stayed all this time, shunned by relatives and strangers alike, with the exception of his wife – may Allah be pleased with her. She did not leave him, morning and evening, except for when she was serving people, then she would come straight back to him. When this had gone on for a long time, and things had gotten very bad, and the time allotted by divine decree had come to an end, Ayyub prayed to the Lord of the worlds, the God of the Messengers, and said:\nأَنِّي مَسَّنِيَ الضُّرُّ وَأَنْتَ أَرْحَمُ الرَّاحِمِينَ\n(Verily, distress has seized me, and You are the Most Merciful of all those who show mercy.)(21:83). And according to this Ayah:\nوَاذْكُرْ عَبْدَنَا أَيُّوبَ إِذْ نَادَىٰ رَبَّهُ أَنِّي مَسَّنِيَ الشَّيْطَانُ بِنُصْبٍ وَعَذَابٍ\n(And remember Our servant Ayyub, when he invoked his Lord (saying): \"Verily, Shaytan has afflicted me with distress and torment!\") It was said that \"distress\" referred to bodily afflictions and \"torment\" referred to the loss of his wealth and children. Then the Most Merciful of those who show mercy responded to him, telling him to stand up and strike the ground with his foot. He did this, and Allah caused a spring of water to flow. He commanded him to wash in it, and all the pain and affliction in his body disappeared. Then He commanded him to strike the ground in a different place, and Allah caused another spring to flow, and Ayyub was commanded to drink from it. Then all his internal problems disappeared, and he became healthy again, inside and out. Allah says:\nارْكُضْ بِرِجْلِكَ ۖ هَٰذَا مُغْتَسَلٌ بَارِدٌ وَشَرَابٌ\n(Strike the ground with your foot. This is (a spring of) water to wash in, cool and a (refreshing) drink.) Ibn Jarir and Ibn Abi Hatim recorded that Anas bin Malik, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nإِنَّ نَبِيَّ اللهِ أَيُّوبَ عَلَيْهِ الصَّلَاةُ وَالسَّلَامُ لَبِثَ بِهِ بَلَاؤُهُ ثَمَانِيَ عَشْرَةَ سَنَةً، فَرَفَضَهُ الْقَرِيبُ وَالْبَعِيدُ، إِلَّا رَجُلَيْنِ كَانَا مِنْ أَخَصِّ إِخْوَانِهِ بِهِ، كَانَا يَغْدُوَانِ إِلَيْهِ وَيَرُوحَانِ، فَقَالَ أَحَدُهُمَا لِصَاحِبِهِ: تَعْلَمُ وَاللهِ لَقَدْ أَذْنَبَ أَيُّوبُ ذَنْبًا مَا أَذْنَبَهُ أَحَدٌ مِنَ الْعَالَمِينَ، قَالَ لَهُ صَاحِبُهُ: وَمَا ذَاكَ؟ قَالَ: مُنْذُ ثَمَانِيَ عَشْرَةَ سَنَةً لَمْ يَرْحَمْهُ اللهُ فَيَكْشِفَ مَا بِهِ، فَلَمَّا رَاحَا إِلَيْهِ لَمْ يَصْبِرِ الرَّجُلُ حَتّٰى ذَكَرَ ذَلِكَ لَهُ، فَقَالَ أَيُّوبُ عَلَيْهِ الصَّلَاةُ وَالسَّلَامُ: لَا أَدْرِي مَا تَقُولُ، غَيْرَ أَنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ يَعْلَمُ أَنِّي كُنْتُ أَمُرُّ عَلَى الرَّجُلَيْنِ يَتَنَازَعَانِ فَيَذْكُرَانِ اللهَ تَعَالَى، فَأَرْجِعُ إِلَى بَيْتِي فَأُكَفِّرُ عَنْهُمَا كَرَاهِيَةَ أَنْ يُذْكَرَ اللهُ تَعَالَى إِلَّا فِي حَقٍّ، قَالَ: وَكَانَ يَخْرُجُ إِلَى حَاجَتِهِ،فَإِذَا قَضَاهَا أَمْسَكَتِ امْرَأَتُهُ بِيَدِهِ حَتّٰى يَبْلُغَ، فَلَمَّا كَانَ ذَاتَ يَوْمٍ أَبْطَأَ عَلَيْهَا، فَأَوْحَى اللهُ تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَى إِلَى أَيُّوبَ عَلَيْهِ الصَّلَاةُ وَالسَّلَامُ أَن ارْكُضْ بِرِجْلِكَ ۖ هَٰذَا مُغْتَسَلٌ بَارِدٌ وَشَرَابٌ فَاسْتَبْطَأَتْهُ (فَتَلَقَّتْهُ) تَنْظُرُ، فَأَقْبَلَ عَلَيْهَا وَقَدْ أَذْهَبَ اللهُ مَا بِهِ مِنَ الْبَلَاءِ وَهُوَ عَلَى أَحْسَنِ مَا كَانَ، فَلَمَّا رَأَتْهُ قَالَتْ: أَيْ بَارَكَ اللهُ فِيكَ، هَلْ رَأَيْتَ نَبِيَّ اللهِ هَذَا الْمُبْتَلَى، فَوَاللهِ عَلَى ذَلِكَ مَا رَأَيْتُ رَجُلًا أَشْبَهَ بِهِ مِنْكَ إِذْ كَانَ صَحِيحًا. قَالَ: فَإِنِّي أَنَا هُوَ، قَالَ: وَكَانَ لَهُ أَنْدَرَانِ: أَنْدَرٌ لِلْقَمْحِ وَأَنْدَرٌ لِلشَّعِيرِ، فَبَعَثَ اللهُ تَعَالَى سَحَابَتَيْنِ فَلَمَّا كَانَتْ إِحْدَاهُمَا عَلَى أَنْدَرِ الْقَمْحِ، أَفْرَغَتْ فِيهِ الذَّهَبَ حَتّٰى فَاضَ، وَأَفْرَغَتِ الْأُخْرَى فِي أَنْدَرِ الشَّعِيرِ حَتّٰى فَاضَ\n(Allah's Prophet Ayyub, peace be upon him, suffered for eighteen years from his affliction and was shunned by relatives and strangers alike, besides two men who were the closest of his brothers to him. They used to visit him every morning and every evening. One of them said to his companion, \"You know, by Allah, that Ayyub committed a great sin which nobody in the world ever committed.\" His companion said, \"Why are you saying that?\" He said, \"For eighteen years he has been suffering and Allah has not had mercy on him and relieve his suffering.\" When he went to him the next morning, the (second) man could not wait to tell this to Ayyub. Ayyub, peace be upon him, said, \"I do not know what you are talking about, but Allah knows if I passed by two men who were arguing and they mentioned the Name of Allah, I would go back home and offer expiation lest they had mentioned the Name of Allah in an improper manner. \" Whenever he went out to answer the call of nature, when he finished, his wife would take his hand until he came back home. One day he took a long time, and Allah had revealed to Ayyub, (Strike the ground with your foot. This is (a spring of) water to wash in, cool and a (refreshing) drink.) She thought that he had taken too long, so she turned to look at him, and saw that Allah had taken away the afflictions he had been suffering, and he looked better than he had ever looked. When she saw him, she said, \"May Allah bless you! Have you seen Allah's Prophet, the one who is sorely tested? By Allah, I have never seen a man who looks more like him than you, if he were healthy.\" He said, \"I am he.\" He had two threshing floors, one for wheat and one for barley. Allah sent two clouds, and when one of them reached the threshing floor of the wheat, it rained gold until it was full. The other rained gold on the threshing floor of the barley until it was full.) This is the wording of Ibn Jarir, may Allah have mercy on him.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nبَيْنَمَا أَيُّوبُ يَغْتَسِلُ عُرْيَانًا خَرَّ عَلَيْهِ جَرَادٌ مِنْ ذَهَبٍ فَجَعَلَ أَيُّوبُ عَلَيْهِ الصَّلَاةُ وَالسَّلَامُ يَحْثُو فِي ثَوْبِهِ، فَنَادَاهُ رَبُّهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ يَا أَيُّوبُ، أَلَمْ أَكُنْ أَغْنَيْتُكَ عَمَّا تَرَى قَالَ عَلَيْهِ الصَّلَاةُ وَالسَّلَامُ: بَلَى يَا رَبِّ، وَلَكِنْ لَا غِنٰى بِي عَنْ بَرَكَتِكَ\n(While Ayyub was bathing naked, locusts of gold fell upon him. Ayyub, peace be upon him, began gathering them in his garment. Then his Lord called to him, \"O Ayyub, have I not made you so rich that you have no need of what you see?\" He, peace be upon him, said, \"Yes, O Lord! But I cannot do without Your blessing!\") This was only recorded by Al-Bukhari.\nوَوَهَبْنَا لَهُ أَهْلَهُ وَمِثْلَهُمْ مَعَهُمْ رَحْمَةً مِنَّا وَذِكْرَىٰ لِأُولِي الْأَلْبَابِ\n(And We gave him (back) his family, and along with them the like thereof, as a mercy from Us, and a reminder for those who understand.) Al-Hasan and Qatadah said, \"Allah brought his family themselves back to life, and added others like them.\"\nرَحْمَةً مِنَّا\n(as a mercy from Us,) means, in return for his patience, steadfastness, repentance, humility and constant turning to Allah.\nوَذِكْرَىٰ لِأُولِي الْأَلْبَابِ\n(and a reminder for those who understand.) means, for those who understand that the consequence of patience is a solution and a way out.\nوَخُذْ بِيَدِكَ ضِغْثًا فَاضْرِبْ بِهِ وَلَا تَحْنَثْ ۗ\n(And take in your hand a bundle of thin grass and strike therewith (your wife), and break not your oath.) Ayyub, peace be upon him, got angry with his wife and was upset about something she had done, so he swore an oath that if Allah healed him, he would strike her with one hundred blows. When Allah healed him, how could her service, mercy, compassion and kindness be repaid with a beating? So Allah showed him a way out, which was to take a bundle of thin grass, with one hundred stems, and hit her with it once. Thus he fulfilled his oath and avoided breaking his vow. This was the solution and way out for one who had Taqwa of Allah and turned to Him in repentance. Allah says:\nإِنَّا وَجَدْنَاهُ صَابِرًا ۚ نِعْمَ الْعَبْدُ ۖ إِنَّهُ أَوَّابٌ\n(Truly, We found him patient. How excellent a servant! Verily, he was ever oft-returning in repentance (to Us)!) Allah praised and commanded him, saying,\nنِعْمَ الْعَبْدُ ۖ إِنَّهُ أَوَّابٌ\n(How excellent a servant! Verily, he was ever oft-returning in repentance (to Us)!) Allah says:\nوَمَنْ يَتَّقِ اللَّهَ يَجْعَلْ لَهُ مَخْرَجًا - وَيَرْزُقْهُ مِنْ حَيْثُ لَا يَحْتَسِبُ ۚ وَمَنْ يَتَوَكَّلْ عَلَى اللَّهِ فَهُوَ حَسْبُهُ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ بَالِغُ أَمْرِهِ ۚ قَدْ جَعَلَ اللَّهُ لِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدْرًا\n(And whosoever has Taqwa of Allah, He will make a way for him to get out (from every difficulty). And He will provide him from (sources) he never could imagine. And whosoever puts his trust in Allah, then He will suffice him. Verily, Allah will accomplish his purpose. Indeed Allah has set a measure for all things.)(65:2-3)","href":"/tafsir/38?verse=41","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:38:45","title":"Ibn Kathir · 38:45–48","text":"And remember Our servants, Ibrahim, Ishaq, and Ya'qub, Ulil-Aydi wal-Absar (45)Verily, We did choose them by granting them the remembrance of the Abode (46)And they are with Us, verily, of the chosen and the best (47)And remember Isma'il, Al-Yasa', and Dhul-Kifl, all are among the best (48)This is a Reminder.. ()\nThe Chosen and the Best among the Prophets\nAllah tells us about the virtues of His servants the Messengers and His Prophets:\nوَاذْكُرْ عِبَادَنَا إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَإِسْحَاقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ أُولِي الْأَيْدِي وَالْأَبْصَارِ\n(And remember Our servants, Ibrahim, Ishaq, and Ya'qub, Ulil-Aydi wal-Absar.) meaning, righteous deeds, beneficial knowledge, strength in worship and insight. 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said:\nأُولِي الْأَيْدِي\n(Ulil-Aydi) \"Of great strength and worship;\nوَالْأَبْصَارِ\n(wal-Absar) means, understanding of the religion.\" Qatadah and As-Suddi said, \"They were given strength in worship and understanding of the religion.\"\nإِنَّا أَخْلَصْنَاهُمْ بِخَالِصَةٍ ذِكْرَى الدَّارِ\n(Verily, We did choose them by granting them the remembrance of the Abode.) Mujahid said, \"This means: We made them strive for the Hereafter, and there is nothing else for them besides that.\" As-Suddi also said, \"The remembrance of the Hereafter and striving for it.\" Malik bin Dinar said, \"Allah removed the love of this world from their hearts, and singled them out for land remembrance of the Hereafter.\" Qatadah said, \"They used to remind the people about the Abode of the Hereafter and to strive for it.\"\nوَإِنَّهُمْ عِنْدَنَا لَمِنَ الْمُصْطَفَيْنَ الْأَخْيَارِ\n(And they are with Us, verily, of the chosen and the best!) means, they are among those who have been elected and chosen, and they are the best and the chosen ones.\nوَاذْكُرْ إِسْمَاعِيلَ وَالْيَسَعَ وَذَا الْكِفْلِ ۖ وَكُلٌّ مِنَ الْأَخْيَارِ\n(And remember Isma'il, Al-Yasa', and Dhul-Kifl, all are among the best.) We have already discussed their characteristics and stories in detail in Surat Al-Anbiya', may peace be upon them, and there is no need to repeat it here.\nهَٰذَا ذِكْرٌ ۚ\n(This is a Reminder) means, a reminder to those who will be reminded. As-Suddi said, \"This means the Holy Qur'an.\"","href":"/tafsir/38?verse=45","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:38:49","title":"Ibn Kathir · 38:49–54","text":"And verily, for those who have Taqwa is a good final return (49)'Adn Paradise, whose doors will be opened for them (50)Therein they will recline; therein they will call for fruits in abundance and drinks (51)And beside them will be Qasirat-at-Tarf, (and) of equal ages (52)This it is what you are promised for the Day of Reckoning (53)(It will be said to them)! Verily, this is Our provision which will never finish (54)\nThe Final Return of the Blessed\nAllah tells us that His blessed, believing servants will have a good final return in the Hereafter, which means their ultimate destination. Then He explains it further, as He says:\nجَنَّاتِ عَدْنٍ\n('Adn Gardens) meaning, eternal gardens (of Paradise),\nمُفَتَّحَةً لَهُمُ الْأَبْوَابُ\n(whose doors will be opened for them.) means, when they come to them (these gardens), their gates will open for them.\nمُتَّكِئِينَ فِيهَا\n(Therein they will recline;) It was said that this means that they will sit cross-legged on chairs beneath canopies.\nيَدْعُونَ فِيهَا بِفَاكِهَةٍ كَثِيرَةٍ\n(therein they will call for fruits in abundance) means, whatever they ask for, they will find it, and it will be prepared just as they wanted it.\nوَشَرَابٍ\n(and drinks;) means, whatever kind of drink they want, the servants will bring it to them,\nبِأَكْوَابٍ وَأَبَارِيقَ وَكَأْسٍ مِنْ مَعِينٍ\n(With cups, and jugs, and a glass of flowing wine.)(56: 18).\nوَعِنْدَهُمْ قَاصِرَاتُ الطَّرْفِ\n(And beside them will be Qasirat-at-Tarf (chaste females)) means, they restrain their glances from anyone except their husbands, and do not turn to anyone else.\nأَتْرَابٌ\n((and) of equal ages.) means, they will all be of the same age. This is the understanding of Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, Mujahid, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Muhammad bin Ka'b and As-Suddi.\nهَٰذَا مَا تُوعَدُونَ لِيَوْمِ الْحِسَابِ\n(This it is what you are promised for the Day of Reckoning!) means, 'this that We have mentioned of the features of Paradise is what He has prepared for His pious servants who will reach it after they have been resurrected from their graves and been saved from the Fire.' Then Allah tells us that Paradise will never come to an end or disappear or cease to be. He says:\nإِنَّ هَٰذَا لَرِزْقُنَا مَا لَهُ مِنْ نَفَادٍ\n(Verily, this is Our provision which will never finish.) This is like the Ayat:\nمَا عِنْدَكُمْ يَنْفَدُ ۖ وَمَا عِنْدَ اللَّهِ بَاقٍ ۗ\n(Whatever is with you, will be exhausted, and whatever is with Allah will remain)(16:96).\nعَطَاءً غَيْرَ مَجْذُوذٍ\n(a gift without an end.)(11:108)\nلَهُمْ أَجْرٌ غَيْرُ مَمْنُونٍ\n(for them is a reward that will never come to an end.)(84:25).\nأُكُلُهَا دَائِمٌ وَظِلُّهَا ۚ تِلْكَ عُقْبَى الَّذِينَ اتَّقَوْا ۖ وَعُقْبَى الْكَافِرِينَ النَّارُ\n(its provision is eternal and so is its shade; this is the end of those who have Taqwa, and the end (final destination) of the disbelievers is Fire.)(13:35). And there are many similar Ayat.","href":"/tafsir/38?verse=49","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:38:55","title":"Ibn Kathir · 38:55–64","text":"This is so! And for the Taghin will be an evil final return (55)Hell! Where they will enter it, and worst (indeed) is that place to rest (56)This is so! Then let them taste it - Hamim and Ghassaq (57)And other of similar kind - all together (58)This is a troop entering with you (in Hell), no welcome for them! Verily, they shall enter in the Fire (59)(The followers will say to those who misled): \"Nay, you (too)! No welcome for you! It is you who brought this upon us, so evil is this place to stay in! (60)They will say: \"Our Lord! Whoever brought this upon us, add to him a double torment in the Fire! (61)And they will say: \"What is the matter with us that we see not men whom we used to count among the bad ones? (62)\"Did we take them as an object of mockery, or have (our) eyes failed to perceive them? (63)Verily, that is the very truth – the mutual dispute of the people of the Fire (64)\nThe Final Return of the Doomed\nHaving mentioned the final of the blessed, Allah follows that with mention of the final return of the doomed when they are resurrected and brought to account. Allah says:\nهَٰذَا ۚ وَإِنَّ لِلطَّاغِينَ\n(This is so! And for the Taghin), which refers to those who disobey Allah, may He be glorified, and oppose the Messengers of Allah, peace be upon them,\nلَشَرَّ مَآبٍ\n(will be an evil final return.) means, the worst final return. Then Allah explains it by saying,\nجَهَنَّمَ يَصْلَوْنَهَا\n(Hell! Where they will enter) means, they will enter it and it will overwhelm them on all sides.\nفَبِئْسَ الْمِهَادُ - هَٰذَا فَلْيَذُوقُوهُ حَمِيمٌ وَغَسَّاقٌ\n(and worst (indeed) is that place to rest! This is so! Then let them taste it – Hamim and Ghassaq.) Hamim is something that has been heated to the ultimate degree, and Ghassaq is the opposite, something that is so intensely cold that it is unbearable. Allah says:\nوَآخَرُ مِنْ شَكْلِهِ أَزْوَاجٌ\n(And other of similar kind (oppasite pairs) – all together!) means, and other things of this kind, a thing and its opposite, serving as punishments. Al-Hasan Al-Basri said, concerning the Ayah:\nوَآخَرُ مِنْ شَكْلِهِ أَزْوَاجٌ\n(And other of similar kind – all together!) \"Different kinds of punishments.\" Others said, such as intense cold and intense heat, and drinking Hamim and eating the bitter tree of Az-Zaqqum, and being lifted up and thrown down, and other kinds of paired opposites, all of which are means of punishment.\nThe Disputes of the People of Hell\nهَٰذَا فَوْجٌ مُقْتَحِمٌ مَعَكُمْ ۖ لَا مَرْحَبًا بِهِمْ ۚ إِنَّهُمْ صَالُو النَّارِ\n(This is a troop entering with you (in Hell), no welcome for them! Verily, they shall enter in the Fire!) Here Allah tells us what the people of Hell will say to one another. This is like the Ayah:\nكُلَّمَا دَخَلَتْ أُمَّةٌ لَعَنَتْ أُخْتَهَا ۖ\n(Every time a new nation enters, it curses its sister nation (that went before))(7:38), which means, instead of greeting one another, they will curse one another, accuse one another of being liars and reject one another. When a new group arrives, the keepers of Hell will say,\nهَٰذَا فَوْجٌ مُقْتَحِمٌ مَعَكُمْ ۖ لَا مَرْحَبًا بِهِمْ ۚ إِنَّهُمْ صَالُو النَّارِ\n(This is a troop entering with you (in Hell), no welcome for them! Verily, they shall enter in the Fire!) meaning, because they are of the people of Hell.\nقَالُوا بَلْ أَنْتُمْ لَا مَرْحَبًا بِكُمْ ۖ\n(Nay, you (too)! No welcome for you!) means, those who are coming in will say,\nبَلْ أَنْتُمْ لَا مَرْحَبًا بِكُمْ ۖ أَنْتُمْ قَدَّمْتُمُوهُ لَنَا\n(Nay, you (too)! No welcome for you! It is you who brought this upon us,) meaning, 'you called us to that which led us to this fate.'\nفَبِئْسَ الْقَرَارُ\n(so evil is this place to stay in!) means, evil is this abode and this destination.\nقَالُوا رَبَّنَا مَنْ قَدَّمَ لَنَا هَٰذَا فَزِدْهُ عَذَابًا 