good or evil, and will compensate each of them accordingly.\"","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=94","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:97","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:97–98","text":"Say (O Muhammad ﷺ): \"Whoever is an enemy to Jibril (Gabriel)(let him die in his fury), for indeed he has brought it (this Qur'an) down to your heart by Allah's permission, confirming what came before it (i.e. the Tawrah and the Injil) and guidance and glad tidings for the believers (97)\"Whoever is an enemy to Allah, His Angels, His Messengers, Jibril and Mika'il, then verily, Allah is an enemy to the disbelievers. (98)\n\n## The Jews are the Enemies of Jibril\n\nImam Abu Ja'far bin Jarir At-Tabari said, \"The scholars of Tafsir agree that this Ayah (2: 97-98) was revealed in response to the Jews who claimed that Jibril (Gabriel) is an enemy of the Jews and that Mika'il (Michael) is their friend.\" Al-Bukhari said, \"Allah said,\nمَن كَانَ عَدُوًّا لِّجِبْرِيلَ\n(Whoever is an enemy of Jibril (let him die in his fury)). 'Ikrimah said, \"Jibr, Mik and Israf all mean, worshipper, while il means, Allah\". Anas bin Malik said, \"When 'Abdullah bin Salam heard of the arrival of the Prophet ﷺ in Al-Madinah, he was working on his land. He came to the Prophet ﷺ and said, 'I am going to ask you about three things which nobody knows except a Prophet. What will be the first portent of the Hour? What will be the first meal taken by the people of Paradise? Why does a child resemble its father, and why does it resemble its maternal uncle?' Allah's Messenger ﷺ said, \"Jibril has just told me the answers.\" 'Abdullah said, 'He (i.e. Jibril), among all the angels, is the enemy of the Jews.' Allah's Messenger ﷺ recited the Ayah,\nمَن كَانَ عَدُوًّا لِّجِبْرِيلَ فَإِنَّهُ نَزَّلَهُ عَلَىٰ قَلْبِكَ\n(Whoever is an enemy to Jibril (Gabriel)(let him die in his fury), for indeed he has brought it (this Qur'an) down to your heart).\nAllah's Messenger ﷺ then said, (The first portent of the Hour will be a fire that will bring together the people from the east to the west; the first meal of the people of Paradise will be the caudate lobe of the liver of fish. As for the child resembling his parents: If a man has sexual intercourse with his wife and his discharge is first, the child will resemble the father. If the woman has a discharge first, the child will resemble her side of the family.) On that 'Abdullah bin Salam said, 'I testify that there is no deity worthy of worship except Allah and you are the Messenger of Allah.' 'Abdullah bin Salam further said, 'O Allah's Messenger! The Jews are liars, and if they should come to know about my conversion to Islam before you ask them (about me), they will tell a lie about me.' The Jews came to Allah's Messenger ﷺ, and 'Abdullah went inside the house. Allah's Messenger ﷺ asked (the Jews), ('What kind of man is 'Abdullah bin Salam?') They replied, 'He is the best among us, the son of the best among us, our master and the son of our master.' Allah's Messenger ﷺ said, (What do you think if he would embrace Islam?) The Jews said, 'May Allah save him from it.' Then 'Abdullah bin Salam came out in front of them saying, 'I testify that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah and that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.' Thereupon they said, 'He is the evilest among us, and the son of the evilest among us.' And they continued talking badly about him. Ibn Salam said, 'This is what I feared, O Messenger of Allah!.'\" Only Al-Bukhari recorded this Hadith with this chain of narration. Al-Bukhari and Muslim recorded this Hadith from Anas using another chain of narration.\nSome people say that 'il' means worshipper while whatever word that is added to it becomes Allah's Name, because 'il' is a constant in such conjunction. This is similar to the names 'Abdullah, 'Abdur-Rahman, 'Abdul-Malik, 'Abdul-Quddus, 'Abdus-Salam, 'Abdul-Kafi, 'Abdul-Jalil, and so forth. Hence, 'Abd' is constant in these compound names, while the remainder differs from name to name. This is the same case with Jibril, Mika'il, 'Azra'il, Israfil, and so forth. Allah knows best.\n\n## Choosing Some Angels to believe in over Others is Disbelief like choosing Some Prophets over Others\n\nAllah said,\nمَن كَانَ عَدُوًّا لِّجِبْرِيلَ فَإِنَّهُ نَزَّلَهُ عَلَىٰ قَلْبِكَ بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ\n(Whoever is an enemy to Jibril (Gabriel)(let him die in his fury), for indeed he has brought it (this Qur'an) down to your heart by Allah's permission,) meaning, whoever becomes an enemy of Jibril, let him know that he is Ruh Al-Qudus who brought down the Glorious Dhikr (Qur'an) to your heart from Allah by His leave. Hence, he is a messenger from Allah. Whoever takes a messenger as an enemy, will have taken all the messengers as enemies. Further, whoever believes in one messenger, is required to believe in all of the messengers. Whoever rejects one messenger, he has rejected all of the messengers. Similarly, Allah said,\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَكْفُرُونَ بِاللَّهِ وَرُسُلِهِ وَيُرِيدُونَ أَن يُفَرِّقُوا بَيْنَ اللَّهِ وَرُسُلِهِ وَيَقُولُونَ نُؤْمِنُ بِبَعْضٍ وَنَكْفُرُ بِبَعْضٍ\n(Verily, those who disbelieve in Allah and His Messengers and wish to make distinction between Allah and His Messengers (by believing in Allah and disbelieving in His Messengers) saying, \"We believe in some but reject others.\")(4:150)\nAllah decreed that they are disbelievers, because they believe in some Prophets and reject others. This is the same with those who take Jibril as an enemy, because Jibril did not choose missions on his own, but by the command of his Lord,\nوَمَا نَتَنَزَّلُ إِلَّا بِأَمْرِ رَبِّكَ\n(And we (angels) descend not except by the command of your Lord)(19: 64), and,\nوَإِنَّهُ لَتَنزِيلُ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ - نَزَلَ بِهِ الرُّوحُ الْأَمِينُ - عَلَىٰ قَلْبِكَ لِتَكُونَ مِنَ الْمُنذِرِينَ\n(And truly, this (the Qur'an) is a revelation from the Lord of all that exists. Which the trustworthy Ruh (Jibril) has brought down. Upon your heart (O Muhammad ﷺ) that you may be (one) of the warners)(26:192-194).\nAl-Bukhari reported that Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said, \"Allah, the Exalted, has said\nمَنْ عَادَى لِي وَلِيًّا فَقَدْ بَارَزَنِي بِالْحَرْبِ\n(Whoever takes a friend of Mine as an enemy, will have started a war with Me.)\"\nTherefore, Allah became angry with those who took Jibril as an enemy. Allah said,\nمَن كَانَ عَدُوًّا لِّجِبْرِيلَ فَإِنَّهُ نَزَّلَهُ عَلَىٰ قَلْبِكَ بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ مُصَدِّقًا لِّمَا بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ\n(Whoever is an enemy to Jibril (Gabriel)(let him die in his fury), for indeed he has brought it (this Qur'an) down to your heart by Allah's permission, confirming what came before it) meaning, the previous Books,\nوَهُدًى وَبُشْرَىٰ لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ\n(and guidance and glad tidings for the believers) meaning, as guidance to their hearts and bringer of the good news of Paradise, which is exclusively for the believers. Similarly, Allah said,\nقُلْ هُوَ لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا هُدًى وَشِفَاءٌ\n(Say: \"It is for those who believe, a guide and a healing.\")(41:44), and,\nوَنُنَزِّلُ مِنَ الْقُرْآنِ مَا هُوَ شِفَاءٌ وَرَحْمَةٌ لِّلْمُؤْمِنِينَ\n(And We send down of the Qur'an that which is a healing and a mercy to those who believe)(17:82).\nAllah then said,\nمَن كَانَ عَدُوًّا لِّلَّهِ وَمَلَائِكَتِهِ وَرُسُلِهِ وَجِبْرِيلَ وَمِيكَالَ فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ عَدُوٌّ لِّلْكَافِرِينَ\n(Whoever is an enemy to Allah, His Angels, His Messengers, Jibril and Mika'il (Michael), then verily, Allah is an enemy to the disbelievers.)\nAllah stated that whoever takes Him, His angels and messengers as enemies, then...Allah's messengers include angels and men, for Allah said,\nاللَّهُ يَصْطَفِي مِنَ الْمَلَائِكَةِ رُسُلًا وَمِنَ النَّاسِ\n(Allah chooses Messengers from angels and from men)(22:75). Allah said,\nوَجِبْرِيلَ وَمِيكَالَ\n(Jibril (Gabriel) and Mika'il (Michael)). Allah mentioned Jibril and Mika'il specifically - although they are included among the angels who were messengers - only because this Ayah was meant to support Jibril the emissary between Allah and His Prophets. Allah also mentioned Mika'il here, because the Jews claimed that Jibril was their enemy and Mika'il was their friend. Allah informed them that whoever is an enemy of either of them, then he is also an enemy of the other as well as Allah. We should state here that Mika'il sometimes descended to some of Allah's Prophets, although to a lesser extent than Jibril, because this was primarily Jibril's task, and Israfil is entrusted with the job of blowing the Trumpet for the commencement of Resurrection on the Day of Judgment. It is recorded in the Sahih that whenever the Messenger of Allah ﷺ would wake up at night, he would supplicate,\nاللَّهُمَّ رَبَّ جِبْرَائِيلَ وَمِيكَائِيلَ وَإِسْرَافِيلَ فَاطِرَ السَّمَوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ عَالِمَ الْغَيْبِ وَالشَّهَادَةِ، أَنْتَ تَحْكُمُ بَيْنَ عِبَادِكَ فِيمَا كَانُوا فِيهِ يَخْتَلِفُونَ، اهْدِنِي لِمَا اخْتُلِفَ فِيهِ مِنَ الْحَقِّ بِإِذْنِكَ إِنَّكَ تَهْدِي مَنْ تَشَاءُ إِلى صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ\n(O Allah, Lord of Jibril, Mika'il and Israfil, Creator of the heavens and earth and Knower of the seen and the unseen! You judge between Your servants regarding what they differ in, so direct me to the truth which they differ on, by Your leave. Verily, You guide whom You will to the straight path.)\nAllah's statement,\nفَإِنَّ اللَّهَ عَدُوٌّ لِّلْكَافِرِينَ\n(then verily, Allah is an enemy to the disbelievers) informed the disbelievers that whoever takes a friend of Allah as an enemy, then he has taken Allah as an enemy, and whoever treats Allah as an enemy, then he shall be Allah's enemy. Indeed, whoever is an enemy of Allah then he will lose in this life and the Hereafter, as stated earlier;\nمَنْ عَادَى لِي وَلِيًّا فَقَدْ آذَنْتُهُ بِالْمُحَارَبَةِ\n(Whoever takes a friend of Mine as an enemy, I shall wage war on him.)","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=97","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:99","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:99–103","text":"And indeed We have sent down to you manifest Ayat and none disbelieve in them but Fasiqun (those who rebel against Allah's command)(99)Is it not (the case) that every time they make a covenant, some party among them throw it aside? Nay! (the truth is:) most of them believe not (100)And when there came to them a Messenger from Allah (i.e. Muhammad ﷺ) confirming what was with them, a party of those who were given the Scripture threw away the Book of Allah behind their backs as if they did not know (101)They followed what the Shayatin (devils) gave out (falsely of the magic) in the lifetime of Sulayman (Solomon). Sulayman did not disbelieve, but the Shayatin (devils) disbelieved, teaching men magic and such things that came down at Babylon to the two angels, Harut and Marut, but neither of these two (angels) taught anyone (such things) till they had said, \"We are for trial, so disbelieve not (by learning this magic from us).\" And from these (angels) people learn that by which they cause separation between man and his wife, but they could not thus harm anyone except by Allah's leave. And they learn that which harms them and profits them not. And indeed they knew that the buyers of it (magic) would have no share in the Hereafter. And how bad indeed was that for which they sold their own selves, if they but knew (102)And if they had believed and guarded themselves from evil and kept their duty to Allah, far better would have been the reward from their Lord, if they but knew (103)\n\n## Proofs of Muhammad's (ﷺ) Prophethood\n\nImam Abu Ja'far bin Jarir said that Allah's statement,\nوَلَقَدْ أَنزَلْنَا إِلَيْكَ آيَاتٍ بَيِّنَاتٍ\n(And indeed We have sent down to you manifest Ayat) means, \"We have sent to you, O Muhammad, clear signs that testify to your prophethood.\" These Ayat are contained in the Book of Allah (Qur'an) which narrates the secrets of the knowledge that the Jews possess, which they hid, and the stories of their earlier generations. The Book of Allah also mentions the texts in the Books of the Jews that are known to only the rabbis and scholars, and the sections where they altered and distorted the rulings of the Tawrah. Since Allah mentioned all of this in His Book revealed to His Prophet Muhammad ﷺ, then this fact alone should be enough evidence for those who are truthful with themselves and who wish to avoid bringing themselves to destruction due to envy and transgression. Further human instict testifies to the truth that Muhammad ﷺ was sent with and the clear signs that he brought which he did not learn or acquire from mankind. Ad-Dahhak said that Ibn 'Abbas said that,\nوَلَقَدْ أَنزَلْنَا إِلَيْكَ آيَاتٍ بَيِّنَاتٍ\n(And indeed We have sent down to you manifest Ayat) means, \"You recite and convey this Book to them day and night, although you are an Ummi (unlettered) who never read a book. Yet, you inform them of what they have (in their own Books). Allah stated that this fact should serve as an example, a clear sign and a proof against them, if they but knew.\"\n\n## The Jews break Their Covenants\n\nWhen the Messenger of Allah ﷺ was sent and Allah reminded the Jews of the covenant that they had with Him, especially concerning Muhammad ﷺ, Malik bin As-Sayf said, \"By Allah! Allah never made a covenant with us about Muhammad, nor did He take a pledge from us at all.\" Allah then revealed,\nأَوَكُلَّمَا عَاهَدُوا عَهْدًا نَّبَذَهُ فَرِيقٌ مِّنْهُم\n(Is it not (the case) that every time they make a covenant, some party among them throw it aside?) Al-Hasan Al-Basri said that Allah's statement,\nبَلْ أَكْثَرُهُمْ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ\n(Nay! (the truth is:) most of them believe not) means, \"There is not a promise that they make, but they break it and abandon it. They make a promise today and break it tomorrow.\"\n\n## The Jews abandoned the Book of Allah and practiced Magic\n\nAs-Suddi commented on,\nوَلَمَّا جَاءَهُمْ رَسُولٌ مِّنْ عِندِ اللَّهِ مُصَدِّقٌ لِّمَا مَعَهُمْ\n(And when there came to them a Messenger from Allah (i.e. Muhammad ﷺ) confirming what was with them), \"When Muhammad ﷺ came to them, they wanted to contradict and dispute with him using the Tawrah. However, the Tawrah and the Qur'an affirmed each other. So the Jews gave up on using the Torah, and took to the Book of Asaf, and the magic of Harut and Marut, which indeed did not conform to the Qur'an. Hence Allah's statement,\nكَأَنَّهُمْ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ\n(As if they did not know!).\"\nAlso, Qatadah said that Allah's statement,\nكَأَنَّهُمْ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ\n(As if they did not know!) means, \"They knew the truth but abandoned it, hid it and denied the fact that they even had it.\"\n\n## Magic existed before Sulayman (Solomon)\n\nAs-Suddi said that Allah's statement,\nوَاتَّبَعُوا مَا تَتْلُو الشَّيَاطِينُ عَلَىٰ مُلْكِ سُلَيْمَانَ\n(They followed what the Shayatin (devils) gave out (falsely of the magic) in the lifetime of Sulayman)\nmeans, \"During the time of Prophet Solomon.' Beforehand, the devils used to ascend to heaven and eavesdrop on the conversations of the angels about what will occur on the earth regarding death, other incidents or unseen matters. They would convey this news to the soothsayers, and the soothsayers would in turn convey the news to the people. The people would believe what the soothsayers told them as being true. When the soothsayers trusted the devils, the devils started to lie to them and added other words to the true news that they heard, to the extent of adding seventy false words to each true word. The people recorded these words in some books. Soon after, the Children of Israel said that the Jinns know matters of the Unseen. When Solomon was sent as a Prophet, he collected these books in a box and buried it under his throne; any devil that dared get near the box was burned. Solomon said, 'I will not hear of anyone who says that the devils know the Unseen, but I will cut off his head.' When Solomon died and the scholars who knew the truth about Solomon perished, there came another generation. To them, the devil materialized in the shape of a human and said to some of the Children of Israel, 'Should I lead you to a treasure that you will never be able to use up?' They said. 'Yes.' He said, 'Dig under this throne,' and he went with them and showed them Solomon's throne. They said to him, 'Come closer.' He said, 'No. I will wait for you here, and if you do not find the treasure then kill me. ' They dug and found the buried books, and Satan said to them, 'Solomon only controlled the humans, devils and birds with this magic.' Thereafter, the news that Solomon was a sorcerer spread among the people, and the Children of Israel adopted these books. When Muhammad ﷺ came, they disputed with him relying on these books. Hence Allah's statement,\nوَمَا كَفَرَ سُلَيْمَانُ وَلَٰكِنَّ الشَّيَاطِينَ كَفَرُوا\n(Sulayman did not disbelieve, but the Shayatin (devils) disbelieved).\n\n## The Story of Harut and Marut, and the Explanation that They were Angels\n\nAllah said,\nوَمَا أُنزِلَ عَلَى الْمَلَكَيْنِ بِبَابِلَ هَارُوتَ وَمَارُوتَ وَمَا يُعَلِّمَانِ مِنْ أَحَدٍ حَتَّىٰ يَقُولَا إِنَّمَا نَحْنُ فِتْنَةٌ فَلَا تَكْفُرْ فَيَتَعَلَّمُونَ مِنْهُمَا مَا يُفَرِّقُونَ بِهِ بَيْنَ الْمَرْءِ وَزَوْجِهِ\n(And such things that came down at Babylon to the two angels, Harut and Marut, but neither of these two (angels) taught anyone (such things) till they had said, \"We are for trial, so disbelieve not (by learning this magic from us).\" And from these (angels) people learn that by which they cause separation between man and his wife).\nThere is a difference of opinion regarding this story. It was said that this Ayah denies that anything was sent down to the two angels, as Al-Qurtubi stated and then referred to the Ayah,\nوَمَا كَفَرَ سُلَيْمَانُ\n(Sulayman did not disbelieve) saying, \"The negation applies in both cases. Allah then said,\nوَلَٰكِنَّ الشَّيَاطِينَ كَفَرُوا يُعَلِّمُونَ النَّاسَ السِّحْرَ وَمَا أُنزِلَ عَلَى الْمَلَكَيْنِ\n(But the Shayatin (devils) disbelieved, teaching men magic and such things that came down at Babylon to the two angels).\nThe Jews claimed that Gabriel and Michael brought magic down to the two angels, but Allah refuted this false claim.\"\nAlso, Ibn Jarir reported, that Al-'Awfi said that Ibn 'Abbas said about Allah's statement,\nوَمَا أُنزِلَ عَلَى الْمَلَكَيْنِ بِبَابِلَ\n(And such things that came down at Babylon to the two angels)\n\"Allah did not send magic down.\"\nAlso, Ibn Jarir narrated that Ar-Rabi' bin Anas said about,\nوَمَا أُنزِلَ عَلَى الْمَلَكَيْنِ\n(And such things that came down to the two angels), \"Allah did not send magic down to the them.\" Ibn Jarir commented, \"This is the correct explanation for this Ayah.\nوَاتَّبَعُوا مَا تَتْلُو الشَّيَاطِينُ عَلَىٰ مُلْكِ سُلَيْمَانَ\n(They followed what the Shayatin (devils) gave out (falsely) in the lifetime of Sulayman.) meaning, magic. However, neither did Solomon disbelieve nor did Allah send magic with the two angels. The devils, on the other hand, disbelieved and taught magic to the people of the Babylon of Harut and Marut.\"\nIbn Jarir continued; \"If someone asks about explaining this Ayah in this manner, we say that,\nوَاتَّبَعُوا مَا تَتْلُو الشَّيَاطِينُ عَلَىٰ مُلْكِ سُلَيْمَانَ\n(They followed what the Shayatin (devils) gave out (falsely) in the lifetime of Sulayman.) means, magic. Solomon neither disbelieved nor did Allah send magic with the two angels. However, the devils disbelieved and taught magic to the people in the Babylon of Harut and Marut, meaning Gabriel and Michael, for Jewish sorcerers claimed that Allah sent magic by the words of Gabriel and Michael to Solomon, son of David. Allah denied this false claim and stated to His Prophet Muhammad ﷺ that Gabriel and Michael were not sent with magic. Allah also exonerated Solomon from practicing magic, which the devils taught to the people of Babylon by the hands of two men, Harut and Marut. Hence, Harut and Marut were two ordinary men (not angels or Gabriel or Michael).\" These were the words of At-Tabari, and this explanation is not plausible.\nMany among the Salaf, said that Harut and Marut were angels who came down from heaven to earth and did what they did as the Ayah stated. To conform this opinion with the fact that the angels are immune from error, we say that Allah had eternal knowledge what these angels would do, just as He had eternal knowledge that Iblis would do as he did, while Allah refered to him being among the angels,\nوَإِذْ قُلْنَا لِلْمَلَائِكَةِ اسْجُدُوا لِآدَمَ فَسَجَدُوا إِلَّا إِبْلِيسَ أَبَىٰ\n(And (remember) when We said to the angels: \"Prostrate yourselves before Adam.\" And they prostrated except Iblis (Satan), he refused)(20:116) and so forth. However, what Harut and Marut did was less evil than what Iblis, may Allah curse him, did. Al-Qurtubi reported this opinion from 'Ali, Ibn Mas'ud, Ibn 'Abbas, Ibn 'Umar, Ka'b Al-Ahbar, As-Suddi and Al-Kalbi.\n\n## Learning Magic is Kufr\n\nAllah said,\nوَمَا يُعَلِّمَانِ مِنْ أَحَدٍ حَتَّىٰ يَقُولَا إِنَّمَا نَحْنُ فِتْنَةٌ فَلَا تَكْفُرْ\n(But neither of these two (angels) taught anyone (such things) till they had said, \"We are for trial, so disbelieve not (by learning this magic from us).)\nAbu Ja'far Ar-Razi said that Ar-Rabi' bin Anas said that Qays bin 'Abbad said that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"When someone came to the angels to learn magic, they would discourage him and say to him, 'We are only a test, so do not fall into disbelief.' They had knowledge of what is good and evil and what constitutes belief or disbelief, and they thus knew that magic is a form of disbelief. When the person who came to learn magic still insisted on learning it, they commanded him to go to such and such place, where if he went, Satan would meet him and teach him magic. When this man would learn magic, the light (of faith) would depart him, and he would see it shining (and flying away) in the sky. He would then proclaim, 'O my sorrow! Woe unto me! What should I do?\" Al-Hasan Al-Basri said that this Ayah means, \"The angels were sent with magic, so that the people whom Allah willed would be tried and tested. Allah made them promise that they would not teach anyone until first proclaiming, 'We are a test for you, do not fall into disbelief.'\" It was recorded by Ibn Abi Hatim. Also, Qatadah said, \"Allah took their covenant to not teach anyone magic until they said, 'We are a test. Therefore, do not fall in disbelief.'\"\nAlso, As-Suddi said, \"When a man would come to the two angels they would advise him, 'Do not fall into disbelief. We are a test. ' When the man would ignore their advice, they would say, 'Go to that pile of ashes and urinate on it.' When he would urinate on the ashes, a light, meaning the light of faith, would depart from him and would shine until it entered heaven. Then something black that appeared to be smoke would descend and enter his ears and the rest of his body, and this is Allah's anger. When he told the angels what happened, they would teach him magic. So Allah's statement,\nوَمَا يُعَلِّمَانِ مِنْ أَحَدٍ حَتَّىٰ يَقُولَا إِنَّمَا نَحْنُ فِتْنَةٌ فَلَا تَكْفُرْ\n(But neither of these two (angels) taught anyone (such things) till they had said, \"We are for trial, so disbelieve not (by learning this magic from us).)\nSunayd said that Hajjaj said that Ibn Jurayj commented on this Ayah (2:102), \"No one dares practice magic except a disbeliever. As for the Fitnah, it involves trials and freedom of choice.\"The scholars who stated that learning magic is disbelief relied on this Ayah for evidence. They also mentioned the Hadith that Abu Bakr Al-Bazzar recorded from 'Abdullah, which states,\nمَنْ أَتَى كَاهِنًا أَوْ سَاحِرًا فَصَدَّقَهُ بِمَا يَقُولُ فَقَدْ كَفَر بِمَا أُنْزِلَ عَلى مُحَمَّدٍ صلّى الله عليه وسلّم\n(Whoever came to a soothsayer or a sorcerer and believed in what he said, will have disbelieved in what Allah revealed to Muhammad ﷺ.)\nThis Hadith has an authentic chain of narration and there are other Hadiths which support it.\n\n## Causing a Separation between the Spouses is One of the Effects of Magic\n\nAllah said,\nفَيَتَعَلَّمُونَ مِنْهُمَا مَا يُفَرِّقُونَ بِهِ بَيْنَ الْمَرْءِ وَزَوْجِهِ\n(And from these (angels) people learn that by which they cause separation between man and his wife,) This means, \"The people learned magic from Harut and Marut and indulged in evil acts that included separating spouses, even though spouses are close to, and intimately associate with each other. This is the devil's work.\" Muslim recorded that Jabir bin 'Abdullah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ الشَّيْطَانَ لَيَضَعُ عَرْشَهُ عَلَى الْمَاءِ ثُمَّ يَبْعَثُ سَرَايَاهُ فِي النَّاسِ فَأَقْرَبُهُمْ عِنْدَهُ مَنْزِلَةً أَعْظَمُهُمْ عِنْدَهُ فِتْنَةً وَيَجِيءُ أَحَدُهُمْ فَيَقُولُ: مَا زِلْتُ بِفُلَانٍ حَتَّى تَرَكْتُهُ وَهُوَ يَقُولُ كَذَا وَكَذَا، فَيَقُولُ إِبْلِيسُ: لَا وَاللهِ مَا صَنَعْتَ شَيْئًا، وَيَجِيءُ أَحَدُهُمْ فَيَقُولُ: مَا تَرَكْتُهُ حَتّى فَرَّقْتُ بَيْنَهُ وَبَيْنَ أَهْلِهِ، قَالَ: فَيُقرِّبُهُ وَيُدْنِيهِ وَيَلْتَزِمُهُ وَيَقُولُ: نِعْمَ أَنْتَ\n(Satan erects his throne on water and sends his emissaries among the people. The closest person to him is the person who causes the most Fitnah. One of them (a devil) would come to him and would say, 'I kept inciting so-and-so, until he said such and such words.' Iblis says, 'No, by Allah, you have not done much.' Another devil would come to him and would say, 'I kept inciting so-and-so, until I separated between him and his wife.' Satan would draw him closer and embrace him, saying, 'Yes, you did well.')\nSeparation between a man and his wife occurs here because each spouse imagines that the other spouse is ugly or ill-mannered, etc.\n\n## Allah's Appointed Term supercedes Everything\n\nAllah said,\nوَمَا هُم بِضَارِّينَ بِهِ مِنْ أَحَدٍ إِلَّا بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ\n(But they could not thus harm anyone except by Allah's leave). Sufyan Ath-Thawri commented, \"Except by Allah's appointed term.\" Further, Al-Hasan Al-Basri said that,\nوَمَا هُم بِضَارِّينَ بِهِ مِنْ أَحَدٍ إِلَّا بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ\n(But they could not thus harm anyone except by Allah's leave) means, \"Allah allows magicians to adversely affect whomever He wills and saves whomever He wills from them. Sorcerers never bring harm to anyone except by Allah's leave.\" Allah's statement,\nوَيَتَعَلَّمُونَ مَا يَضُرُّهُمْ وَلَا يَنفَعُهُمْ\n(And they learn that which harms them and profits them not.) means, it harms their religion and does not have a benefit compared to its harm.\nوَلَقَدْ عَلِمُوا لَمَنِ اشْتَرَاهُ مَا لَهُ فِي الْآخِرَةِ مِنْ خَلَاقٍ\n(And indeed they knew that the buyers of it (magic) would have no (Khalaq) share in the Hereafter.) meaning, \"The Jews who preferred magic over following the Messenger of Allah ﷺ knew that those who commit the same error shall have no Khalaq in the Hereafter.\" Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid and As-Suddi stated that 'no Khalaq' means, 'no share.'\nAllah then said,\nوَلَبِئْسَ مَا شَرَوْا بِهِ أَنفُسَهُمْ لَوْ كَانُوا يَعْلَمُونَ - وَلَوْ أَنَّهُمْ آمَنُوا وَاتَّقَوْا لَمَثُوبَةٌ مِّنْ عِندِ اللَّهِ خَيْرٌ لَّوْ كَانُوا يَعْلَمُونَ\n(And how bad indeed was that for which they sold their own selves, if they but knew. And if they had believed and guarded themselves from evil and kept their duty to Allah, far better would have been the reward from their Lord, if they but knew!). Allah stated,\nوَلَبِئْسَ\n(And how bad) meaning, what they preferred, magic, instead of faith and following the Messenger, if they but comprehend the advice.\nوَلَوْ أَنَّهُمْ آمَنُوا وَاتَّقَوْا لَمَثُوبَةٌ مِّنْ عِندِ اللَّهِ خَيْرٌ\n(And if they had believed and guarded themselves from evil and kept their duty to Allah, far better would have been the reward from their Lord,) meaning, \"Had they believed in Allah and His Messenger ﷺ and avoided the prohibitions, then Allah's reward for these good deeds would have been better for them than what they chose and preferred for themselves.\" Similarly, Allah said,\nوَقَالَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْعِلْمَ وَيْلَكُمْ ثَوَابُ اللَّهِ خَيْرٌ لِّمَنْ آمَنَ وَعَمِلَ صَالِحًا وَلَا يُلَقَّاهَا إِلَّا الصَّابِرُونَ\n(But those who had been given (religious) knowledge said: \"Woe to you! The reward of Allah (in the Hereafter) is better for those who believe and do righteous good deeds, and this none shall attain except As-Sabirun (the patient in following the truth).\")(28:80).","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=99","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:104","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:104–105","text":"O you who believe! Say not (to the Messenger ﷺ) Ra'ina but say Unzurna (make us understand) and hear. And for the disbelievers there is a painful torment (104)Neither those who disbelieve among the People of the Scripture (Jews and Christians) nor Al-Mushrikin (the idolaters) like that there should be sent down unto you any good from your Lord. But Allah chooses for His mercy whom He wills. And Allah is the Owner of great bounty (105)\n\n## Manners in Speech\n\nAllah forbade His believing servants from imitating the behavior and deeds of the disbelievers. The Jews used to use devious words that hide what they really meant. May Allah's curse be upon them. When they wanted to say, 'hear us,' they would use the word Ra'ina, which is an insult (in Hebrew, but means 'hear us' in Arabic). Allah said,\nمِّنَ الَّذِينَ هَادُوا يُحَرِّفُونَ الْكَلِمَ عَن مَّوَاضِعِهِ وَيَقُولُونَ سَمِعْنَا وَعَصَيْنَا وَاسْمَعْ غَيْرَ مُسْمَعٍ وَرَاعِنَا لَيًّا بِأَلْسِنَتِهِمْ وَطَعْنًا فِي الدِّينِ وَلَوْ أَنَّهُمْ قَالُوا سَمِعْنَا وَأَطَعْنَا وَاسْمَعْ وَانظُرْنَا لَكَانَ خَيْرًا لَّهُمْ وَأَقْوَمَ وَلَٰكِن لَّعَنَهُمُ اللَّهُ بِكُفْرِهِمْ فَلَا يُؤْمِنُونَ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا\n(Among those who are Jews, there are some who displace words from (their) right places and say: \"We hear your word (O Muhammad ﷺ) and disobey,\" and \"Hear and let you (O Muhammad ﷺ) hear nothing.\" And Ra'ina with a twist of their tongues and as a mockery of the religion (Islam). And if only they had said: \"We hear and obey,\" and \"Do make us understand,\" it would have been better for them, and more proper; but Allah cursed them for their disbelief, so they believe not except a few)(4:46).\nAlso, the Hadiths stated that when they would greet Muslims, they would say, 'As-Samu 'alaykum,' meaning, 'death be to you'. This is why we were commanded to answer them by saying, 'Wa 'alaykum,' meaning, 'and to you too', then our supplication against them shall be answered, rather than theirs against us.\nAllah forbade the believers from imitating the disbelievers in tongue or deed. Allah said,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَقُولُوا رَاعِنَا وَقُولُوا انظُرْنَا وَاسْمَعُوا وَلِلْكَافِرِينَ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ\n(O you who believe! Say not (to the Messenger ﷺ) Ra'ina but say Unzurna (make us understand) and hear. And for the disbelievers there is a painful torment)(2:104).\nAlso, Imam Ahmad narrated that Ibn 'Umar said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nبُعِثْتُ بَيْنَ يَدَيِ السَّاعَةِ بِالسَّيْفِ حَتَّى يُعْبَدَ اللهُ وَحْدَهُ لَا شَرِيكَ لَهُ، وَجُعِلَ رِزْقِي تَحْتَ ظِلِّ رُمْحِي، وَجُعِلَتِ الذِّلَّةُ وَالصَّغَارُ عَلَى مَنْ خَالَفَ أَمْرِي، وَمَنْ تَشَبَّهَ بِقَومٍ فَهُوَ مِنْهُم\n(I was sent with the sword just before the Last Hour, so that Allah is worshipped alone without partners. My sustenance was provided for me from under the shadow of my spear. Those who oppose my command were humiliated and made inferior, and whoever imitates a people, he is one of them.)\nAbu Dawud narrated that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nمَنْ تَشَبَّهَ بِقَوْمٍ فَهُوَ مِنْهُم\n(Whoever imitates a people is one of them.)\nThese Hadiths indicate, along with their threats and warnings, that we are not allowed to imitate the disbelievers in their statements, deeds, clothes, feasts, acts of worship, etc., whatever actions of the disbelievers that were not legislated for us.\nAd-Dahhak said that Ibn 'Abbas commented on the Ayah,\nلَا تَقُولُوا رَاعِنَا\n(Say not (to the Messenger ﷺ) Ra'ina)\nThey used to say to the Prophet ﷺ, Ar'ina samak (which is an insult). Ibn Abu Hatim said that it was reported that Abu Al-'Aliyah, Abu Malik, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, 'Atiyah Al-'Awfi and Qatadah said similarly. Further, Mujahid said, \"Do not say Ra'ina' means, 'Do not dispute'.\" Mujahid said in another narration, \"Do not say, 'We hear from you, and you hear from us.'\" Also, 'Ata' said, \"Do not say,\nرَاعِنَا\n(Ra'ina), which was a dialect that the Ansar used and which was forbidden from use by Allah.\"\nAlso, As-Suddi said, \"Rifa'ah bin Zayd, a Jewish man from the tribe of Qaynuqa', used to come to the Prophet ﷺ and say to him, 'Hear, Ghayr Musma'in (let you hear nothing).' The Muslims used to think that the Prophets are greeted and honored with this type of speech, and this is why some of them used to say, 'Hear, let you hear nothing,' and so on, as mentioned in Surat An-Nisa.\" Thereafter, Allah forbade the believers from uttering the word Ra'ina.\" 'Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam also said similarly.\n\n## The extreme Enmity that the Disbelievers and the People of the Book have against Muslims\n\nAllah said next (2:105),\nمَّا يَوَدُّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَابِ وَلَا الْمُشْرِكِينَ أَن يُنَزَّلَ عَلَيْكُم مِّنْ خَيْرٍ مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ\n(Neither those who disbelieve among the People of the Scripture (Jews and Christians) nor Al-Mushrikin (the idolaters), like that there should be sent down unto you any good from your Lord).\nAllah described the deep enmity that the disbelieving polytheists and People of the Scripture, whom Allah warned against imitating, have against the believers, so that Muslims should sever all friendship with them. Also, Allah mentioned what He granted the believers of the perfect Law that He legislated for their Prophet Muhammad ﷺ. Allah said,\nوَاللَّهُ يَخْتَصُّ بِرَحْمَتِهِ مَن يَشَاءُ وَاللَّهُ ذُو الْفَضْلِ الْعَظِيمِ\n(But Allah chooses for His mercy whom He wills. And Allah is the Owner of great bounty)(2:105).","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=104","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:106","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:106–107","text":"Whatever a verse (revelation) do Nansakh (We abrogate) or Nunsiha (cause to be forgotten), We bring a better one or similar to it. Know you not that Allah is Able to do all things (106)Know you not that it is Allah to Whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth? And besides Allah you have neither any Wali (protector or guardian) nor any helper (107)\n\n## The Meaning of Naskh\n\nIbn Abi Talhah said that Ibn 'Abbas said that,\nمَا نَنسَخْ مِنْ آيَةٍ\n(Whatever a verse (revelation) do Nansakh) means, \"Whatever an Ayah We abrogate.\" Also, Ibn Jurayj said that Mujahid said that,\nمَا نَنسَخْ مِنْ آيَةٍ\n(Whatever a verse (revelation) do Nansakh) means, \"Whatever an Ayah We erase.\" Also, Ibn Abi Najih said that Mujahid said that,\nمَا نَنسَخْ مِنْ آيَةٍ\n(Whatever a verse (revelation) do Nansakh) means, \"We keep the words, but change the meaning.\" He related these words to the companions of 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud. Ibn Abi Hatim said that similar statements were mentioned by Abu Al-'Aliyah and Muhammad bin Ka'b Al-Qurazi. Also As-Suddi said that,\nمَا نَنسَخْ مِنْ آيَةٍ\n(Whatever a verse (revelation) do Nansakh) means, \"We erase it.\" Further, Ibn Abi Hatim said that it means, \"Erase and raise it, such as erasing the following wordings (from the Qur'an), 'The married adulterer and the married adulteress: stone them to death,' and, 'If the son of Adam had two valleys of gold, he would seek a third.'\"\nIbn Jarir stated that,\nمَا نَنسَخْ مِنْ آيَةٍ\n(Whatever a verse (revelation) do Nansakh) means, \"Whatever ruling we repeal in an Ayah by making the allowed unlawful and the unlawful allowed.\" The Nasakh only occurs with commandments, prohibitions, permissions, and so forth. As for stories, they do not undergo Nasakh. The word, 'Nasakh' literally means, 'to copy a book'. The meaning of Nasakh in the case of commandments is removing the commandment and replacing it by another. And whether the Nasakh involves the wordings, the ruling or both, it is still called Nasakh.\nAllah said next,\nأَوْ نُنسِهَا\n(or Nunsiha (cause it to be forgotten)). 'Ali bin Abi Talhah said that Ibn 'Abbas said that,\nمَا نَنسَخْ مِنْ آيَةٍ أَوْ نُنسِهَا\n(Whatever a verse (revelation) do Nansakh or Nunsiha) means, \"Whatever Ayah We repeal or uphold without change.\" Also, Mujahid said that the companions of Ibn Mas'ud (who read this word Nansa'ha) said that it means, \"We uphold its wording and change its ruling.\" Further, 'Ubayd bin 'Umayr, Mujahid and 'Ata' said, 'Nansa'ha' means, \"We delay it (i.e., do not abrogate it).\" Further, 'Atiyyah Al-'Awfi said that the Ayah means, \"We delay repealing it.\" This is the same Tafsir provided by As-Suddi and Ar-Rabi' bin Anas. 'Abdur-Razzaq said that Ma'mar said that Qatadah said about Allah's statement,\nمَا نَنسَخْ مِنْ آيَةٍ أَوْ نُنسِهَا\n(Whatever a verse (revelation) do We abrogate or cause to be forgotten) \"Allah made His Prophet ﷺ forget what He willed and He abrogated what He will.\"\nAllah's said,\nنَأْتِ بِخَيْرٍ مِّنْهَا أَوْ مِثْلِهَا\n(We bring a better one or similar to it), better, relates to the benefit provided for the one it addresses, as reported from 'Ali bin Abi Talhah that Ibn 'Abbas said,\nنَأْتِ بِخَيْرٍ مِّنْهَا\n(We bring a better one) means, \"We bring forth a more beneficial ruling, that is also easier for you.\" Also, As-Suddi said that,\nنَأْتِ بِخَيْرٍ مِّنْهَا أَوْ مِثْلِهَا\n(We bring a better one or similar to it) means, \"We bring forth a better Ayah, or similar to that which was repealed.\" Qatadah also said that,\nنَأْتِ بِخَيْرٍ مِّنْهَا أَوْ مِثْلِهَا\n(We bring a better one or similar to it) means, \"We replace it by an Ayah more facilitating, permitting, commanding, or prohibiting.\"\n\n## Naskh occurs even though the Jews deny it\n\nAllah said,\nأَلَمْ تَعْلَمْ أَنَّ اللَّهَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ - أَلَمْ تَعْلَمْ أَنَّ اللَّهَ لَهُ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَمَا لَكُم مِّن دُونِ اللَّهِ مِن وَلِيٍّ وَلَا نَصِيرٍ\n(Know you not that Allah is Able to do all things? Know you not that it is Allah to Whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth? And besides Allah you have neither any Wali (protector or guardian) nor any helper).\nAllah directed His servants to the fact that He alone is the Owner of His creatures and that He does with them as He wills. Indeed, His is the supreme authority and all creation is His, and just as He created them as He wills, He brings happiness to whom He wills, misery to whom He wills, health to whom He wills and ailment to whom He wills. He also brings success to whom He wills and failure to whom He wills. He judges between His servants as He wills, allows what He wills and disallows what He wills. He decides what He wills, there is no opponent for His judgment, and no one can question Him about what He does, while they shall be questioned. He tests His servants and their obedience to His Messengers by the Naskh. He commands a matter containing a benefit which He knows of, and then He out of His wisdom, prohibits it. Hence, perfect obedience is realized by adhering to His commands, following His Messengers, believing in what ever they convey, implementing their commands and avoiding what they prohibit.\nThe statements of Allah here contain tremendous benefit, prove that the Jews are disbelievers and refute their claim that Naskh does not occur, may Allah curse the Jews. In ignorance and arrogance they claimed that the sound mind stipulates that Naskh does not occur. Some of them falsely claimed that there are divine texts that dismiss the possibility that Naskh occurred.\nImam Abu Ja'far bin Jarir said, \"The Ayah means, 'Do you not know, O Muhammad, that I alone own the heavens and the earth and that I decide whatever I will in them? I forbid whatever I will, change and repeal whatever I will of My previous rulings, whenever I will. I also uphold whatever I will.\"\nIbn Jarir then said, \"Although Allah directed His statement indicating His greatness towards His Prophet ﷺ, He also rejected the lies of the Jews who denied that the rulings of the Torah could undergo Naskh. The Jews also denied the prophethood of Jesus and Muhammad, because of their dislike for what they brought from Allah, such as changing some rulings of the Torah, as Allah commanded. Allah thus proclaimed to the Jews that He owns the heavens and earth and also all authority in them. Further, the subjects in Allah's kingdom are His creation, and they are required to hear and obey His commands and prohibitions. Allah has full authority to command the creation as He wills, forbidding them from what He wills, abrogate what He wills, uphold what He wills, and decide whatever commandments and prohibitions He wills.\"\nI (Ibn Kathir) say that the Jews' dismissal of the occurrence of the Naskh is only a case of their disbelief and rebellion. The sound mind does not deny that there could be a Naskh in Allah's commandments, for He decides what He wills, just as He does what He wills. Further, Naskh occurred in previous Books and Law. For instance, Allah allowed Adam to marry his daughters to his sons and then later forbade this practice. Allah also allowed Nuh to eat from all kinds of animals after they left the ark, then prohibited eating some types of foods. Further, marrying two sisters to one man was allowed for Israel and his children, but Allah prohibited this practice later in the Torah. Allah commanded Abraham to slaughter his son, then repealed that command before it was implemented. Also, Allah commanded the Children of Israel to kill those who worshipped the calf and then repealed that command, so that the Children of Israel were not all exterminated. There are many other instances that the Jews admit have occurred, yet they ignore them. Also, it is a well-known fact that their Books foretold about Muhammad ﷺ and contained the command to follow him. These texts, in their Books, indicate that the Jews were required to follow the Prophet Muhammad ﷺ and that no good deed would be accepted from them, unless it conformed to Muhammad's Law. The Prophet ﷺ brought another Book - the Qur'an - which is the last revelation from Allah.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=106","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:108","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:108","text":"Or do you want to ask your Messenger (Muhammad ﷺ) as Musa (Moses) was asked before (i.e. show us openly our Lord)? And he who changes faith for disbelief, verily, he has gone astray from the right way (108)\n\n## The Prohibition of Unnecessary Questions\n\nIn this Ayah, Allah forbade the believers from asking the Prophet ﷺ numerous questions about matters that did not occur yet. Similarly, Allah said,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَسْأَلُوا عَنْ أَشْيَاءَ إِن تُبْدَ لَكُمْ تَسُؤْكُمْ وَإِن تَسْأَلُوا عَنْهَا حِينَ يُنَزَّلُ الْقُرْآنُ تُبْدَ لَكُمْ\n(O you who believe! Ask not about things which, if made plain to you, may cause you trouble. But if you ask about them while the Qur'an is being revealed, they will be made plain to you)(5:101).\nThis Ayah means, \"If you ask about a matter after it is revealed, it shall be duly explained to you. Therefore, do not ask about matters that have not occurred yet, for they might become prohibited, due to your questions.\" This is why the Sahih narrated,\nإِنَّ أَعْظَمَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ جُرْمًا مَنْ سَأَلَ عَنْ شَيْءٍ لَمْ يُحَرَّمْ، فَحُرِّمَ مِنْ أَجْلِ مَسْأَلَتِهِ\n(The greatest criminal among the Muslims is the one who asks if a thing is prohibited, which is not prohibited, and it becomes prohibited because of his asking about it.)\nThis is why when the Messenger of Allah ﷺ was asked about a husband who finds another man with his wife; if he exposes the adultery, he will be exposing a major incident; if he is quiet about it, he will be quiet about a major matter. The Messenger of Allah ﷺ did not like such questions. Later on, Allah revealed the ruling of Mula'anah [Refer to Nur 24:6-9 in the Qur'an]. The Two Sahihs recorded that Al-Mughirah bin Shu'bah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ \"Forbade saying, 'It was said' and 'He said,' and wasting money and asking many questions.\" Muslim recorded that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nذَرُونِي مَا تَرَكْتُكُمْ، فَإِنَّمَا هَلَكَ مَنْ كَانَ قَبْلَكُمْ بِكَثْرَةِ سُؤَالِهِمْ وَاخْتِلَافِهِمْ عَلى أَنْبِيَائِهِمْ، فَإِذَا أَمَرْتُكُمْ بِأَمْرٍ فَأْتُوا مِنْهُ مَا اسْتَطَعْتُمْ وَإِنْ نَهَيْتُكُمْ عَنْ شَيْءٍ فَاجْتَنِبُوهُ\n(Leave me as I leave you; those before you were only destroyed because of their excessive questioning and disputing with their Prophets. Therefore, when I command you with a matter, adhere to it as much as you can, and when I forbid from something, avoid it.)\nThe Prophet ﷺ only said this after he told the Companions that Allah has ordered them to perform Hajj. A man asked, \"Every year, O Messenger of Allah?\" The Prophet ﷺ did not answer him, but he repeated his question three times. Then the Prophet ﷺ said,\nلَا، وَلَوْ قُلْتُ: نَعَمْ، لَوَجَبَتْ وَلَوْ وَجَبَتْ لَمَا اسْتَطَعْتُم\n(No. Had I said yes, it would have been ordained, and you would not have been able to implement it.)\nThis is why Anas bin Malik said, \"We were forbidden from asking the Messenger of Allah ﷺ about things. So we were delighted when a bedouin man would come and ask him while we listened.\"\nMuhammad bin Ishaq said that Muhammad bin Abi Muhammad told him that 'Ikrimah or Sa'id said that Ibn 'Abbas said that Rafi' bin Huraymilah or Wahb bin Zayd said, \"O Muhammad! Bring us a Book sent down from heaven and which we could read, and make some rivers flow for us, then we will follow you and believe in you.\" Allah sent down the answer to this challenge,\nأَمْ تُرِيدُونَ أَن تَسْأَلُوا رَسُولَكُمْ كَمَا سُئِلَ مُوسَىٰ مِن قَبْلُ وَمَن يَتَبَدَّلِ الْكُفْرَ بِالْإِيمَانِ فَقَدْ ضَلَّ سَوَاءَ السَّبِيلِ\n(Or do you want to ask your Messenger (Muhammad ﷺ) as Musa was asked before (i.e. show us openly our Lord)? And he who changes faith for disbelief, verily, he has gone astray from the right way).\nAllah criticized those who ask the Messenger of Allah ﷺ about a certain matter just for the purpose of being difficult, just as the Children of Israel asked Musa out of stubbornness, rejection and rebellion. Allah said,\nوَمَن يَتَبَدَّلِ الْكُفْرَ بِالْإِيمَانِ\n(And he who changes faith for disbelief) meaning, whoever prefers disbelief to faith,\nفَقَدْ ضَلَّ سَوَاءَ السَّبِيلِ\n(verily, he has gone astray from the right way) meaning, he has strayed from the straight path, to the path of ignorance and misguidance. This is the case of those who deviated from accepting the Prophets and obeying them and those who kept asking their Prophets unnecessary questions in defiance and disbelief, just as Allah said,\nأَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ بَدَّلُوا نِعْمَتَ اللَّهِ كُفْرًا وَأَحَلُّوا قَوْمَهُمْ دَارَ الْبَوَارِ - جَهَنَّمَ يَصْلَوْنَهَا وَبِئْسَ الْقَرَارُ\n(Have you not seen those who have changed the blessings of Allah into disbelief (by denying Prophet Muhammad ﷺ and his Message of Islam), and caused their people to dwell in the house of destruction? Hell, in which they will burn and what an evil place to settle in!)(14:28-29).\nAbu Al-'Aliyah commented, \"They exchanged comfort for hardship.\"","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=108","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:109","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:109–110","text":"Many of the People of the Scripture (Jews and Christians) wish that they could turn you away as disbelievers after you have believed, out of envy from their own selves, even after the truth (that Muhammad ﷺ is Allah's Messenger) has become manifest unto them. But forgive and overlook, till Allah brings His command. Verily, Allah is able to do all things (109)And perform the Salah and give the Zakah, and whatever of good you send forth for yourselves before you, you shall find it with Allah. Certainly, Allah is the Seer of what you do (110)\n\n## The Prohibition of following the Ways of the People of the Book\n\nAllah warned His believing servants against following the ways of the People of Book, who publicly and secretly harbor emnity and hatred for the believers, and who envy the believers, while they recognize the virtue of the believers and their Prophet ﷺ. Allah also commanded His believing servants to forgive them and to be patient with them, until Allah delivers His aid and victory to them. Allah commanded the believers to perform the prayer perfectly, to pay the Zakah and He encouraged them to preserve the practice of these righteous deeds.\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that 'Abdullah bin Ka'b bin Malik said that Ka'b bin Al-Ashraf, who was a Jew and a poet, used to criticize the Prophet ﷺ in his poems, so Allah revealed,\nوَدَّ كَثِيرٌ مِّنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَابِ لَوْ يَرُدُّونَكُم\n(Many of the People of the Scripture (Jews and Christians) wish that they could turn you away..) regarding his matter.\nAlso, Ad-Dahhak said that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"An unlettered Messenger came to the People of the Scriptures confirming what they have in their own Books about the Messengers and the Ayat of Allah. He also believes in all of this, just as they believe in it. Yet, they rejected the Prophet out of disbelief, envy and transgression. This is why Allah said,\nكُفَّارًا حَسَدًا مِّنْ عِندِ أَنفُسِهِم مِّن بَعْدِ مَا تَبَيَّنَ لَهُمُ الْحَقُّ\n(out of envy from their own selves, even after the truth (that Muhammad ﷺ is Allah's Messenger) has become manifest unto them).\nAllah said that after He illuminated the truth for them, such that they were not ignorant of any of it, yet their envy made them deny the Prophet ﷺ. Thus Allah criticized, chastised and denounced them.\" Allah legislated the characteristics that His Prophet ﷺ and the believers should adhere to: belief, faith and accepting what Allah revealed to them and to those before them out of His generosity and tremendous kindness.\nAr-Rabi' bin Anas said that,\nمِّنْ عِندِ أَنفُسِهِم\n(from their own selves) means, \"of their making.\" Also, Abu Al-'Aliyah said that,\nمِّن بَعْدِ مَا تَبَيَّنَ لَهُمُ الْحَقُّ\n(even after the truth (that Muhammad ﷺ is Allah's Messenger) has become manifest unto them) means, \"After it became clear that Muhammad ﷺ is the Messenger of Allah whom they find written of in the Torah and the Injil. They denied him in disbelief and transgression because he was not one of them.\" Qatadah and Ar-Rabi' bin Anas said similarly. Allah said,\nفَاعْفُوا وَاصْفَحُوا حَتَّىٰ يَأْتِيَ اللَّهُ بِأَمْرِهِ\n(But forgive and overlook, till Allah brings His command.) this is similar to His saying;\nوَلَتَسْمَعُنَّ مِنَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ مِن قَبْلِكُمْ وَمِنَ الَّذِينَ أَشْرَكُوا أَذًى كَثِيرًا\n(And you shall certainly hear much that will grieve you from those who received the Scripture before you (Jews and Christians) and from those who ascribe partners to Allah)(3: 186).\nAli bin Abi Talhah said that Ibn 'Abbas said that Allah's statement,\nفَاعْفُوا وَاصْفَحُوا حَتَّىٰ يَأْتِيَ اللَّهُ بِأَمْرِهِ\n(But forgive and overlook, till Allah brings His command.) was abrogated by the Ayah,\nفَاقْتُلُوا الْمُشْرِكِينَ حَيْثُ وَجَدتُّمُوهُمْ\n(Then kill the Mushrikin wherever you find them)(9:5), and,\nقَاتِلُوا الَّذِينَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللَّهِ وَلَا بِالْيَوْمِ الْآخِرِ\n(Fight against those who believe not in Allah, nor in the Last Day)(9:29) until,\nوَهُمْ صَاغِرُونَ\n(And feel themselves subdued)(9:29).\nAllah's pardon for the disbelievers was repealed.\" Abu Al-'Aliyah, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, Qatadah and As-Suddi said similarly: It was abrogated by the Ayah of the sword.\" (Mentioned above). The Ayah,\nحَتَّىٰ يَأْتِيَ اللَّهُ بِأَمْرِهِ\n(till Allah brings His command.) gives further support for this view.\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded Usamah bin Zayd saying that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and his Companions used to forgive the disbelievers and the People of the Book, just as Allah commanded in His statement,\nفَاعْفُوا وَاصْفَحُوا حَتَّىٰ يَأْتِيَ اللَّهُ بِأَمْرِهِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ\n(But forgive and overlook, till Allah brings His command. Verily, Allah is able to do all things).\nThe Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) used to forgive them and was patient with them as Allah ordered him, until Allah allowed fighting them. Then Allah destroyed those who He decreed to be killed among the strong men of Quraysh, by the Prophet's forces. The chain of narration for this text is Sahih, but I did not see its wordings in the six collections of Hadith, although the basis of it is in the Two Sahihs, narrated from Usamah bin Zayd.\n\n## The Encouragement to perform Good Deeds\n\nAllah said,\nوَأَقِيمُوا الصَّلَاةَ وَآتُوا الزَّكَاةَ وَمَا تُقَدِّمُوا لِأَنفُسِكُم مِّنْ خَيْرٍ تَجِدُوهُ عِندَ اللَّهِ\n(And perform the Salah and give the Zakah, and whatever of good you send forth for yourselves before you, you shall find it with Allah).\nAllah encouraged the believers to busy themselves in performing deeds that would bring them benefit and reward on the Day of Resurrection, such as prayer and paying Zakah. This way, they will gain Allah's aid in this life and on a Day when the witnesses testify,\nيَوْمَ لَا يَنفَعُ الظَّالِمِينَ مَعْذِرَتُهُمْ وَلَهُمُ اللَّعْنَةُ وَلَهُمْ سُوءُ الدَّارِ\n(The Day when their excuses will be of no profit to the Zalimin (wrongdoers). Theirs will be the curse, and theirs will be the evil abode (i.e. painful torment in Hell-fire))(40:52).\nThis is why Allah said,\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ بَصِيرٌ\n(Certainly, Allah sees what you do), meaning, that He is never unaware of the deeds of any person, nor will these deeds be lost by Him. Whether deeds are righteous or evil, Allah will award each according to what he or she deserves based on their deeds.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=109","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:111","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:111–113","text":"And they say, \"None shall enter Paradise unless he be a Jew or a Christian.\" These are their own desires. Say (O Muhammad ﷺ), \"Produce your Burhan if you are truthful. (111)Yes! But whoever submits his face (himself) to Allah (i.e. follows Allah's religion of Islamic Monotheism) and he is a Muhsin then his reward is with his Lord (Allah), on such shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve (112)The Jews said that the Christians follow nothing (i.e. are not on the right religion); and the Christians said that the Jews follow nothing (i.e. are not on the right religion); though they both recite the Scripture. Like unto their word, said those (the pagans) who know not. Allah will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection about that wherein they have been differing (113)\n\n## The Hopes of the People of the Book\n\nAllah made the confusion of the Jews and the Christians clear, since they claim that no one will enter Paradise, unless he is a Jew or a Christian. Similarly, Allah mentioned their claims in Surat Al-Ma'idah:\nنَحْنُ أَبْنَاءُ اللَّهِ وَأَحِبَّاؤُهُ\n(We are the children of Allah and His loved ones)(5:18).\nAllah refuted this false claim and informed them that they will be punished because of their sins. Previously we mentioned their claim that the Fire would not touch them for more than a few days, after which they would be put in Paradise. Allah rebuked this claim, and He said about this baseless claim,\nتِلْكَ أَمَانِيُّهُمْ\n(These are their own desires). Abu Al-'Aliyah commented, \"These are wishes that they wished Allah would answer, without basis.\" Similar was stated by Qatadah and Ar-Rabi' bin Anas. Allah then said,\nقُلْ\n(Say) meaning, \"Say O Muhammad:\"\nهَاتُوا بُرْهَانَكُمْ\n(\"Produce your Burhan...\") meaning, \"Your proof\", as Abu Al-'Aliyah, Mujahid, As-Suddi and Ar-Rabi' bin Anas stated. Qatadah said that the Ayah means, \"Bring the evidence that supports your statement,\nإِن كُنتُمْ صَادِقِينَ\n(if you are truthful) in your claim. \"\nAllah then said,\nبَلَىٰ مَنْ أَسْلَمَ وَجْهَهُ لِلَّهِ وَهُوَ مُحْسِنٌ\n(Yes! But whoever submits his face (himself) to Allah (i.e. follows Allah's religion of Islamic Monotheism) and he is a Muhsin) meaning, \"Whoever performs deeds in sincerity, for Allah alone without partners.\" In a similar statement, Allah said,\nفَإِنْ حَاجُّوكَ فَقُلْ أَسْلَمْتُ وَجْهِيَ لِلَّهِ وَمَنِ اتَّبَعَنِ\n(So if they dispute with you (Muhammad ﷺ) say: \"I have submitted myself to Allah (in Islam), and (so have) those who follow me.\")(3:20)\nAbu Al-'Aliyah and Ar-Rabi' said that,\nبَلَىٰ مَنْ أَسْلَمَ وَجْهَهُ لِلَّهِ\n(Yes! But whoever submits his face (himself) to Allah) means, \"Whoever is sincere with Allah.\"\nAlso, Sa'id bin Jubayr said that,\nبَلَىٰ مَنْ أَسْلَمَ\n(Yes! But whoever submits) means, he is sincere,\nوَجْهَهُ\n(his face (himself)) meaning, in his religion.\nوَهُوَ مُحْسِنٌ\n(and he is a Muhsin) following the Messenger ﷺ. For there are two conditions for deeds to be accepted; the deed must be performed for Allah's sake alone and conform to the Shari'ah. When the deed is sincere, but does not conform to the Shari'ah, then it will not be accepted. The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَنْ عَمِلَ عَمَلًا لَيْسَ عَلَيْهِ أَمْرُنَا فَهُوَ رَدٌّ\n(Whoever performs a deed that does not conform with our matter (religion), then it will be rejected.)\nThis Hadith was recorded by Muslim. Therefore, the good deeds of the priests and rabbis will not be accepted, even if they are sincerely for Allah alone, because these deeds do not conform with the method of the Messenger ﷺ, who was sent for all mankind. Allah said regarding such cases,\nوَقَدِمْنَا إِلَىٰ مَا عَمِلُوا مِنْ عَمَلٍ فَجَعَلْنَاهُ هَبَاءً مَّنثُورًا\n(And We shall turn to whatever deeds they (disbelievers, polytheists, sinners) did, and We shall make such deeds as scattered floating particles of dust.)(25:23)\nوَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا أَعْمَالُهُمْ كَسَرَابٍ بِقِيعَةٍ يَحْسَبُهُ الظَّمْآنُ مَاءً حَتَّىٰ إِذَا جَاءَهُ لَمْ يَجِدْهُ شَيْئًا\n(As for those who disbelieved, their deeds are like a mirage in a desert. The thirsty one thinks it to be water, until he comes up to it, he finds it to be nothing.)(24:39) and,\nوُجُوهٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ خَاشِعَةٌ - عَامِلَةٌ نَّاصِبَةٌ - تَصْلَىٰ نَارًا حَامِيَةً - تُسْقَىٰ مِنْ عَيْنٍ آنِيَةٍ\n(Some faces, that Day will be humiliated. Laboring, weary. They will enter in the hot blazing Fire. They will be given to drink from a boiling spring)(88:2-5).\nWhen the deed conforms to the Shari'ah outwardly, but the person did not perform it sincerely for Allah alone, the deed will also be rejected, as in the case of the hypocrites and those who do their deeds to show off. Similarly, Allah said,\nإِنَّ الْمُنَافِقِينَ يُخَادِعُونَ اللَّهَ وَهُوَ خَادِعُهُمْ وَإِذَا قَامُوا إِلَى الصَّلَاةِ قَامُوا كُسَالَىٰ يُرَاءُونَ النَّاسَ وَلَا يَذْكُرُونَ اللَّهَ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا\n(Verily, the hypocrites seek to deceive Allah, but it is He Who deceives them. And when they stand up for As-Salah (the prayer), they stand with laziness to be seen by people, and they do not remember Allah but little.)(4:142) and,\nفَوَيْلٌ لِّلْمُصَلِّينَ - الَّذِينَ هُمْ عَن صَلَاتِهِمْ سَاهُونَ - الَّذِينَ هُمْ يُرَاءُونَ - وَيَمْنَعُونَ الْمَاعُونَ\n(So woe unto those performers of Salah (prayers)(hypocrites). Those who delay their Salah (from their stated fixed times). Those who do good deeds only to be seen (of men). And withhold Al-Ma'un (small kindnesses))(107:4-7).\nThis is why Allah said,\nفَمَن كَانَ يَرْجُو لِقَاءَ رَبِّهِ فَلْيَعْمَلْ عَمَلًا صَالِحًا وَلَا يُشْرِكْ بِعِبَادَةِ رَبِّهِ أَحَدًا\n(So whoever hopes for the meeting with his Lord, let him work righteousness and associate none as a partner in the worship of his Lord)(18:110).\nHe also said in this Ayah,\nبَلَىٰ مَنْ أَسْلَمَ وَجْهَهُ لِلَّهِ وَهُوَ مُحْسِنٌ\n(Yes, but whoever submits his face (himself) to Allah (follows Allah's religion of Islamic Monotheism) and he is a Muhsin).\nAllah's statement,\nفَلَهُمْ أَجْرُهُمْ عِندَ رَبِّهِمْ وَلَا خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلَا هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ\n(Shall have their reward with their Lord, on them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve) guaranteed them the rewards and safety from what they fear and should avoid.\nفَلَا خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ\n(There shall be no fear on them) in the future,\nوَلَا هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ\n(nor shall they grieve) about what they abandoned in the past. Moreover, Sa'id bin Jubayr said,\nفَلَا خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ\n\"(There shall be no fear on them) in the Hereafter, and\nوَلَا هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ\n(nor shall they grieve) about their imminent death.\"\n\n## The Jews and Christians dispute among Themselves out of Disbelief and Stubbornness\n\nAllah said,\nوَقَالَتِ الْيَهُودُ لَيْسَتِ النَّصَارَىٰ عَلَىٰ شَيْءٍ وَقَالَتِ النَّصَارَىٰ لَيْسَتِ الْيَهُودُ عَلَىٰ شَيْءٍ وَهُمْ يَتْلُونَ الْكِتَابَ\n(The Jews said that the Christians follow nothing (i.e. are not on the right religion); and the Christians said that the Jews follow nothing (i.e. are not on the right religion); though they both recite the Scripture.)\nAllah explained the disputes, hatred and stubbornness that the People of the Book have towards each other. Muhammad bin Ishaq reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"When a delegation of Christians from Najran came to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, the Jewish rabbis came and began arguing with them before the Messenger of Allah ﷺ. Rafi' bin Huraymilah said, 'You do not follow anything,' and he reiterated his disbelief in Jesus and the Injil. Then a Christian man from Najran's delegation said to the Jews, 'Rather, you do not follow anything,' and he reiterated his rejection of Musa's prophethood and his disbelief in the Torah. So Allah revealed the Ayah,\nوَقَالَتِ الْيَهُودُ لَيْسَتِ النَّصَارَىٰ عَلَىٰ شَيْءٍ وَقَالَتِ النَّصَارَىٰ لَيْسَتِ الْيَهُودُ عَلَىٰ شَيْءٍ وَهُمْ يَتْلُونَ الْكِتَابَ\n(The Jews said that the Christians follow nothing (i.e. are not on the right religion); and the Christians said that the Jews follow nothing (i.e. are not on the right religion); though they both recite the Scripture.)\"\nAllah made it clear that each party read the affirmation of what they claimed to reject in their Book. Consequently, the Jews disbelieve in Jesus, even though they have the Torah in which Allah took their Covenant by the tongue of Moses to believe in Jesus. Also, the Gospel contains Jesus' assertion that Moses' prophethood and the Torah came from Allah. Yet, each party disbelieved in what the other party had.\nAllah said,\nكَذَٰلِكَ قَالَ الَّذِينَ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ مِثْلَ قَوْلِهِمْ\n(Like unto their word, said those who know not) thus exposing the ignorance displayed by the Jews and the Christians concerning their statements that we mentioned. There is a difference of opinion regarding the meaning of Allah's statement,\nالَّذِينَ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ\n(who know not)\nFor instance, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas and Qatadah said that,\nكَذَٰلِكَ قَالَ الَّذِينَ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ\n(Like unto their word, said those said those who know not) means, \"The Christians said similar statements to the Jews.\" Ibn Jurayj asked 'Ata', \"Who are those 'who know not'?\" 'Ata' said, \"Nations that existed before the Jews and the Christians and before the Torah and the Gospel.\" Also, As-Suddi said that,\nقَالَ الَّذِينَ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ\n(said those who know not) is in reference to the Arabs who said that Muhammad ﷺ was not following anything (i. e. did not follow a true or existing religion). Abu Ja'far bin Jarir chose the view that this Ayah is general and that there is no evidence that specifically supports any of these explanations. So interpreting the Ayah in a general way is better. Allah knows best.\nAllah said,\nفَاللَّهُ يَحْكُمُ بَيْنَهُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ فِيمَا كَانُوا فِيهِ يَخْتَلِفُونَ\n(Allah will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection about that wherein they have been differing.) meaning, that Allah will gather them all on the Day of Return. On that Day, Allah will justly judge between them, for He is never unjust with anyone, even as little as the weight of an atom. This Ayah is similar to Allah's statement in Surat Al-Hajj (22:17),\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَالَّذِينَ هَادُوا وَالصَّابِئِينَ وَالنَّصَارَىٰ وَالْمَجُوسَ وَالَّذِينَ أَشْرَكُوا إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَفْصِلُ بَيْنَهُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ شَهِيدٌ\n(Verily, those who believe (in Allah and in His Messenger Muhammad ﷺ), and those who are Jews, and the Sabians, and the Christians, and the Majus, and those who associate partners with Allah; truly, Allah will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection. Verily, Allah is over all things a Witness).\nAllah said,\nقُلْ يَجْمَعُ بَيْنَنَا رَبُّنَا ثُمَّ يَفْتَحُ بَيْنَنَا بِالْحَقِّ وَهُوَ الْفَتَّاحُ الْعَلِيمُ\n(Say: \"Our Lord will assemble us all together (on the Day of Resurrection), then He will judge between us with truth. And He is the Just Judge, the Knower of the true state of affairs.\")(34:26).","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=111","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:114","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:114","text":"And who are more unjust than those who forbid that Allah's Name be mentioned (i.e. prayers and invocations) in Allah's Masjids and strive for their ruin? It was not fitting that such should themselves enter them (Allah's Masjids) except in fear. For them there is disgrace in this world, and they will have a great torment in the Hereafter (114)\n\n## Of the Most Unjust are Those Who prevent People from the Masjids and strive for their Ruin\n\nThe Quraysh idolators are those who hindered the people from the Masjids of Allah and wanted to destroy them. Ibn Jarir reported that Ibn Zayd said that Allah's statement,\nوَمَنْ أَظْلَمُ مِمَّن مَّنَعَ مَسَاجِدَ اللَّهِ أَن يُذْكَرَ فِيهَا اسْمُهُ وَسَعَىٰ فِي خَرَابِهَا\n(And who are more unjust than those who forbid that Allah's Name be mentioned (i.e. prayers and invocations) in Allah's Masjids and strive for their ruin?) is about the Quraysh idolators who prevented the Prophet ﷺ from entering Makkah from Al-Hudaybiyyah, until he slaughtered the Hadi (animal for sacrifice) at Dhi-Tuwa. He then agreed to a peace treaty with the idolators and said to them, (No one before has ever prevented people from entering the House. One would even see the killer of his father and brother, but would not prevent him (from entering the House of Allah).) They said, \"Whoever killed our fathers at Badr, shall never enter it while there is one of us alive.\" Allah's statement,\nوَسَعَىٰ فِي خَرَابِهَا\n(and strive for their ruin) means those who prevent whoever maintain the Masjids with Allah's remembrance and who visit Allah's House to perform Hajj and 'Umrah. Ibn Abi Hatim recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said that the Quraysh prevented the Prophet ﷺ from praying at the Ka'bah in Al-Masjid Al-Haram, so Allah revealed,\nوَمَنْ أَظْلَمُ مِمَّن مَّنَعَ مَسَاجِدَ اللَّهِ أَن يُذْكَرَ فِيهَا اسْمُهُ\n(And who are more unjust than those who forbid that Allah's Name be mentioned (i.e. prayers and invocations) in Allah's Masjids?)\"\nAfter Allah chastised the Jews and Christians, He also criticized the idolators who expelled the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and his Companions from Makkah, preventing them from praying in Al-Masjid Al-Haram, which they kept exclusively for their idols and polytheism. Allah said,\nوَمَا لَهُمْ أَلَّا يُعَذِّبَهُمُ اللَّهُ وَهُمْ يَصُدُّونَ عَنِ الْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ وَمَا كَانُوا أَوْلِيَاءَهُ إِنْ أَوْلِيَاؤُهُ إِلَّا الْمُتَّقُونَ وَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَهُمْ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ\n(And why should not Allah punish them while they hinder (men) from Al-Masjid Al-Haram, and they are not its guardians? None can be its guardians except Al-Muttaqun (the pious), but most of them know not.)(8:34)\nمَا كَانَ لِلْمُشْرِكِينَ أَن يَعْمُرُوا مَسَاجِدَ اللَّهِ شَاهِدِينَ عَلَىٰ أَنفُسِهِم بِالْكُفْرِ أُولَٰئِكَ حَبِطَتْ أَعْمَالُهُمْ وَفِي النَّارِ هُمْ خَالِدُونَ - إِنَّمَا يَعْمُرُ مَسَاجِدَ اللَّهِ مَنْ آمَنَ بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الْآخِرِ وَأَقَامَ الصَّلَاةَ وَآتَى الزَّكَاةَ وَلَمْ يَخْشَ إِلَّا اللَّهَ فَعَسَىٰ أُولَٰئِكَ أَن يَكُونُوا مِنَ الْمُهْتَدِينَ\n(It is not for the Mushrikin (polytheists), to maintain the Masjids of Allah while they witness against their own selves of disbelief. The works of such are in vain and in Fire shall they abide. The Masjids of Allah shall be maintained only by those who believe in Allah and the Last Day; perform the Salah, and give the Zakah and fear none but Allah. It is they who are on true guidance.)(9:17-18)\nand,\nهُمُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَصَدُّوكُمْ عَنِ الْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ وَالْهَدْيَ مَعْكُوفًا أَن يَبْلُغَ مَحِلَّهُ وَلَوْلَا رِجَالٌ مُّؤْمِنُونَ وَنِسَاءٌ مُّؤْمِنَاتٌ لَّمْ تَعْلَمُوهُمْ أَن تَطَئُوهُمْ فَتُصِيبَكُم مِّنْهُم مَّعَرَّةٌ بِغَيْرِ عِلْمٍ لِّيُدْخِلَ اللَّهُ فِي رَحْمَتِهِ مَن يَشَاءُ لَوْ تَزَيَّلُوا لَعَذَّبْنَا الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنْهُمْ عَذَابًا أَلِيمًا\n(They are the ones who disbelieved and hindered you from Al-Masjid-Al-Haram (at Makkah) and detained the sacrificial animals, from reaching their place of sacrifice. Had there not been believing men and believing women whom you did not know, that you may kill them and on whose account a sin would have been committed by you without (your) knowledge, that Allah might bring into His mercy whom He wills ـ if they (the believers and the disbelievers) had been apart, We verily, would have punished those of them who disbelieved with painful torment)(48:25).\nTherefore, Allah said here,\nإِنَّمَا يَعْمُرُ مَسَاجِدَ اللَّهِ مَنْ آمَنَ بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الْآخِرِ وَأَقَامَ الصَّلَاةَ وَآتَى الزَّكَاةَ وَلَمْ يَخْشَ إِلَّا اللَّهَ\n(The Masjids of Allah shall be maintained only by those who believe in Allah and the Last Day; perform the Salah, and give the Zakah and fear none but Allah)(9:18).\nTherefore, if those believers who follow the virtues mentioned in the Ayah were prevented from attending the Masjid, then what cause for destruction is worse than this? Maintaining the Masjids not only means beautifying them, but it involves remembering Allah, establishing His Shari'ah in the Masjids and purifying them from the filth of Shirk.\n\n## The Good News that Islam shall prevail\n\nAllah said next,\nأُولَٰئِكَ مَا كَانَ لَهُمْ أَن يَدْخُلُوهَا إِلَّا خَائِفِينَ\n(It was not fitting that such should themselves enter them (Allah's Masjids) except in fear).\nThis Ayah means, \"Do not allow them - the disbelievers - to enter the Masjids, except to satisfy the terms of an armistice or a treaty.\" When the Messenger of Allah ﷺ conquered Makkah in 9 H, he commanded that someone announce at Mina, \"After the current year, no idolators shall perform Hajj, and no naked persons shall perform Tawaf around the House, except for those who have a treaty. In this case, the treaty will be carried to the end of its term.\" This Ayah supports the Ayah,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِنَّمَا الْمُشْرِكُونَ نَجَسٌ فَلَا يَقْرَبُوا الْمَسْجِدَ الْحَرَامَ بَعْدَ عَامِهِمْ هَٰذَا\n(O you who believe! (in Allah's Oneness and in His Messenger Muhammad ﷺ)! Verily, the Mushrikun (idolators) are Najasun (impure). So let them not come near Al-Masjid-Al-Haram (at Makkah) after this year)(9:28).\nIt was also said that this Ayah (2:114) carries the good news for the Muslims from Allah that He will allow them to take over Al-Masjid Al-Haram and all the Masjids and disgrace the idolators. Soon after, the Ayah indicated, no idolator shall enter the House, except out of fear of being seized or killed, unless he embraces Islam. Allah fulfilled this promise and later decreed that idolators not be allowed to enter Al-Masjid Al-Haram. The Messenger of Allah ﷺ stated that no two religions should remain in the Arabian Peninsula, and the Jews and Christians should be expelled from it, all praise is due to Allah. All of these rulings ensure maintaining the honor of Al-Masjid Al-Haram and purifying the area where Allah sent His Messenger to warn and bring good news to all of mankind, may Allah's peace and blessings be on him.\nThis Ayah also described the disgrace that the disbelievers earn in this life, and that the punishment comes in a form comparable to the deed. Just as they prevented the believers from entering Al-Masjid Al-Haram, they were prevented from entering it in turn. Just as they expelled the believers from Makkah, they were in turn expelled from Makkah,\nوَلَهُمْ فِي الْآخِرَةِ عَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ\n(and they will have a great torment in the Hereafter) because they breached the sanctity of the House and brought filth to it by erecting idols all around it, invoking other than Allah and performing Tawaf around it while naked, etc.\nHere it is worth mentioning the Hadith about seeking refuge from disgrace in this life and the torment of the Hereafter. Imam Ahmad recorded that Busr bin Artah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to supplicate,\nاللَّهُمَّ أَحْسِنْ عَاقِبَتَنَا فِي الْأُمُورِ كُلِّهَا وَأَجِرْنَا مِنْ خِزْيِ الدُّنْيَا وَعَذَابِ الْآخِرَةِ\n(O Allah! Make our end better in all affairs, and save us from disgrace in this life and the torment of the Hereafter.)\nThis Hadith is Hasan.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=114","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:115","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:115","text":"And to Allah belong the east and the west, so wherever you turn (yourselves or your faces) there is the Face of Allah (and He is High above, over His Throne). Surely, Allah is Sufficient (for His creatures' needs), Knowing (115)\n\n## Facing the Qiblah (Direction of the Prayer)\n\nThis ruling brought comfort to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and his Companions, who were driven out of Makkah and had to depart from the area of Al-Masjid Al-Haram. In Makkah, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to pray in the direction of Bayt Al-Maqdis, while the Ka'bah was between him and the Qiblah. When the Messenger ﷺ migrated to Al-Madinah, he faced Bayt Al-Maqdis for sixteen or seventeen months, and then Allah directed him to face Al-Ka'bah in prayer. This is why Allah said,\nوَلِلَّهِ الْمَشْرِقُ وَالْمَغْرِبُ فَأَيْنَمَا تُوَلُّوا فَثَمَّ وَجْهُ اللَّهِ\n(And to Allah belong the east and the west, so wherever you turn (yourselves or your faces) there is the Face of Allah (and He is High above, over His Throne)).\nAli bin Abi Talhah said that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"The first part of the Qur'an that was abrogated was about the Qiblah. When the Messenger of Allah ﷺ migrated to Al-Madinah, which was inhabited by the Jews, he was at first commanded to face Bayt Al-Maqdis. The Jews were happy, and the Messenger of Allah ﷺ faced Bayt Al-Maqdis for some ten months. However, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ liked to face the Qiblah of Ibrahim (Al-Ka'bah at Makkah), and he used to look to the sky and supplicate. So Allah revealed,\nقَدْ نَرَىٰ تَقَلُّبَ وَجْهِكَ فِي السَّمَاءِ\n(Verily, We have seen the turning of your (Muhammad's) face towards the heaven) until,\nفَوَلُّوا وُجُوهَكُمْ شَطْرَهُ\n(turn your faces (in prayer) in that direction)(2:144).\nThe Jews were disturbed by this development and said, 'What made them change the direction of the Qiblah that they used to face?' Allah revealed,\nقُل لِّلَّهِ الْمَشْرِقُ وَالْمَغْرِبُ\n(Say (O Muhammad ﷺ): \"To Allah belong both, east and the west\") and,\nفَأَيْنَمَا تُوَلُّواْ فَثَمَّ وَجْهُ اللَّهِ\n(So wherever you turn (yourselves or your faces) there is the Face of Allah (and He is High above, over His Throne)).\"\nIkrimah said that Ibn 'Abbas said,\nفَأَيْنَمَا تُوَلُّواْ فَثَمَّ وَجْهُ اللَّهِ\n(So wherever you turn (yourselves or your faces) there is the Face of Allah (and He is High above, over His Throne)) means, \"Allah's direction is wherever you face, east or west.\" Mujahid said that,\nفَأَيْنَمَا تُوَلُّواْ فَثَمَّ وَجْهُ اللَّهِ\n(So wherever you turn (yourselves or your faces) there is the Face of Allah (and He is High above, over His Throne))\nmeans, \"Wherever you may be, you have a Qiblah to face, that is, Al-Ka'bah.\"\nHowever, it was said that Allah sent down this Ayah before the order to face the Ka'bah. Ibn Jarir said, \"Others said that this Ayah was revealed to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ permitting the one praying voluntary prayers to face wherever they wish in the east or west, while traveling, when in fear and when facing the enemy.\" For instance, Ibn 'Umar used to face whatever direction his animal was headed and proclaim that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ did the same, explaining the Ayah,\nفَأَيْنَمَا تُوَلُّواْ فَثَمَّ وَجْهُ اللَّهِ\n(So wherever you turn (yourselves or your faces) there is the Face of Allah).\"\nThat Hadith was also collected by Muslim, At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa'i, Ibn Abi Hatim, Ibn Marduwyah, and its origin is in the Two Sahihs from Ibn 'Umar and 'Amr bin Rabi'ah without mentioning the Ayah. In his Sahih, Al-Bukhari recorded that Nafi' said that whenever Ibn 'Umar was asked about the prayer during times of fear, he used to describe it and would then say, \"When the sense of fear is worse than that, pray while standing, or while riding, whether facing the Qiblah or not.\" Nafi' then said, \"I think Ibn 'Umar mentioned that from the Prophet ﷺ.\" It was also said that the Ayah was revealed about those who are unable to find the correct direction of the Qiblah in the dark or due to cloudy skies and, thus, prayed in a direction other than the Qiblah by mistake.\n\n## The Qiblah for the People of Al-Madinah is what is between the East and the West\n\nIn his Tafsir of this Ayah (2:115), Al-Hafiz Ibn Marduwyah recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَا بَيْنَ الْمَشْرِقِ وَالْمَغْرِبِ قِبْلَةٌ لِأَهْلِ الْمَدِينَةِ وَأَهْلِ الشَّامِ وَأَهْلِ الْعِرَاقِ\n(What is between the east and the west is the Qiblah for the people of Al-Madinah, Ash-Sham and 'Iraq.)\nAt-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah recorded this Hadith with the wording,\nمَا بَيْنَ الْمَشْرِقِ وَالْمَغْرِبِ قِبْلَةٌ\n(What is between the east and the west is a Qiblah.)\nIbn Jarir said, \"The meaning of Allah's statement;\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ وَاسِعٌ عَلِيمٌ\n(Surely, Allah is Sufficient (for His creatures' needs), Knowing) is that Allah encompasses all His Creation by providing them with sufficient needs and by His generosity and favor. His statement,\nعَلِيمٌ\n(Knowing) means He is knowledgeable of their deeds and nothing escapes His watch, nor is He unaware of anything. Rather, His knowledge encompasses everything.\"","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=115","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:116","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:116–117","text":"And they (Jews, Christians and pagans) say: Allah has begotten a son (children or offspring). Glory is to Him (Exalted is He above all that they associate with Him). Nay, to Him belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth, and all are Qānitūn to Him (116)The Originator of the heavens and the earth. When He decrees a matter, He only says to it: \"Be! ـ and it is (117)\n\n## Refuting the Claim that Allah has begotten a Son\n\nThis and the following Ayat refute the Christians, may Allah curse them, and their like among the Jews and the Arab idolators, who claimed that the angels are Allah's daughters. Allah refuted all of them in their claim that He had begotten a son. Allah said,\nسُبْحَانَهُ\n(Glory is to Him.)\nmeaning, He is holier and more perfect than such claim;\nبَل لَّهُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ\n(Nay, to Him belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth,) meaning, the truth is not as the disbelievers claimed, rather, Allah's is the kingdom of the heavens and earth and whatever and whoever is in, on and between them. Allah is the Supreme Authority in the heavens and earth, and He is the Creator, Provider and Sustainer Who decides all the affairs of the creation as He wills. All creatures are Allah's servants and are owned by Him. Therefore, how could one of them be His son? The son of any being is born out of two comparable beings. Allah has no equal or rival sharing His grace and greatness, so how can He have a son when He has no wife? Allah said,\nبَدِيعُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ أَنَّىٰ يَكُونُ لَهُ وَلَدٌ وَلَمْ تَكُن لَّهُ صَاحِبَةٌ وَخَلَقَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ وَهُوَ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ عَلِيمٌ\n(He is the Originator of the heavens and the earth. How can He have children when He has no wife? He created all things and He is the Knower of everything)(6:101).\nوَقَالُوا اتَّخَذَ الرَّحْمَٰنُ وَلَدًا - لَّقَدْ جِئْتُمْ شَيْئًا إِدًّا - تَكَادُ السَّمَاوَاتُ يَتَفَطَّرْنَ مِنْهُ وَتَنشَقُّ الْأَرْضُ وَتَخِرُّ الْجِبَالُ هَدًّا - أَن دَعَوْا لِلرَّحْمَٰنِ وَلَدًا - وَمَا يَنبَغِي لِلرَّحْمَٰنِ أَن يَتَّخِذَ وَلَدًا - إِن كُلُّ مَن فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ إِلَّا آتِي الرَّحْمَٰنِ عَبْدًا - لَّقَدْ أَحْصَاهُمْ وَعَدَّهُمْ عَدًّا - وَكُلُّهُمْ آتِيهِ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ فَرْدًا\n(And they say: \"The Most Gracious (Allah) has begotten a son (offspring or children).\" Indeed you have brought forth (said) a terrible evil thing. Whereby the heavens are almost torn, and the earth is split asunder, and the mountains fall in ruins. That they ascribe a son (or offspring or children) to the Most Gracious (Allah). But it is not suitable for (the majesty of) the Most Gracious (Allah) that He should beget a son (or offspring or children). There is none in the heavens and the earth but comes unto the Most Gracious (Allah) as a servant. Verily, He knows each one of them, and has counted them a full counting. And everyone of them will come to Him alone on the Day of Resurrection (without any helper, or protector or defender))(19:88-95), and,\nقُلْ هُوَ اللَّهُ أَحَدٌ - اللَّهُ الصَّمَدُ - لَمْ يَلِدْ وَلَمْ يُولَدْ - وَلَمْ يَكُن لَّهُ كُفُوًا أَحَدٌ\n(Say: \"He is Allah (the) One, Allah the Samad (the Self-Sufficent, upon whom all depend), He begets not, nor was He begotten, and there is none comparable to Him.\")(112).\nIn these Ayat, Allah stated that He is the Supreme Master Whom there is no equal or rival, everything and everyone was created by Him, so how can He have a son from among them? This is why, in the Tafsir of this Ayah, Al-Bukhari recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nقَالَ اللهُ تَعَالَى: كَذّبَنِي ابْنُ آدَمَ وَلَمْ يَكُنْ لَهُ ذلِكَ، وَشَتَمَنِي وَلَمْ يَكُنْ لَهُ ذلِكَ، فَأَمَّا تَكْذِيبُهُ إِيَّايَ فَيَزْعُمُ أَنِّي لَا أَقْدِرُ أَنْ أُعِيدَهُ كَمَا كَانَ، وَأَمَّا شَتْمُهُ إِيَّايَ فَقَوْلُهُ لِي وَلَدًا فَسُبْحَانِي أَنْ أَتَّخِذَ صَاحِبَةً أَوْ وَلَدًا\n(Allah said, 'The son of Adam has denied Me, and that is not his right. He has insulted Me, and that is not his right. As for the denial of Me, he claimed that I am unable to bring him back as he used to be (resurrect him). As for his insulting Me, he claimed that I have a son. All praise is due to Me, it is unbefitting that I should have a wife or a son.')\nThis Hadith was recorded by Al-Bukhari.\nIt is recorded in the Two Sahihs that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nلَا أَحَدَ أَصْبَرُ عَلَى أَذًى سَمِعَهُ مِنَ اللهِ: إِنَّهُمْ يَجْعَلُونَ لَهُ وَلَدًا وَهُوَ يَرْزُقُهُمْ وَيُعَافِيهِم\n(No one is more patient when hearing an insult than Allah. They attribute a son to Him, yet He still gives them sustanence and health.)\n\n## Everything is within Allah's Grasp\n\nAllah said,\nكُلٌّ لَّهُ قَانِتُونَ\n(all are Qānitūn to Him).\nIbn Abi Hatim said that Abu Sa'id Al-Ashaj informed them that Asbat informed them from Mutarrif, from 'Atiyah, from Ibn 'Abbas who said that,\nقَانِتِينَ\n(Qānitīn)(2:238) means, they pray to Him. 'Ikrimah and Abu Malik also said that,\nكُلٌّ لَّهُ قَانِتُونَ\n(and all are Qānitūn to Him.) means, bound to Him in servitude to Him. Sa'id bin Jubayr said that Qānitūn is sincerity. Ar-Rabi' bin Anas said that,\nكُلٌّ لَّهُ قَانِتُونَ\n(all are Qānitūn to Him.) means, \"Standing up - before Him - on the Day of Resurrection.\" Also, As-Suddi said that,\nكُلٌّ لَّهُ قَانِتُونَ\n(and all are Qānitūn to Him.) means, \"Obedient on the Day of Resurrection.\" Khasif said that Mujahid said that,\nكُلٌّ لَّهُ قَانِتُونَ\n(and all are Qānitūn to Him.) means, \"Obedient. He says, 'Be a human' and he becomes a human.\" He also said, \"(Allah says,) 'Be a donkey' and it becomes a donkey.\" Also, Ibn Abi Najih said that Mujahid said that,\nكُلٌّ لَّهُ قَانِتُونَ\n(and all are Qānitūn to Him.) means, obedient. Mujahid also said, \"The obedience of the disbeliever occurs when his shadow prostrates, while he hates that.\" Mujahid's statement, which Ibn Jarir preferred, combines all the meanings, and that is that Qunut means obedience and submission to Allah. There are two categories of Qunut: legislated and destined, for Allah said,\nوَلِلَّهِ يَسْجُدُ مَن فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ طَوْعًا وَكَرْهًا وَظِلَالُهُم بِالْغُدُوِّ وَالْآصَالِ\n(And unto Allah (alone) falls in prostration whoever is in the heavens and the earth, willingly or unwillingly, and so do their shadows in the mornings and in the (late) afternoons)(13:15).\n\n## The Meaning of Badee'\n\nAllah said,\nبَدِيعُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ\n(The Badī' (Originator) of the heavens and the earth.) which means, He created them when nothing resembling them existed. Mujahid and As-Suddi said that this is the linguistic meaning, for all new matters are called Bid'ah. Muslim recorded the Messenger of Allah ﷺ saying,\nفَإِنَّ كُلَّ مُحْدَثَةٍ بِدْعَةٌ\n(...every innovation (in religion) is a Bid'ah.)\nThere are two types of Bid'ah, religious, as mentioned in the Hadith:\nفَإِنَّ كُلَّ مُحْدَثَةٍ بِدْعَةٌ وَكُلَّ بِدْعَةٍ ضَلَالَةٌ\n(...every innovation is a Bid'ah and every Bid'ah is heresy.)\nAnd there is a linguistic Bid'ah, such as the statement of the Leader of the faithful 'Umar bin Al-Khattab when he gathered the Muslims to pray the Tarawih prayer in congregation (which was also an earlier practice of the Prophet ﷺ) and said, \"What a good Bid'ah this is.\"\nIbn Jarir said, \"Thus the meaning of the Ayat (2:116-117) becomes, 'Allah is far more glorious than to have had a son, for He is the Owner of everything that is in the heavens and earth. All testify to His Oneness and to their submissiveness to Him. He is their Creator and Maker. Without created precedence, He shaped the creatures in their current shapes. Allah also bears witness to His servants that Jesus, who some claimed to be Allah's son, is among those who testify to His Oneness. Allah stated that He created the heavens and earth out of nothing and without precedent. Likewise, He created Jesus, the Messiah, with His power and without a father.\" This explanation from Ibn Jarir, may Allah have mercy upon him, is very good and correct.\nAllah said,\nوَإِذَا قَضَىٰ أَمْرًا فَإِنَّمَا يَقُولُ لَهُ كُن فَيَكُونُ\n(When He decrees a matter, He only says to it : \"Be! ـ and it is.) thus, demonstrating His perfectly complete ability and tremendous authority; if He decides a matter, He merely orders it to, 'Be' and it comes into existence. Similarly, Allah said,\nإِنَّمَا أَمْرُهُ إِذَا أَرَادَ شَيْئًا أَن يَقُولَ لَهُ كُن فَيَكُونُ\n(Verily, His command, when He intends a thing, is only that He says to it, \"Be! ـ and it is.)(36:82),\nإِنَّمَا قَوْلُنَا لِشَيْءٍ إِذَا أَرَدْنَاهُ أَن نَّقُولَ لَهُ كُن فَيَكُونُ\n(Verily, Our Word unto a thing when We intend it, is only that We say unto it: \"Be! ـ and it is.)(16:40) and,\nوَمَا أَمْرُنَا إِلَّا وَاحِدَةٌ كَلَمْحٍ بِالْبَصَرِ\n(And Our commandment is but one as the twinkling of an eye)(54:50)\nSo Allah informed us that He created Jesus by merely saying, \"Be!\" and he was, as Allah willed:\nإِنَّ مَثَلَ عِيسَىٰ عِندَ اللَّهِ كَمَثَلِ آدَمَ خَلَقَهُ مِن تُرَابٍ ثُمَّ قَالَ لَهُ كُن فَيَكُونُ\n(Verily, the likeness of 'Isa (Jesus) before Allah is the likeness of Adam. He created him from dust, then (He) said to him: \"Be! ـ and he was)(3:59).","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=116","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:118","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:118","text":"And those who have no knowledge say: \"Why does not Allah speak to us (face to face) or why does not a sign come to us?\" So said the people before them words of similar import. Their hearts are alike, We have indeed made plain the signs for people who believe with certainty (118)\nMuhammad bin Ishaq reported that Ibn 'Abbas said that Rafi' bin Huraymilah said to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, \"O Muhammad! If you were truly a Messenger from Allah, as you claim, then ask Allah to speak to us directly, so that we hear His Speech.\" So Allah revealed,\nوَقَالَ الَّذِينَ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ لَوْلَا يُكَلِّمُنَا اللَّهُ أَوْ تَأْتِينَا آيَةٌ\n(And those who have no knowledge say: \"Why does not Allah speak to us (face to face) or why does not a sign come to us?\")\nAbu Al-'Aliyah, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, Qatadah and As-Suddi said that it was actually the statement of the Arab disbelievers:\nكَذَٰلِكَ قَالَ الَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِهِم مِّثْلَ قَوْلِهِمْ\n(So said the people before them words of similar import.) He said, \"These are the Jews and the Christians.\"\nWhat further proves that the Arab idolators said the statement mentioned in the Ayah is that Allah said,\nوَإِذَا جَاءَتْهُمْ آيَةٌ قَالُوا لَن نُّؤْمِنَ حَتَّىٰ نُؤْتَىٰ مِثْلَ مَا أُوتِيَ رُسُلُ اللَّهِ ۘ اللَّهُ أَعْلَمُ حَيْثُ يَجْعَلُ رِسَالَتَهُ سَيُصِيبُ الَّذِينَ أَجْرَمُوا صَغَارٌ عِندَ اللَّهِ وَعَذَابٌ شَدِيدٌ بِمَا كَانُوا يَمْكُرُونَ\n(And when there comes to them a sign (from Allah) they say: \"We shall not believe until we receive the like of that which the Messengers of Allah had received.\" Allah knows best with whom to place His Message. Humiliation and disgrace from Allah and a severe torment will overtake the criminals (polytheists and sinners) for that which they used to plot.)(6:124) and\nوَقَالُوا لَن نُّؤْمِنَ لَكَ حَتَّىٰ تَفْجُرَ لَنَا مِنَ الْأَرْضِ يَنبُوعًا\n(And they say: \"We shall not believe in you (O Muhammad ﷺ), until you cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for us) until,\nقُلْ سُبْحَانَ رَبِّي هَلْ كُنتُ إِلَّا بَشَرًا رَّسُولًا\n(Say (O Muhammad ﷺ): \"Glorified (and Exalted) be my Lord [(Allah) above all that evil they (polytheists) associate with Him]! Am I anything but a man, sent as a Messenger?\")(17:90-93) and,\nوَقَالَ الَّذِينَ لَا يَرْجُونَ لِقَاءَنَا لَوْلَا أُنزِلَ عَلَيْنَا الْمَلَائِكَةُ أَوْ نَرَىٰ رَبَّنَا\n(And those who expect not a meeting with Us (i. e. those who deny the Day of Resurrection and the life of the Hereafter) said: \"Why are not the angels sent down to us, or why do we not see our Lord?\")(25:21) and,\nبَلْ يُرِيدُ كُلُّ امْرِئٍ مِّنْهُمْ أَن يُؤْتَىٰ صُحُفًا مُّنَشَّرَةً\n(Nay, everyone of them desires that he should be given pages spread out)(74:52).\nThere are many other Ayat that testify to the disbelief of the Arab idolators, their transgression, stubbornness, and that they asked unnecessary questions out of disbelief and arrogance. The statements of the Arab idolators followed the statements of the nations of the People of the Two Scriptures and other religions before them. Allah said,\nيَسْأَلُكَ أَهْلُ الْكِتَابِ أَن تُنَزِّلَ عَلَيْهِمْ كِتَابًا مِّنَ السَّمَاءِ فَقَدْ سَأَلُوا مُوسَىٰ أَكْبَرَ مِن ذَٰلِكَ فَقَالُوا أَرِنَا اللَّهَ جَهْرَةً\n(The People of the Scripture (Jews) ask you to cause a book to descend upon them from heaven. Indeed, they asked Musa (Moses) for even greater than that, when they said: \"Show us Allah in public,\")(4:153) and,\nوَإِذْ قُلْتُمْ يَا مُوسَىٰ لَن نُّؤْمِنَ لَكَ حَتَّىٰ نَرَى اللَّهَ جَهْرَةً\n(And (remember) when you said: \"O Musa! We shall never believe in you until we see Allah plainly.\")(2:55).\nAllah's statement,\nتَشَابَهَتْ قُلُوبُهُمْ\n(Their hearts are alike.) means, the hearts of the Arab idolators are just like the hearts of those before them, containing disbelief, stubbornness and injustice. Similarly, Allah said,\nكَذَٰلِكَ مَا أَتَى الَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِهِم مِّن رَّسُولٍ إِلَّا قَالُوا سَاحِرٌ أَوْ مَجْنُونٌ - أَتَوَاصَوْا بِهِ\n(Likewise, no Messenger came to those before them but they said: \"A sorcerer or a madman!\" Have they (the people of the past) transmitted this saying to these (Quraysh pagans)?)(51:52-53).\nAllah said next,\nقَدْ بَيَّنَّا الْآيَاتِ لِقَوْمٍ يُوقِنُونَ\n(We have indeed made plain the signs for people who believe with certainty.) meaning, We made the arguments clear, prooving the truth of the Messengers, with no need of more questions or proofs for those who believe, follow the Messengers and comprehend what Allah sent them with. As for those whose hearts and hearing Allah has stamped and whose eyes have been sealed, Allah described them:\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ حَقَّتْ عَلَيْهِمْ كَلِمَتُ رَبِّكَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ - وَلَوْ جَاءَتْهُمْ كُلُّ آيَةٍ حَتَّىٰ يَرَوُا الْعَذَابَ الْأَلِيمَ\n(Truly, those, against whom the Word (wrath) of your Lord has been justified, will not believe. Even if every sign should come to them, until they see the painful torment)(10:96-97).","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=118","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:119","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:119","text":"Verily, We have sent you (O Muhammad ﷺ) with the truth (Islam), a bringer of glad tidings (for those who believe in what you brought, that they will enter Paradise) and a warner (for those who disbelieve in what you brought, that they will enter the Hellfire). And you will not be asked about the dwellers of the blazing Fire (119)\nAllah's statement;\nوَلَا تُسْأَلُ عَنْ أَصْحَابِ الْجَحِيمِ\n(And you will not be asked about the dwellers of the blazing Fire.) means, \"We shall not ask you about the disbelief of those who rejected you.\" Similarly, Allah said,\nفَإِنَّمَا عَلَيْكَ الْبَلَاغُ وَعَلَيْنَا الْحِسَابُ\n(Your duty is only to convey (the Message) and on Us is the reckoning.)(13:40)\nفَذَكِّرْ إِنَّمَا أَنتَ مُذَكِّرٌ - لَّسْتَ عَلَيْهِم بِمُصَيْطِرٍ\n(So remind them (O Muhammad ﷺ) ـ you are only one who reminds. You are not a dictator over them.)(88:21-22) and,\nنَّحْنُ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا يَقُولُونَ وَمَا أَنتَ عَلَيْهِم بِجَبَّارٍ فَذَكِّرْ بِالْقُرْآنِ مَن يَخَافُ وَعِيدِ\n(We know best what they say. And you (O Muhammad ﷺ) are not the one to force them (to belief). But warn by the Qur'an; him who fears My threat)(50:45).\nThere are many other similar Ayat.\n\n## The Description of the Prophet (ﷺ) in the Tawrah\n\nImam Ahmad recorded 'Ata' bin Yasar saying that he met 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As and said to him, \"Tell me about the description of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ in the Torah.\" He said, \"Yes, by Allah, he is described by the Torah with the same characteristics that he is described with in the Qur'an with: 'O Prophet! We have sent you as a witness, a bringer of good news, a warner, and as safe refuge for the unlettered people. You are My servant and Messenger. I have called you the Mutawakkil (who depends and relies on Allah for each and everything). You are not harsh, nor hard, nor obnoxious in the bazaars. He does not reward the evil deed with an evil deed. Rather, he forgives and pardons. Allah will not bring his life to an end, until he straightens the wicked's religion by his hands so that the people proclaim: There is no deity worthy of worship except Allah. By his hands, Allah will open blind eyes, deaf ears and sealed hearts.'\" This was recorded by Al-Bukhari only.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=119","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:120","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:120–121","text":"Never will the Jews nor the Christians be pleased with you (O Muhammad ﷺ) till you follow their religion. Say: \"Verily, the guidance of Allah (i.e. Islamic Monotheism) that is the (only) guidance. And if you (O Muhammad ﷺ) were to follow their (Jews and Christians) desires after what you have received of Knowledge (i.e. the Qur'an), then you would have against Allah neither any Wali (protector or guardian) nor any helper (120)Those to whom we gave the Book recite it as it should be recited (Yatlunahu Haqqa Tilawatihi) they are the ones who believe therein. And whoso disbelieve in it, those are they who are the losers (121)\nIbn Jarir said, \"Allah said,\nوَلَن تَرْضَىٰ عَنكَ الْيَهُودُ وَلَا النَّصَارَىٰ حَتَّىٰ تَتَّبِعَ مِلَّتَهُمْ\n(Never will the Jews nor the Christians be pleased with you (O Muhammad ﷺ) till you follow their religion.) meaning, 'The Jews and the Christians will never be happy with you, O Muhammad! Therefore, do not seek what pleases or appeases them, and stick to what pleases Allah by calling them to the truth that Allah sent you with.' Allah's statement,\nقُلْ إِنَّ هُدَى اللَّهِ هُوَ الْهُدَىٰ\n(Say: \"Verily, the guidance of Allah (i.e. Islamic Monotheism) that is the (only) guidance\") means, 'Say, O Muhammad ﷺ, the guidance of Allah that He sent me with is the true guidance, meaning the straight, perfect and comprehensive religion.'\" Qatadah said that Allah's statement,\nقُلْ إِنَّ هُدَى اللَّهِ هُوَ الْهُدَىٰ\n(Say: \"Verily, the guidance of Allah (i.e. Islamic Monotheism) that is the (only) guidance) is, \"A true argument that Allah taught Muhammad ﷺ and his Companions and which they used against the people of misguidance.\" Qatadah said, \"We were told that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to say,\nلَا تَزَالُ طَائِفَةٌ مِنْ أُمَّتِي يُقَاتِلُونَ عَلَى الْحَقِّ ظَاهِرِينَ، لَا يَضُرُّهُمْ مَنْ خَالَفَهُمْ حَتَّى يَأْتِيَ أَمْرُ اللهِ\n(There will always be a group of my Ummah fighting upon the truth, having the upper hand, not harmed by their opponents, until the decree of Allah (the Last Hour) comes.)\nThis Hadith was collected in the Sahih and narrated from 'Abdullah bin 'Amr.\nوَلَئِنِ اتَّبَعْتَ أَهْوَاءَهُم بَعْدَ الَّذِي جَاءَكَ مِنَ الْعِلْمِ مَا لَكَ مِنَ اللَّهِ مِن وَلِيٍّ وَلَا نَصِيرٍ\n(And if you (O Muhammad ﷺ) were to follow their (Jews and Christians) desires after what you have received of Knowledge (i.e. the Qur'an), then you would have against Allah neither any Wali (protector or guardian) nor any helper.)\nThis Ayah carries a stern warning for the Muslim Ummah against imitating the ways and methods of the Jews and Christians, after they have acquired knowledge of the Qur'an and Sunnah, may Allah grant us refuge from this behavior. Although the speech in this Ayah was directed at the Messenger ﷺ, the ruling of which applies to his entire Ummah.\n\n## The Meaning of Correct Tilawah\n\nAllah said,\nالَّذِينَ آتَيْنَاهُمُ الْكِتَابَ يَتْلُونَهُ حَقَّ تِلَاوَتِهِ\n(Those to whom We gave the Book. Yatlunahu Haqqan Tilawatih.)\nAbdur-Razzaq ﷺ said from Ma'mar, from Qatadah, \"They are the Jews and Christians.\" This is the opinion of 'Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam, and it was also chosen by Ibn Jarir. Sa'id reported from Qatadah, \"They are the Companions of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ.\" Abu Al-'Aliyah said that Ibn Mas'ud said, \"By He in Whose Hand is my soul! The right Tilawah is allowing what it makes lawful, prohibiting what it makes unlawful, reciting it as it was revealed by Allah, not changing the words from their places, and not interpreting it with other than its actual interpretation.\" As-Suddi reported from Abu Malik from Ibn 'Abbas who said about this Ayah (2:121): \"They make lawful what it allows and they prohibit what it makes unlawful, and they do not alter its wordings.\" 'Umar bin Al-Khattab said, \"They are those who when they recite an Ayah that mentions mercy, they ask Allah for it, and when they recite an Ayah that mentions torment, they seek refuge with Allah from it.\" This meaning was attributed to the Prophet ﷺ, for when he used to recite an Ayah of mercy, he invoked Allah for mercy, and when he recited an Ayah of torment, he sought refuge from it with Allah.\nAllah's statement,\nأُولَٰئِكَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِهِ\n(they are the ones who believe therein)\nexplains the Ayah,\nالَّذِينَ آتَيْنَاهُمُ الْكِتَابَ يَتْلُونَهُ حَقَّ تِلَاوَتِهِ\n(Those to whom We gave the Book. Yatlunahu Haqqa Tilawatihi).\nThese Ayat mean, \"Those among the People of the Book who perfectly adhered to the Books that were revealed to the previous Prophets, will believe in what I have sent you with, O Muhammad!\" Allah said in another Ayah,\nوَلَوْ أَنَّهُمْ أَقَامُوا التَّوْرَاةَ وَالْإِنجِيلَ وَمَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْهِم مِّن رَّبِّهِمْ لَأَكَلُوا مِن فَوْقِهِمْ وَمِن تَحْتِ أَرْجُلِهِم\n(And if only they had acted according to the Tawrah, the Injil, and what has (now) been sent down to them from their Lord (the Qur'an), they would surely, have gotten provision from above them and from underneath their feet.)(5:66). The Ayah,\nقُلْ يَا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ لَسْتُمْ عَلَىٰ شَيْءٍ حَتَّىٰ تُقِيمُوا التَّوْرَاةَ وَالْإِنجِيلَ وَمَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْكُم مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ\n(Say (O Muhammad ﷺ) \"O People of the Scripture (Jews and Christians)! You have nothing (as regards guidance) till you act according to the Tawrah, the Injil, and what has (now) been sent down to you from your Lord (the Qur'an).\")(5:68)\nmeans, \"If you adhere to the Torah and the Gospel in the correct manner, believe in them as you should, and believe in the news they carry about Muhammad's prophethood, his description and the command to follow, aid and support him, then this will direct you to adhere to truth and righteousness in this life and the Hereafter.\" In another Ayah, Allah said,\nالَّذِينَ يَتَّبِعُونَ الرَّسُولَ النَّبِيَّ الْأُمِّيَّ الَّذِي يَجِدُونَهُ مَكْتُوبًا عِندَهُمْ فِي التَّوْرَاةِ وَالْإِنجِيلِ\n(Those who follow the Messenger, the Prophet who can neither read nor write (i.e. Muhammad ﷺ) whom they find written with them in the Tawrah and the Injil.)(7:157) and,\nقُلْ آمِنُوا بِهِ أَوْ لَا تُؤْمِنُوا إِنَّ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْعِلْمَ مِن قَبْلِهِ إِذَا يُتْلَىٰ عَلَيْهِمْ يَخِرُّونَ لِلْأَذْقَانِ سُجَّدًا - وَيَقُولُونَ سُبْحَانَ رَبِّنَا إِن كَانَ وَعْدُ رَبِّنَا لَمَفْعُولًا\n(Say (O Muhammad ﷺ to them): \"Believe in it (the Qur'an) or do not believe (in it). Verily, those who were given knowledge before it, when it is recited to them, fall down on their faces in humble prostration. And they say: \"Glory be to our Lord! Truly, the promise of our Lord must be fulfilled.\")(17:107-108).\nThese Ayat indicate that what Allah promised for Muhammad ﷺ will certainly occur. Allah also said,\nالَّذِينَ آتَيْنَاهُمُ الْكِتَابَ مِن قَبْلِهِ هُم بِهِ يُؤْمِنُونَ - وَإِذَا يُتْلَىٰ عَلَيْهِمْ قَالُوا آمَنَّا بِهِ إِنَّهُ الْحَقُّ مِن رَّبِّنَا إِنَّا كُنَّا مِن قَبْلِهِ مُسْلِمِينَ - أُولَٰئِكَ يُؤْتَوْنَ أَجْرَهُم مَّرَّتَيْنِ بِمَا صَبَرُوا وَيَدْرَءُونَ بِالْحَسَنَةِ السَّيِّئَةَ وَمِمَّا رَزَقْنَاهُمْ يُنفِقُونَ\n(Those to whom We gave the Scripture (i. e. the Tawrah and the Injil) before it, they believe in it (the Qur'an). And when it is recited to them, they say: \"We believe in it. Verily, it is the truth from our Lord. Indeed even before it we have been from those who submit themselves to Allah in Islam as Muslims. These will be given their reward twice over, because they are patient, and repel evil with good, and spend (in charity) out of what We have provided them.)(28:52-54) and,\nوَقُل لِّلَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ وَالْأُمِّيِّينَ أَأَسْلَمْتُمْ فَإِنْ أَسْلَمُوا فَقَدِ اهْتَدَوا وَّإِن تَوَلَّوْا فَإِنَّمَا عَلَيْكَ الْبَلَاغُ وَاللَّهُ بَصِيرٌ بِالْعِبَادِ\n(And say to those who were given the Scripture (Jews and Christians) and to those who are illiterates (Arab pagans): \"Do you (also) submit yourselves (to Allah in Islam)?\" If they do, they are rightly guided; but if they turn away, your duty is only to convey the Message; and Allah is the Seer of (His) servants)(3:20).\nAllah said,\nوَمَن يَكْفُرْ بِهِ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْخَاسِرُونَ\n(And whoever disbelieves in it (the Qur'an), those are they who are the losers)(2:121), just as He said in another Ayah,\nوَمَن يَكْفُرْ بِهِ مِنَ الْأَحْزَابِ فَالنَّارُ مَوْعِدُهُ\n(But those of the sects (Jews, Christians and all the other non-Muslim nations) that reject it (the Qur'an), the Fire will be their promised meeting place)(11:17).\nAs recorded in the Sahih, the Prophet ﷺ said,\nوَالَّذِي نَفْسِي بِيَدِهِ لَا يَسْمَعُ بِي أَحَدٌ مِنْ هذِهِ الْأُمَّةِ يَهُودِيٌّ وَلَا نَصْرَانِيٌّ ثُمَّ لَا يُؤْمِنُ بِي إِلَّا دَخَلَ النَّارَ\n(By He in Whose Hand is my soul! There is no member of this Ummah (mankind and Jinns), Jew or a Christian, who hears of me, yet does not believe in me, but will enter the Fire.)","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=120","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:122","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:122–123","text":"O Children of Israel! Remember My favor which I bestowed upon you and that I preferred you over the nations) (122)And fear the Day (of Judgement) when no person shall avail another, nor shall compensation be accepted from him, nor shall intercession be of use to him, nor shall they be helped (123)\nWe mentioned a similar Ayah at the beginning of this Surah, and it is mentioned here to emphisize the importance of following the Ummi Prophet and Messenger, who is described for the People of the Scriptures in their Books by his characteristics, name, the good news about him and the description of his Ummah. Allah warned them against concealing this information, which is among the favors that Allah granted them. Allah also commanded them to remember their daily life and their religious affairs and how He blessed them. They should not envy their cousins, the Arabs, for what Allah has given them, the Final Messenger of Allah being an Arab. Envy should not incite them to oppose or deny the Prophet or refrain from following him, may Allah's peace and blessings be upon him until the Day of Judgment.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=122","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:124","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:124","text":"And (remember) when the Lord of Ibrahim (Abraham) tried him with (certain) commands, which he fulfilled. He (Allah) said (to him), \"Verily, I am going to make you an Imam (a leader) for mankind (to follow you).\" (Ibrahim) said, \"And of my offspring (to make leaders).\" (Allah) said, \"My covenant (prophethood) includes not Zalimin (polytheists and wrongdoers). (124)\n\n## Ibrahim Al-Khalil was an Imam for the People\n\nAllah is informing us of the honor of Ibrahim Al-Khalil, who He made an Imam for the people, and a model to be imitated, because of the way he conducted himself and adhered to Tawhid. This honor was given to Prophet Ibrahim when he adhered to Allah's decisions and prohibitions. This is why Allah said,\nوَإِذِ ابْتَلَىٰ إِبْرَاهِيمَ رَبُّهُ بِكَلِمَاتٍ\n(And (remember) when the Lord of Ibrahim (i.e., Allah) tried him with (certain) commands).\nThis Ayah means, O Muhammad! Remind the idolators and the People of the Scriptures, who pretend to be followers of the religion of Ibrahim, while in reality they do not follow it, while you, O Muhammad, and your followers are the true followers of his religion; remind them of the commands and prohibitions that Allah tested Ibrahim with.\nفَأَتَمَّهُنَّ\n(which he fulfilled.) indicating that Ibrahim implemented all of Allah's orders. Allah said in another Ayah,\nوَإِبْرَاهِيمَ الَّذِي وَفَّىٰ\n(And of Ibrahim (Abraham) who fulfilled (or conveyed) all that (Allah ordered him to do or convey))(53:37)\nmeaning, he was truthful and he was obedient to Allah's legislation. Also, Allah said,\nإِنَّ إِبْرَاهِيمَ كَانَ أُمَّةً قَانِتًا لِّلَّهِ حَنِيفًا وَلَمْ يَكُ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ - شَاكِرًا لِّأَنْعُمِهِ اجْتَبَاهُ وَهَدَاهُ إِلَىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُّسْتَقِيمٍ - وَآتَيْنَاهُ فِي الدُّنْيَا حَسَنَةً وَإِنَّهُ فِي الْآخِرَةِ لَمِنَ الصَّالِحِينَ - ثُمَّ أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْكَ أَنِ اتَّبِعْ مِلَّةَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ حَنِيفًا وَمَا كَانَ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ\n(Verily, Ibrahim was an Ummah (or a nation), obedient to Allah, Hanif (i.e. to worship none but Allah), and he was not one of those who were Al-Mushrikin (polytheists), (He was) thankful for His (Allah's) favors. He (Allah) chose him and guided him to a straight path. And We gave him good in this world, and in the Hereafter he shall be of the righteous. Then, We have sent the revelation to you (O Muhammad ﷺ saying): \"Follow the religion of Ibrahim Hanif (Islamic Monotheism ـ to worship none but Allah) and he was not of the Mushrikin.)(16:120-123)\nقُلْ إِنَّنِي هَدَانِي رَبِّي إِلَىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُّسْتَقِيمٍ دِينًا قِيَمًا مِّلَّةَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ حَنِيفًا وَمَا كَانَ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ\n(Say (O Muhammad ﷺ): \"Truly, my Lord has guided me to a straight path, a right religion, the religion of Ibrahim, Hanifan, and Ibrahim (to worship none but Allah, alone) and he was not of Al-Mushrikin.\")(6:161) and,\nمَا كَانَ إِبْرَاهِيمُ يَهُودِيًّا وَلَا نَصْرَانِيًّا وَلَٰكِن كَانَ حَنِيفًا مُّسْلِمًا وَمَا كَانَ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ - إِنَّ أَوْلَى النَّاسِ بِإِبْرَاهِيمَ لَلَّذِينَ اتَّبَعُوهُ وَهَٰذَا النَّبِيُّ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَاللَّهُ وَلِيُّ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ\n(Ibrahim was neither a Jew nor a Christian, but he was a true Muslim Hanifan (Islamic Monotheism ـ to worship none but Allah alone) and he was not of Al-Mushrikin. Verily, among mankind who have the best claim to Ibrahim are those who followed him, and this Prophet (Muhammad ﷺ) and those who have believed (Muslims). And Allah is the Wali (Protector and Helper) of the believers)(3:67-68).\nAllah said,\nبِكَلِمَاتٍ\n(with Kalimāt (words)) which means, \"Laws, commandments and prohibitions.\" 'Words' as mentioned here, sometimes refers to what Allah has willed, such as Allah's statement about Maryam,\nوَصَدَّقَتْ بِكَلِمَاتِ رَبِّهَا وَكُتُبِهِ وَكَانَتْ مِنَ الْقَانِتِينَ\n(And she testified to the truth of the Words of her Lord, and (also believed in) His Scriptures, and she was of the Qanitin (i.e. obedient to Allah))(66:12).\n\"Words\" also refers to Allah's Law, such as Allah's statement,\nوَتَمَّتْ كَلِمَتُ رَبِّكَ صِدْقًا وَعَدْلًا\n(And the Word of your Lord has been fulfilled in truth and in justice)(6:115) meaning, His legislation. \"Words\" also means truthful news, or a just commandment or prohibition. For instance, Allah said,\nوَإِذِ ابْتَلَىٰ إِبْرَاهِيمَ رَبُّهُ بِكَلِمَاتٍ فَأَتَمَّهُنَّ\n(And (remember) when the Lord of Ibrahim tried him with (certain) Words (commands), which he fulfilled) meaning, he adhered to them, Allah said,\nإِنِّي جَاعِلُكَ لِلنَّاسِ إِمَامًا\n(\"Verily, I am going to make you an Imam (a leader) for mankind (to follow you).\") as a reward for Ibrahim's good deeds, adhering to the commandments and avoiding the prohibitions. This is why Allah made Ibrahim a role model for the people, and an Imam whose conduct and path are imitated and followed.\n\n## What were the Words that Ibrahim was tested with?\n\nThere is a difference of opinion over the words that Allah tested Ibrahim with. There are several opinions attributed to Ibn 'Abbas. For instance, 'Abdur-Razzaq said that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Allah tested him with the rituals (of Hajj).\" Abu Ishaq reported the same. 'Abdur-Razzaq also narrated that Ibn 'Abbas said that,\nوَإِذِ ابْتَلَىٰ إِبْرَاهِيمَ رَبُّهُ بِكَلِمَاتٍ\n(And (remember) when the Lord of Ibrahim (Abraham)(i.e., Allah) tried him with (certain) commands) means, \"Allah tested him with Taharah (purity, ablution): five on the head and five on the body. As for the head, they are cutting the mustache, rinsing the mouth, inhaling and discarding water, using Siwak and parting the hair. As for the body, they are trimming the nails, shaving the pubic hair, circumcision and plucking under the arm and washing with water after answering the call of nature.\" Ibn Abi Hatim said, \"A similar statement was also reported from Sa'id bin Al-Musayyib, Mujahid, Ash-Sha'bi, An-Nakha'i, Abu Salih, Abu Al-Jald, and so forth.\"\nThere is a similar statement that Imam Muslim narrated from 'A'ishah who said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nعَشْرٌ مِنَ الْفِطْرَةِ: قَصُّ الشَّارِبِ وَإِعْفَاءُ اللِّحْيَةِ وَالسِّوَاكُ وَاسْتِنْشَاقُ الْمَاءِ وَقَصُّ الْأَظْفَارِ وَغَسْلُ الْبَرَاجِمِ وَنَتْفُ الْإِبْطِ وَحَلْقُ الْعَانَةِ وَانْتِقَاصُ الْمَاءِ وَنَسِيتُ الْعَاشِرَةَ إِلَّا أَنْ تَكُونَ الْمَضْمَضَةَ\n(Ten are among the Fitrah (instinct, natural constitution): trimming the mustache, growing the beard, using Siwak, inhaling and then exhaling water (in ablution), cutting the nails, washing between the fingers (in ablution), plucking the underarm hair, shaving the pubic hair, washing with water after answering the call of nature, (and I forgot the tenth, I think it was) rinsing the mouth (in ablution).)\nThe Two Sahihs recorded Abu Hurayrah saying that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nالْفِطْرَةُ خَمْسٌ: الْخِتَانُ وَالْاسْتِحْدَادُ وَقَصُّ الشَّارِبِ وَتَقْلِيمُ الْأَظْفَارِ وَنَتْفُ الْإِبْطِ\n(Five are among the acts of Fitrah: circumcision, shaving the pubic hair, trimming the mustache, cutting the nails and plucking the underarm hair.) This is the wording with Muslim.\nMuhammad bin Ishaq reportd that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"The words that Allah tested Ibrahim with, and that he implemented were: abandoning his (disbelieving) people when Allah commanded him to do so, disputing with Nimrod (king of Babylon) about Allah, being patient when he was thrown in the fire (although this was extremely traumatic) migrating from his homeland when Allah commanded him to do so, patience with the monetary and material demands of hosting guests by Allah's command, and Allah's order for him to slaughter his son. When Allah tested Ibrahim with these words, and he was ready for the major test, Allah said to him,\nأَسْلِمْ قَالَ أَسْلَمْتُ لِرَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(\"Submit (be a Muslim)!\" He said, \"I have submitted myself (as a Muslim) to the Lord of all that exists.\")(2:131) although this meant defying and being apart from the people.\"\n\n## The Unjust do not qualify for Allah's Promise\n\nAllah said that Ibrahim said,\nوَمِن ذُرِّيَّتِي\n(And of my offspring (to make leaders)) and Allah replied,\nلَا يَنَالُ عَهْدِي الظَّالِمِينَ\n(My covenant (prophethood) includes not Zalimin (polytheists and wrongdoers)).\nWhen Allah made Ibrahim an Imam (Leader for the faithful), he asked Allah that Imams thereafter be chosen from his offspring. Allah accepted his supplication, but told him that there will be unjust people among his offspring and they will not benefit from Allah's promise. Thus, they will neither become Imams nor be imitated (for they will not be righteous). The proof that Ibrahim's supplication to Allah was accepted is that Allah said in Surat Al-'Ankabut (29:27),\nوَجَعَلْنَا فِي ذُرِّيَّتِهِ النُّبُوَّةَ وَالْكِتَابَ\n(And We ordained among his offspring prophethood and the Book).\nHence, every Prophet whom Allah sent after Ibrahim were from among his offspring, and every Book that Allah revealed was to them. As for Allah's statement,\nقَالَ لَا يَنَالُ عَهْدِي الظَّالِمِينَ\n((Allah) said, \"My covenant (prophethood) includes not Zalimin (polytheists and wrongdoers).\")\nAllah mentioned that there are unjust people among the offspring of Ibrahim, and they will not benefit from Allah's promise, nor would they be entrusted with anything, even though they are among the children of Allah's Khalil (intimate friend, Prophet Abraham). There will also be those who do good among the children of Ibrahim, and these it is who will benefit from Ibrahim's supplication. Ibn Jarir said that this Ayah indicated that the unjust shall not be Imams for the people. Moreover, the Ayah informed Ibrahim that there will be unjust people among his offspring. Also, Ibn Khuwayz Mindad Al-Maliki said, \"The unjust person does not qualify to be a Khalifah, a ruler, one who gives religious verdicts, a witness, or even a narrator (of Hadiths).\"\nوَإِذْ جَعَلْنَا الْبَيْتَ مَثَابَةً لِّلنَّاسِ وَأَمْنًا وَاتَّخِذُوا مِن مَّقَامِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ مُصَلًّى\n(125. And (remember) when We made the House (the Ka'bah at Makkah) a place of resort for mankind and a place of safety. And take you (people) the Maqam (place) of Ibrahim (or the stone on which Ibrahim as a place)\n\n## The Virtue of Allah's House\n\nAl-'Awfi reported that Ibn 'Abbas commented on Allah's statement,\nوَإِذْ جَعَلْنَا الْبَيْتَ مَثَابَةً لِّلنَّاسِ\n(And (remember) when We made the House (the Ka'bah at Makkah) a place of resort for mankind)\n\"They do not remain in the House, they only visit it and return to their homes, and then visit it again.\" Also, Abu Ja'far Ar-Razi narrated from Ar-Rabi' bin Anas from Abu Al-'Aliyah who said that,\nوَإِذْ جَعَلْنَا الْبَيْتَ مَثَابَةً لِّلنَّاسِ وَأَمْنًا\n(And (remember) when We made the House (the Ka'bah at Makkah) a place of resort for mankind and a place of safety) means, \"Safe from enemies and armed conflict. During the time of Jahiliyyah, the people were often victims of raids and kidnapping, while the people in the area surrounding it (Al-Masjid Al-Haram) were safe and not subject to kidnapping.\" Also, Mujahid, 'Ata', As-Suddi, Qatadah and Ar-Rabi' bin Anas were reported to have said that the Ayah (2:125) means, \"Whoever enters it shall be safe.\"\nThis Ayah indicates that Allah honored the Sacred House, which Allah made as a safe refuge and safe haven. Therefore, the souls are eager, but never bored, to conduct short visits to the House, even every year. This is because Allah accepted the supplication of His Khalil, Ibrahim, when he asked Allah to make the hearts of people eager to visit the House. Ibrahim said (14:40),\nرَبَّنَا وَتَقَبَّلْ دُعَاءِ\n(Our Lord! And accept my invocation).\n\n## Allah described the House as a safe resort and refuge\n\nAllah described the House as a safe resort and refuge, for those who visit it are safe, even if they had committed acts of evil. This honor comes from the honor of the person who built it first, Khalil Ar-Rahman, just as Allah said,\nوَإِذْ بَوَّأْنَا لِإِبْرَاهِيمَ مَكَانَ الْبَيْتِ أَن لَّا تُشْرِكْ بِي شَيْئًا\n(And (remember) when We showed Ibrahim the site of the (Sacred) House (the Ka'bah at Makkah)(saying): \"Associate not anything (in worship) with Me...\")(22:26) and,\nإِنَّ أَوَّلَ بَيْتٍ وُضِعَ لِلنَّاسِ لَلَّذِي بِبَكَّةَ مُبَارَكًا وَهُدًى لِّلْعَالَمِينَ - فِيهِ آيَاتٌ بَيِّنَاتٌ مَّقَامُ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَمَن دَخَلَهُ كَانَ آمِنًا\n(Verily, the first House (of worship) appointed for mankind was that at Bakkah (Makkah), full of blessing, and a guidance for Al-'Alamin (mankind and Jinn). In it are manifest signs (for example), the Maqam (place) of Ibrahim; whosoever enters it, he attains security)(3:96-97).\nThe last honorable Ayah emphasized the honor of Ibrahim's Maqam, and the instruction to pray next to it,\nوَاتَّخِذُوا مِن مَّقَامِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ مُصَلًّى\n(And take you (people) the Maqam (place) of Ibrahim as a place of prayer).\nThe Maqam of Ibrahim\nSufyan Ath-Thawri reported that Sa'id bin Jubayr commented on the Ayah,\nوَاتَّخِذُوا مِن مَّقَامِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ مُصَلًّى\n(And take you (people) the Maqam (place) of Ibrahim as a place of prayer)\n\"The stone (Maqam) is the standing place of Ibrahim, Allah's Prophet, and a mercy from Allah. Ibrahim stood on the stone, while Isma'il was handing him the stones (constructing the Ka'bah). As-Suddi said, \"The Maqam of Ibrahim is a stone which Isma'il's wife put under Ibrahim's feet when washing his head.\" Al-Qurtubi mentioned this, but he considered it unauthentic, although others gave it prefrence, Ar-Razi reported it in his Tafsir from Al-Hasan Al-Basri, Qatadah, and Ar-Rabi' bin Anas.\nIbn Abi Hatim reported that Jabir, describing the Hajj (pilgrimage) of the Prophet ﷺ said, \"When the Prophet ﷺ performed Tawaf, 'Umar asked him, 'Is this the Maqam of our father?' He said, 'Yes.' 'Umar said, 'Should we take it a place of prayer?' So Allah revealed,\nوَاتَّخِذُوا مِن مَّقَامِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ مُصَلًّى\n(And take you (people) the Maqam (place) of Ibrahim (Abraham) as a place of prayer.\")\nAl-Bukhari said, \"Chapter: Allah's statement,\nوَاتَّخِذُوا مِن مَّقَامِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ مُصَلًّى\n(And take you (people) the Maqam (place) of Ibrahim (Abraham) as a place of prayer) meaning, they return to it repeatedly.\" He then narrated that Anas bin Malik said that 'Umar bin Al-Khattab said, \"I agreed with my Lord, or my Lord agreed with me, regarding three matters. I said, 'O Messenger of Allah! I wish you take the Maqam of Ibrahim a place for prayer.' The Ayah,\nوَاتَّخِذُوا مِن مَّقَامِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ مُصَلًّى\n(And take you (people) the Maqam (place) of Ibrahim (Abraham)) was revealed. I also said, 'O Messenger of Allah! The righteous and the wicked enter your house. I wish you would command the Mothers of the believers (the Prophet's wives) to wear Hijab. Allah sent down the Ayah that required the Hijab. And when I knew that the Prophet ﷺ was angry with some of his wives, I came to them and said, 'Either you stop what you are doing, or Allah will endow His Messenger with better women than you are.' I advised one of his wives and she said to me, 'O 'Umar! Does the Messenger of Allah not know how to advise his wives, so that you have to do the job instead of him?' Allah then revealed,\nعَسَىٰ رَبُّهُ إِن طَلَّقَكُنَّ أَن يُبْدِلَهُ أَزْوَاجًا خَيْرًا مِّنكُنَّ مُسْلِمَاتٍ\n(It may be if he divorced you (all) that his Lord will give him instead of you, wives better than you, ـ Muslims (who submit to Allah)).\" (66:5)\nAlso, Ibn Jarir narrated that Jabir said, \"After the Messenger of Allah kissed the Black Stone, he went around the house three times in a fast pace and four times in a slow pace. He then went to Maqam of Ibrahim, with it between him and the House, and prayed two Rak'ahs.\" This is part of the long Hadith that Muslim recorded in Sahih. Al-Bukhari recorded that 'Amr bin Dinar said that he heard Ibn 'Umar say, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ performed Tawaf around the House seven times and then prayed two Rak'ahs behind the Maqam.\"\nAll these texts indicate that the Maqam is the stone that Ibrahim was standing on while building the House. As the House's walls became higher, Isma'il brought his father a stone, so that he could stand on it, while Isma'il handed him the stones. Ibrahim would place the stones on the wall, and whenever he finished one side, he would move to the next side, to complete the building all around. Ibrahim kept repeating this until he finished building the House, as we will describe when we explain the story of Ibrahim and Isma'il and how they built the House, as narrated from Ibn 'Abbas and collected by Al-Bukhari. Ibrahim's footprints were still visible in the stone, and the Arabs knew this fact during the time of Jahiliyyah. This is why Abu Talib said in his poem known as 'Al-Lamiyyah', \"And Ibrahim's footprint with his bare feet on the stone is still visible.\"\nThe Muslims also saw Ibrahim's footprints on the stone, as Anas bin Malik said, \"I saw the Maqam with the print of Ibrahim's toes and feet still visible in it, but the footprints dissipated because of the people rubbing the stone with their hands.\"\nEarlier, the Maqam was placed close to the Ka'bah's wall. In the present time, the Maqam is placed next to Al-Hijr on the right side of those entering through the door.\nWhen Ibrahim finished building the House, he placed the stone next to the wall of Al-Ka'bah. Or, when the House was finished being built, Ibrahim just left the stone where it was last standing, and he was commanded to pray next to the stone when he finished the Tawaf (circumambulating). It is understandable that the Maqam of Ibrahim would stand where the building of the House ended. The Leader of the faithful 'Umar bin Al-Khattab, one of the Four Rightly Guided Caliphs whom we were commanded to emulate, moved the stone away from the Ka'bah's wall during his reign. 'Umar is one of the two men, whom the Messenger of Allah ﷺ described when he said,\nاقْتَدُوا بِاللَّذَيْنِ مِنْ بَعْدِي أَبِي بَكْرٍ وَعُمَرَ\n(Imitate the two men who will come after me: Abu Bakr and 'Umar.)\nUmar was also the person whom the Qur'an agreed with regarding praying next to Maqam of Ibrahim. This is why none among the Companions rejected it when he moved it.\nAbdur-Razzaq reported from Ibn Jurayj from 'Ata', \"Umar bin Al-Khattab moved the Maqam back.\" Also, Abdur-Razzaq narrated that Mujahid said that Umar was the first person who moved the Maqam back to where it is now standing.\" Al-Hafiz Abu Bakr, Ahmad bin 'Ali bin Al-Husayn Al-Bayhaqi recorded A'ishah saying, \"During the time of the Messenger of Allah and Abu Bakr, the Maqam was right next to the House. 'Umar moved the Maqam during his reign.\" This Hadith has an authentic chain of narration.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=124","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:125","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:125–128","text":"(cont.) And We commanded Ibrahim (Abraham) and Isma'il (Ishmael) that they should purify My House (the Ka'bah at Makkah) for those who are circumambulating it, or staying (I'tikaf), or bowing or prostrating themselves (there, in prayer)(125)And (remember) when Ibrahim said, \"My Lord, make this city (Makkah) a place of security and provide its people with fruits, such of them as believe in Allah and the Last Day.\" He (Allah) answered: \"As for him who disbelieves, I shall leave him in contentment for a while, then I shall compel him to the torment of the Fire, and worst indeed is that destination! (126)And (remember) when Ibrahim and (his son) Isma'il were raising the foundations of the House (the Ka'bah at Makkah), (saying), \"Our Lord! Accept (this service) from us. Verily, You are the Hearer, the Knower. (127)\"Our Lord! And make us submissive unto You and of our offspring a nation submissive unto You, and show us our Manasik, and accept our repentance. Truly, You are the One Who accepts repentance, the Most Merciful (128)\n\n## The Command to purify the House\n\nAl-Hasan Al-Basri said that,\nوَعَهِدْنَا إِلَىٰ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَإِسْمَاعِيلَ\n(And We gave Our 'Ahd (command) to Ibrahim and Isma'il) means, \"Allah ordered them to purify it from all filth and impurities, of which none should ever touch it.\" Also, Ibn Jurayj said, \"I said to 'Ata', 'What is Allah's 'Ahd?' He said, 'His command.'\" Also, Sa'id bin Jubayr said that Ibn 'Abbas commented on the Ayah,\nأَن طَهِّرَا بَيْتِيَ لِلطَّائِفِينَ وَالْعَاكِفِينَ\n(that they should purify My House (the Ka'bah) for those who are circumambulating it, or staying (I'tikaf)) \"Purify it from the idols.\" Further, Mujahid and Sa'id bin Jubayr said that,\nطَهِّرَا بَيْتِيَ لِلطَّائِفِينَ\n(purify My House for those who are circumambulating it) means, \"From the idols, sexual activity, false witness and sins of all kinds.\"\nAllah said,\nلِلطَّآئِفِينَ\n(for those who are performing Tawaf (circumambulating) it).\nThe Tawaf around the House is a well-established ritual, Sa'id bin Jubayr said that,\nلِلطَّآئِفِينَ\n(for those who are circumambulating it) means, strangers (he means who do not live in Makkah), while;\nوَالْعَاكِفِينَ\n(or staying (I'tikaf)) is about those who live in the area of the Sacred House. Also, Qatadah and Ar-Rabi' bin Anas said that I'tikaf is in reference to those who live in the area of the House, just as Sa'id bin Jubayr stated. Allah said,\nوَالرُّكَّعِ السُّجُودِ\n(or bowing or prostrating themselves (there, in prayer))\nIbn 'Abbas said, when it is a place of prayer it includes those who are described as bowing and prostrating themselves. Also, 'Ata' and Qatadah offered the same Tafsir.\nPurifying all Masjids is required according to this Ayah and according to Allah's statement,\nفِي بُيُوتٍ أَذِنَ اللَّهُ أَن تُرْفَعَ وَيُذْكَرَ فِيهَا اسْمُهُ يُسَبِّحُ لَهُ فِيهَا بِالْغُدُوِّ وَالْآصَالِ\n(In houses (mosques) which Allah has ordered to be raised (to be cleaned, and to be honored), in them His Name is remembered (i.e. Adhan, Iqamah, Salah, invocations, recitation of the Qur'an). Therein glorify Him (Allah) in the mornings and in the (late) afternoons)(24:36).\nThere are many Hadiths that give a general order for purifying the Masjids and keeping filth and impurities away from them. This is why the Prophet ﷺ said,\nإِنَّمَا بُنِيَتِ الْمَسَاجِدُ لِمَا بُنِيَتْ لَهُ\n(The Masjids are established for the purpose that they were built for (i. e. worshipping Allah alone).)\nI have collected a book on this subject, and all praise is due to Allah.\n\n## Makkah is a Sacred Area\n\nAllah said,\nوَإِذْ قَالَ إِبْرَاهِيمُ رَبِّ اجْعَلْ هَٰذَا بَلَدًا آمِنًا وَارْزُقْ أَهْلَهُ مِنَ الثَّمَرَاتِ مَنْ آمَنَ مِنْهُم بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الْآخِرِ\n(And (remember) when Ibrahim said, \"My Lord, make this city (Makkah) a place of security and provide its people with fruits, such of them as believe in Allah and the Last Day.\")\nImam Abu Ja'far bin Jarir At-Tabari narrated that Jabir bin 'Abdullah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ إِبْرَاهِيمَ حَرَّمَ بَيْتَ اللهِ وَأَمَّنَهُ وَإِنِّي حَرَّمْتُ الْمَدِينَةَ مَا بَيْنَ لَابَتَيْهَا، فَلَا يُصَادُ صَيْدُهَا وَلَا يُقْطَعُ عِضَاهُهَا\n(Ibrahim made Allah's House a Sacred Area and a safe refuge. I have made what is between the two sides of Al-Madinah a Sacred Area. Therefore, its game should not be hunted, and its trees should not be cut.) An-Nasa'i and Muslim also recorded this Hadith.\nThere are several other Hadiths that indicate that Allah made Makkah a sacred area before He created the heavens and earth. The Two Sahihs recorded 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas saying that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ هَذَا الْبَلَدَ حَرَّمَهُ اللهُ يَوْمَ خَلَقَ السَّمَوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ، فَهُوَ حَرَامٌ بِحُرْمَةِ اللهِ إِلى يَومِ الْقِيَامَةِ وَإِنَّهُ لَمْ يَحِلَّ الْقِتَالُ فِيهِ لِأَحَدٍ قَبْلِي وَلَمْ يَحِلَّ لِي إِلَّا سَاعَةً مِنْ نَهَارٍ، فَهُوَ حَرَامٌ بِحُرْمَةِ اللهِ إِلى يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ لَا يُعْضَدُ شَوْكُهُ وَلَا يُنَفَّرُ صَيْدُهُ، وَلَا يَلْتَقِطُ لُقَطَتَهُ إِلَّا مَنْ عَرَّفَهَا وَلَا يُخْتَلى خَلَاهَا\nفَقَالَ الْعَبَّاسُ:\nيَا رَسُولَ اللهِ: إِلّا الْإذْخِرَ فَإِنَّهُ لِقَيْنِهِمْ وَلِبُيُوتِهِمْ\nفَقَالَ: إِلَّا الْإِذْخِرَ\n(Allah has made this city a sanctuary (sacred place) the Day He created the heavens and earth. Therefore, it is a sanctuary until the Day of Resurrection because Allah made it a sanctuary. It was not legal for anyone to fight in it before me, and it was legal for me for a few hours of one day. Therefore, it is a sanctuary until the Day of Resurrection, because Allah made it a sanctuary. None is allowed to uproot its thorny shrubs, or to chase its game, or to pick up something that has fallen, except by a person who announces it publicly, nor should any of its trees be cut.) Al-'Abbas said, 'O Messenger of Allah! Except the lemon-grass, for our goldsmiths and for our graves.' The Prophet added, (Except lemon-grass.)\nThis is the wording of Muslim. The Two Sahihs also recorded Abu Hurayrah narrating a similar Hadith, while Al-Bukhari recorded a similar Hadith from Safiyyah bint Shaybah who narrated it from the Prophet ﷺ.\nAbu Shurayh Al-'Adawi said that he said to 'Amr bin Sa'id while he was sending armies to Makkah, \"O Commander! Let me narrate a Hadith that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said the day that followed the victory of Makkah. My ears heard the Hadith, my heart comprehended it, and my eyes saw the Prophet ﷺ when he said it. He thanked Allah and praised him and then said,\nإِنَّ مَكَّةَ حَرَّمَهَا اللهُ وَلَمْ يُحَرِّمْهَا النَّاسُ فَلَا يَحِلُّ لِامْرِىءٍ يُؤْمِنُ بِاللهِ وَالْيَومِ الْآخِرِ أَنْ يَسْفِكَ بِهَا دَمًا وَلَا يَعْضِدَ بِهَا شَجَرَةً، فَإِنْ أَحَدٌ تَرَخَّصَ بِقِتَالِ رَسُولِ اللهِ صلّى الله عليه وسلّم فَقُولُوا: إِنَّ اللهَ أَذِنَ لِرَسُولِهِ وَلَمْ يَأْذَنْ لَكُمْ، وَإِنَّمَا أَذِنَ لِي فِيهَا سَاعَةً مِنْ نَهَارٍ وَقَدْ عَادَتْ حُرْمَتُهَا الْيَومَ كَحُرْمَتِهَا بِالْأَمْسِ فَلْيُبَلِّغِ الشَّاهِدُ الْغَائِبَ\n(Allah, not the people, made Makkah a sanctuary, so any person who has belief in Allah and the Last Day, should neither shed blood in it nor should he cut down its trees. If anybody argues that fighting in it is permissible on the basis that Allah's Messenger fought in Makkah, say to him, 'Allah allowed His Messenger and did not allow you.' Allah allowed me only for a few hours on that day (of the Conquest), and today its sanctity is valid as it was before. So, those who are present should inform those who are absent (concerning this fact).)\nAbu Shurayh was asked, 'What did 'Amr reply?' He said, ('Amr said) 'O Abu Shurayh! I know better than you about this, the Sacred House does not give protection to a sinner, a murderer or a thief.' This Hadith was collected by Al-Bukhari and Muslim.\nAfter this, there is no contradiction between the Hadiths that stated that Allah made Makkah a sanctuary when He created the heavens and earth and the Hadiths that Ibrahim made it a sanctuary, since Ibrahim conveyed Allah's decree that Makkah is a sanctuary, before he built the House. Similarly, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ was written as the Final Prophet when Adam was still clay. Yet, Ibrahim said,\nرَبَّنَا وَابْعَثْ فِيهِمْ رَسُولًا مِّنْهُمْ\n(Our Lord! Send amongst them a Messenger of their own)(2: 129).\nAllah accepted Ibrahim's supplication, although He had full knowledge beforehand that it will occur by His decree. To further elaborate on this subject, we should mention the Hadith about what the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said when he was asked, \"O Messenger of Allah! Tell us about how your prophethood started.\" He ﷺ said,\nدَعْوَةُ أَبِي إِبْرَاهِيمَ، عَلَيْهِ السَّلَامُ، وَبُشْرَى عِيسَى ابْنِ مَرْيَمَ، وَرَأَتْ أُمِّي كَأَنَّهُ خَرَجَ مِنْهَا نُورٌ أَضَاءَتْ لَهُ قُصُورُ الشَّامِ\n(I am the supplication of my father Ibrahim, the good news of Jesus, the son of Mary, and my mother saw a light that radiated from her which illuminated the castles of Ash-Sham (Syria).)\nIn this Hadith, the Companions asked the Messenger ﷺ about the beginning of his prophethood. We will explain this matter later, if Allah wills.\n\n## Ibrahim invokes Allah to make Makkah an Area of Safety and Sustenance\n\nAllah said that Ibrahim said,\nرَبِّ اجْعَلْ هَٰذَا بَلَدًا آمِنًا\n(My Lord, make this city (Makkah) a place of security)(2:126) from terror, so that its people do not suffer from fear. Allah accepted Ibrahim's supplication. Allah said,\nوَمَن دَخَلَهُ كَانَ آمِنًا\n(Whosoever enters it, he attains security)(3:97) and,\nأَوَلَمْ يَرَوْا أَنَّا جَعَلْنَا حَرَمًا آمِنًا وَيُتَخَطَّفُ النَّاسُ مِنْ حَوْلِهِمْ\n(Have they not seen that We have made (Makkah) a secure sanctuary, while men are being snatched away from all around them?)(29:67).\nWe have already mentioned the Hadiths that prohibit fighting in the Sacred Area. Muslim recorded that Jabir said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nلَا يَحِلُّ لِأَحَدٍ أَنْ يَحْمِلَ بِمَكَّةَ السِّلَاحَ\n(No one is allowed to carry weapons in Makkah.) Allah mentioned that Ibrahim said,\nرَبِّ اجْعَلْ هَٰذَا بَلَدًا آمِنًا\n(My Lord, make this city (Makkah) a place of security) meaning, make this a safe city. This occurred before the Ka'bah was built. Allah said in Surat Ibrahim,\nوَإِذْ قَالَ إِبْرَاهِيمُ رَبِّ اجْعَلْ هَٰذَا الْبَلَدَ آمِنًا\n(And (remember) when Ibrahim said, \"My Lord! Make this city (Makkah) one of peace and security...\")(14:35) as here, Ibrahim supplicated a second time after the House was built and its people lived around it, after Ishaq who was thirteen years Isma'il's junior was born. This is why at the end of his supplication, Ibrahim said here,\nالْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي وَهَبَ لِي عَلَى الْكِبَرِ إِسْمَاعِيلَ وَإِسْحَاقَ إِنَّ رَبِّي لَسَمِيعُ الدُّعَاءِ\n(All the praises and thanks be to Allah, Who has given me in old age Isma'il (Ishmael) and Ishaq (Isaac). Verily, my Lord is indeed the Hearer of invocations)(14:39).\nAllah said next,\nوَارْزُقْ أَهْلَهُ مِنَ الثَّمَرَاتِ مَنْ آمَنَ مِنْهُم بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الْآخِرِ قَالَ وَمَن كَفَرَ فَأُمَتِّعُهُ قَلِيلًا ثُمَّ أَضْطَرُّهُ إِلَىٰ عَذَابِ النَّارِ وَبِئْسَ الْمَصِيرُ\n(\"...and provide its people with fruits, such of them as believe in Allah and the Last Day.\" He (Allah) answered: \"As for him who disbelieves, I shall leave him in contentment for a while, then I shall compel him to the torment of the Fire, and worst indeed is that destination!\")\nIbn Jarir said that Ubayy bin Ka'b commented on,\nقَالَ وَمَن كَفَرَ فَأُمَتِّعُهُ قَلِيلًا ثُمَّ أَضْطَرُّهُ إِلَىٰ عَذَابِ النَّارِ وَبِئْسَ الْمَصِيرُ\n(He answered: \"As for him who disbelieves, I shall leave him in contentment for a while, then I shall compel him to the torment of the Fire, and worst indeed is that destination!\")\n\"These are Allah's Words (meaning not Ibrahim's)\" This is also the Tafsir of Mujahid and 'Ikrimah. Furthermore, Ibn Abi Hatim narrated that Ibn 'Abbas commented on Allah's statement,\nرَبِّ اجْعَلْ هَٰذَا بَلَدًا آمِنًا وَارْزُقْ أَهْلَهُ مِنَ الثَّمَرَاتِ مَنْ آمَنَ مِنْهُم بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الْآخِرِ\n(My Lord, make this city (Makkah) a place of security and provide its people with fruits, such of them as believe in Allah and the Last Day.)\n\"Ibrahim asked Allah to grant sustenance for the believers only. However, Allah revealed, 'I will also provide for the disbelievers, just as I shall provide for the believers. Would I create something and not sustain and provide for? I shall allow the disbelievers little delight, and then force them to the torment of the Fire, and what an evil destination. Ibn 'Abbas then recited,\nكُلًّا نُّمِدُّ هَٰؤُلَاءِ وَهَٰؤُلَاءِ مِنْ عَطَاءِ رَبِّكَ وَمَا كَانَ عَطَاءُ رَبِّكَ مَحْظُورًا\n(On each these as well as those We bestow from the bounties of your Lord. And the bounties of your Lord can never be forbidden)(17:20).\nThis was recorded by Ibn Marduwyah, who also recorded similar statements from 'Ikrimah and Mujahid. Similarly, Allah said,\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَفْتَرُونَ عَلَى اللَّهِ الْكَذِبَ لَا يُفْلِحُونَ - مَتَاعٌ فِي الدُّنْيَا ثُمَّ إِلَيْنَا مَرْجِعُهُمْ ثُمَّ نُذِيقُهُمُ الْعَذَابَ الشَّدِيدَ بِمَا كَانُوا يَكْفُرُونَ\n(Verily, those who invent a lie against Allah will never be successful. (A brief) enjoyment in this world! And then unto Us will be their return, then We shall make them taste the severest torment because they used to disbelieve.)(10:69-70),\nوَمَن كَفَرَ فَلَا يَحْزُنكَ كُفْرُهُ إِلَيْنَا مَرْجِعُهُمْ فَنُنَبِّئُهُم بِمَا عَمِلُوا إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلِيمٌ بِذَاتِ الصُّدُورِ - نُمَتِّعُهُمْ قَلِيلًا ثُمَّ نَضْطَرُّهُمْ إِلَىٰ عَذَابٍ غَلِيظٍ\n(And whoever disbelieves, let not his disbelief grieve you (O Muhammad ﷺ). To Us is their return, and We shall inform them what they have done. Verily, Allah is the Knower of what is in the breasts (of men). We let them enjoy for a little while, then in the end We shall oblige them to (enter) a great torment.)(31:23-24) and,\nوَلَوْلَا أَن يَكُونَ النَّاسُ أُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً لَّجَعَلْنَا لِمَن يَكْفُرُ بِالرَّحْمَٰنِ لِبُيُوتِهِمْ سُقُفًا مِّن فِضَّةٍ وَمَعَارِجَ عَلَيْهَا يَظْهَرُونَ - وَلِبُيُوتِهِمْ أَبْوَابًا وَسُرُرًا عَلَيْهَا يَتَّكِئُونَ - وَزُخْرُفًا وَإِن كُلُّ ذَٰلِكَ لَمَّا مَتَاعُ الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَالْآخِرَةُ عِندَ رَبِّكَ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ\n(And were it not that mankind would have become of one community (all disbelievers desiring worldly life only), We would have provided for those who disbelieve in the Most Gracious (Allah), silver roofs for their houses, and elevators whereby they ascend. And for their houses, doors (of silver), and thrones (of silver) on which they could recline. And adornments of gold. Yet all this would have been nothing but an enjoyment of this world. And the Hereafter with your Lord is (only) for the Muttaqin (the pious).)(43:33-35). Allah said next,\nثُمَّ أَضْطَرُّهُ إِلَىٰ عَذَابِ النَّارِ وَبِئْسَ الْمَصِيرُ\n(Then I shall compel him to the torment of the Fire, and worst indeed is that destination!) meaning, \"After the delight that the disbeliever enjoyed in this life, I will make his destination torment in the Fire, and what an evil destination.\" This Ayah indicates that Allah gives the disbelievers respite and then seizes them in a manner compatible to His greatness and ability. This Ayah is similar to Allah's statement,\nوَكَأَيِّن مِّن قَرْيَةٍ أَمْلَيْتُ لَهَا وَهِيَ ظَالِمَةٌ ثُمَّ أَخَذْتُهَا وَإِلَيَّ الْمَصِيرُ\n(And many a township did I give respite while it was given to wrongdoing. Then (in the end) I seized it (with punishment). And to Me is the (final) return (of all))(22:48).\nAlso, the Two Sahihs recorded,\nلَا أَحَدَ أَصْبَرُ عَلى أَذًى سَمِعَهُ مِنَ اللهِ إِنَّهُمْ يَجْعَلُونَ لَهُ وَلَدًا وَهُوَ يَرْزُقُهُمْ وَيُعَافِيهِم\n(No one is more patient than Allah when hearing abuse. They attribute a son to Him, while He grants them sustenance and health.)\nThe Sahih also recorded,\nإِنَّ اللهَ لَيُمْلِي لِلظَّالِـمِ حَتّى إِذَا أَخَذَهُ لَمْ يُفْلِتْهُ\n(Allah gives respite to the unjust person, until when He seizes him; He never lets go of him.)\nHe then recited Allah's statement,\nوَكَذَٰلِكَ أَخْذُ رَبِّكَ إِذَا أَخَذَ الْقُرَىٰ وَهِيَ ظَالِمَةٌ إِنَّ أَخْذَهُ أَلِيمٌ شَدِيدٌ\n(Such is the punishment of your Lord when He punishes the (population of) towns while they are doing wrong. Verily, His punishment is painful (and) severe). (11:102)\n\n## Building the Ka'bah and asking Allah to accept This Deed\n\nAllah said,\nوَإِذْ يَرْفَعُ إِبْرَاهِيمُ الْقَوَاعِدَ مِنَ الْبَيْتِ وَإِسْمَاعِيلُ رَبَّنَا تَقَبَّلْ مِنَّا إِنَّكَ أَنتَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ - رَبَّنَا وَاجْعَلْنَا مُسْلِمَيْنِ لَكَ وَمِن ذُرِّيَّتِنَا أُمَّةً مُّسْلِمَةً لَّكَ وَأَرِنَا مَنَاسِكَنَا وَتُبْ عَلَيْنَا إِنَّكَ أَنتَ التَّوَّابُ الرَّحِيمُ\n(And (remember) when Ibrahim (Abraham) and (his son) Isma'il (Ishmael) were raising the foundations of the House (the Ka'bah at Makkah), (saying), \"Our Lord! Accept (this service) from us. Verily, You are the Hearer, the Knower. Our Lord! And make us submissive unto You and of our offspring a nation submissive unto You, and show us our Manasik and accept our repentance. Truly, You are the One Who accepts repentance, the Most Merciful.\")\nAllah said, \"O Muhammad! Remind your people when Ibrahim and Isma'il built the House and raised its foundations while saying,\nرَبَّنَا تَقَبَّلْ مِنَّا إِنَّكَ أَنتَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ\n(Our Lord! Accept (this service) from us. Verily, You are the Hearer, the Knower.\")\nAl-Qurtubi mentioned that Ubayy and Ibn Mas'ud used to recite the Ayah this way,\nوَإِذْ يَرْفَعُ إِبْرَاهِيمُ الْقَوَاعِدَ مِنَ الْبَيْتِ وَإِسْمَاعِيلُ وَيَقُولَانِ رَبَّنَا تَقَبَّلْ مِنَّا إِنَّكَ أَنتَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ\n(And (remember) when Ibrahim and (his son) Isma'il were raising the foundations of the House (the Ka'bah at Makkah), Saying, \"Our Lord! Accept (this service) from us. Verily, You are the Hearer, the Knower.\")\nWhat further testifies to this statement (which adds 'saying' to the Ayah) by Ubayy and Ibn Mas'ud, is what came afterwards,\nرَبَّنَا وَاجْعَلْنَا مُسْلِمَيْنِ لَكَ وَمِن ذُرِّيَّتِنَا أُمَّةً مُّسْلِمَةً لَّكَ\n(Our Lord! And make us submissive unto You and of our offspring a nation submissive unto You).\nThe Prophets Ibrahim and Isma'il were performing a good deed, yet they asked Allah to accept this good deed from them. Ibn Abi Hatim narrated that Wuhayb bin Al-Ward recited,\nوَإِذْ يَرْفَعُ إِبْرَاهِيمُ الْقَوَاعِدَ مِنَ الْبَيْتِ وَإِسْمَاعِيلُ رَبَّنَا تَقَبَّلْ مِنَّا\n(And (remember) when Ibrahim and (his son) Isma'il were raising the foundations of the House (the Ka'bah at Makkah), (saying), \"Our Lord! Accept (this service) from us\") and cried and said, \"O Khalil of Ar-Rahman! You raise the foundations of the House of Ar-Rahman (Allah), yet you are afraid that He will not accept it from you?\" This is the behavior of the sincere believers, whom Allah described in His statement,\nوَالَّذِينَ يُؤْتُونَ مَا آتَوا\n(And those who give that which they give)(23:60) meaning, they give away voluntary charity, and perform the acts of worship yet,\nوَّقُلُوبُهُمْ وَجِلَةٌ\n(with their hearts full of fear)(23: 60) afraid that these good deeds might not be accepted of them. There is an authentic Hadith narrated by 'A'ishah on this subject, which we will mention later, Allah willing.\nAl-Bukhari recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Prophet Ibrahim took Isma'il and his mother and went away with them until he reached the area of the House, where he left them next to a tree above Zamzam in the upper area of the Masjid. During that time, Isma'il's mother was still nursing him. Makkah was then uninhabited, and there was no water source in it. Ibrahim left them there with a bag containing some dates and a water-skin containing water. Ibrahim then started to leave, and Isma'il's mother followed him and said, 'O Ibrahim! To whom are you leaving us in this barren valley that is not inhabited?' She repeated the question several times and Ibrahim did not reply. She asked, 'Has Allah commanded you to do this?' He said, 'Yes.' She said, 'I am satisfied that Allah will never abandon us.' Ibrahim left, and when he was far enough away where they could not see him, close to Thaniyyah, he faced the House, raised his hands and supplicated,\nرَّبَّنَا إِنِّي أَسْكَنتُ مِن ذُرِّيَّتِي بِوَادٍ غَيْرِ ذِي زَرْعٍ عِندَ بَيْتِكَ الْمُحَرَّمِ\n(O our Lord! I have made some of my offspring to dwell in an uncultivable valley by Your Sacred House (the Ka'bah at Makkah)) until,\nيَشْكُرُونَ\n(Give thanks)(14:37). Isma'il's mother then returned to her place, started drinking water from the water-skin and nursing Isma'il. When the water was used up, she and her son became thirsty. She looked at him, and he was suffering from thirst; she left, because she disliked seeing his face in that condition. She found the nearest mountian to where she was, As-Safa, ascended it and looked, in vain, hoping to see somebody. When she came down to the valley, she raised her garment and ran, just as a tired person runs, until she reached the Al-Marwah mountain. In vain, she looked to see if there was someone there. She ran to and fro (between the two mountains) seven times.\" Ibn 'Abbas said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said, \"This is why the people make the trip between As-Safa and Al-Marwah (during Hajj and Umrah).\"\n\"When she reached Al-Marwah, she heard a voice and said, 'Shush,' to herself. She tried to hear the voice again and when she did, she said, 'I have heard you. Do you have relief?' She found the angel digging with his heel (or his wing) where Zamzam now exists, and the water gushed out. Isma'il's mother was astonished and started digging, using her hand to transfer water to the water-skin.\" Ibn 'Abbas said that the Prophet ﷺ then said, \"May Allah grant His mercy to the mother of Isma'il, had she left the water, (flow naturally without her intervention), it would have been flowing on the surface of the earth.\"\n\"Isma'il's mother started drinking the water and her milk increased for her child. The angel (Gabriel) said to her, 'Do not fear abandonment. There shall be a House for Allah built here by this boy and his father. Allah does not abandon His people.' During that time, the area of the House was raised above ground level and the floods used to reach its right and left sides.\nAfterwards some people of the tribe of Jurhum, passing through Kada', made camp at the bottom of the valley. They saw some birds, they were astonished, and said, 'Birds can only be found at a place where there is water. We did not notice before that this valley had water.' They sent a scout or two who searched the area, found the water, and returned to inform them about it. Then they all went to Isma'il's mother, next to the water, and said, 'O Mother of Isma'il! Will you allow us to be with you (or dwell with you)?' She said, 'Yes. But you will have no exclusive right to the water here.' They said, 'We agree.'\" Ibn 'Abbas said that the Prophet ﷺ said, \"At that time, Isma'il's mother liked to have human company.\"\n\"And thus they stayed there and sent for their relatives to join them. Later on, her boy reached the age of puberty and married a lady from them, for Isma'il learned Arabic from them, and they liked the way he was raised. Isma'il's mother died after that.\nThen an idea occurred to Abraham to visit his dependents. So he left (to Makkah). When he arrived, he did not find Isma'il, so he asked his wife about him. She said, 'He has gone out hunting.' When he asked her about their living conditions, she complained to him that they live in misery and poverty. Abraham said (to her), 'When your husband comes, convey my greeting and tell him to change the threshold of his gate.' When Isma'il came, he sensed that they had a visitor and asked his wife, 'Did we have a visitor?' She said, 'Yes. An old man came to visit us and asked me about you, and I told him where you were. He also asked about our condition, and I told him that we live in hardship and poverty.' Isma'il said, 'Did he ask you to do anything?' She said, 'Yes. He asked me to convey his greeting and that you should change the threshold of your gate.' Isma'il said to her, 'He was my father and you are the threshold, so go to your family (i.e. you are divorced).' So he divorced her and married another woman.\nAgain Ibrahim thought of visiting his dependents whom he had left (at Makkah). Ibrahim came to Isma'il's house, but did not find Isma'il and asked his wife, 'Where is Isma'il?' Isma'il's wife replied, 'He has gone out hunting.' He asked her about their condition, and she said that they have a good life and praised Allah. Ibrahim asked, 'What is your food and what is your drink?' She replied, 'Our food is meat and our drink is water.' He said, 'O Allah! Bless their meat and their drink.'\" The Prophet (Muhammad ﷺ) said, \"They did not have crops then, otherwise Ibrahim would have invoked Allah to bless that too. Those who do not live in Makkah cannot bear eating a diet only containing meat and water.\"\n\"Ibrahim said, 'When Isma'il comes back, convey my greeting to him and ask him to keep the threshold of his gate.' When Isma'il came back, he asked, 'Has anyone visited us.' She said, 'Yes. A good looking old man,' and she praised Ibrahim, 'And he asked me about our livelihood and I told him that we live in good conditions.' He asked, 'Did he ask you to convey any message?' She said, 'Yes. He conveyed his greeting to you and said that you should keep the threshold of your gate.' Isma'il said, 'That was my father, and you are the threshold; he commanded me to keep you.'\nIbrahim then came back visiting and found Isma'il behind the Zamzam well, next to a tree, mending his arrows. When he saw Ibrahim, he stood up and they greeted each other, just as the father and son greet each other. Ibrahim said, 'O Isma'il, Your Lord has ordered me to do something.' He said, 'Obey your Lord.' He asked Isma'il, 'Will you help me?' He said, 'Yes, I will help you.' Ibrahim said, 'Allah has commanded me to build a house for Him there,' and he pointed to an area that was above ground level. So, both of them rose and started to raise the foundations of the House. Abraham started building (the Ka'bah), while Isma'il continued handing him the stones. Both of them were saying, 'O our Lord ! Accept (this service) from us, Verily, You are the Hearing, the Knowing.' (2.127) Hence, they were building the House, part by part, going around it and saying,\nرَبَّنَا تَقَبَّلْ مِنَّا إِنَّكَ أَنتَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ\n(Our Lord! Accept (this service) from us. Verily, You are the Hearer, the Knower.)\n\n## The Story of rebuilding the House by Quraysh before the Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) was sent as Prophet\n\nIn his Sīrah, Muhammad bin Ishaq bin Yasar said, \"When the Messenger of Allah ﷺ reached thirty-five years of age, the Quraysh gathered to rebuild the Ka'bah, this included covering it with a roof. However, they were weary of demolishing it. During that time, the Ka'bah was barely above a man's shoulder, so they wanted to raise its height and build a ceiling on top. Some people had stolen the Ka'bah's treasure beforehand, which used to be in a well in the middle of the Ka'bah\nThe treasure was later found with a man called, Duwayk, a freed servant of Bani Mulayh bin 'Amr, from the tribe of Khuza'ah. The Quraysh cut off his hand as punishment. Some people claimed that those who actually stole the treasure left it with Duwayk. Afterwards, the sea brought a ship that belonged to a Roman merchant to the shores of Jeddah, where it washed-up. So they collected the ship's wood to use it for the Ka'bah's ceiling; a Coptic carpenter in Makkah prepared what they needed for the job.\nWhen they decided to begin the demolition process to rebuild the House, Abu Wahb bin 'Amr bin 'A'idh bin 'Abd bin 'Imran bin Makhzum took a stone from the Ka'bah; the stone slipped from his hand and went back to where it had been. He said, 'O people of Quraysh! Do not spend on rebuilding the House, except from what was earned from pure sources. No money earned from a prostitute, usury or injustice should be included.'\" Ibn Ishaq commented here that the people also attribute these words to Al-Walid bin Al-Mughirah bin 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Makhzum.\nIbn Ishaq continued, \"The Quraysh began to organize their efforts to rebuild the Ka'bah, each subtribe taking the responsibility of rebuilding a designated part of it.\nHowever, they were still weary about bringing down the Ka'bah. Al-Walid bin Al-Mughirah said, 'I will start to bring it down.' He held an ax and stood by the Ka'bah and said, 'O Allah! No harm is meant. O Allah! We only seek to do a good service.' He then started to chop the House's stones. The people waited that night and said, 'We will wait and see. If something strikes him, we will not bring it down and instead rebuid it the way it was. If nothing happens to him, then Allah will have agreed to what we are doing.' The next morning, Al-Walid went to work on the Ka'bah, and the people started bringing the Ka'bah down with him. When they reached the foundations that Ibrahim built, they uncovered green stones that were above each other, just like a pile of spears.\" Ibn Ishaq then said that some people told him, \"A man from Quraysh, who was helping rebuild the Ka'bah, placed the shovel between two of these stones to pull them up; when one of the stones was moved, all of Makkah shook, so they did not dig up these stones.\"\n\n## The Dispute regarding Who should place the Black Stone in Its Place\n\nIbn Ishaq said, \"The tribes of Quraysh collected stones to rebuild the House, each tribe collecting on their own. They started rebuilding it, until the rebuilding of the Ka'bah reached the point where the Black Stone was to be placed in its designated site. A dispute erupted between the various tribes of Quraysh, each seeking the honor of placing the Black Stone for their own tribe. The dispute almost led to violence between the leaders of Quraysh in the area of the Sacred House. Banu 'Abd Ad-Dar and Banu 'Adi bin Ka'b bin Lu'ay, gave their mutual pledge to fight until death. However, five or four days later, Abu Umayyah bin Al-Mughirah bin 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Makhzum, the oldest man from Quraysh then intervened at the right moment. Abu Umayyah suggested that Quraysh should appoint the first man to enter the House from its entrance to be a mediator between them. They agreed.\nThe Messenger - Muhammad ﷺ - was the first person to enter the House. When the various leaders of Quraysh realized who the first one was, they all proclaimed, 'This is Al-Amin (the Honest one). We all accept him; This is Muhammad.' When the Prophet ﷺ reached the area where the leaders were gathering and they informed him about their dispute, he asked them to bring a garment and place it on the ground. He placed the Black Stone on it. He then requested that each of the leaders of Quraysh hold the garment from one side and all participate in lifting the Black Stone, moving it to its designated area. Next, the Prophet ﷺ carried the Black Stone by himself and placed it in its designated position and built around it. The Quraysh used to call the Messenger of Allah 'Al-Amin' even before the revelation came to him.\"\n\n## Ibn Az-Zubayr rebuilds Al-Ka'bah the way the Prophet (ﷺ) wished\n\nIbn Ishaq said, \"During the time of the Prophet ﷺ, the Ka'bah was eighteen cubits high and was covered with Egyptian linen, and they with a striped garment. Al-Hajjaj bin Yusuf was the first person to cover it with silk.\" The Ka'bah remained the same way the Quraysh rebuilt it, until it was burned during the reign of 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubayr, after the year 6o H, at the end of the reign of Yazid bin Mu'awiyah. During that time, Ibn Az-Zubayr was besieged at Makkah. When it was burned, Ibn Az-Zubayr brought the Ka'bah down and built it upon the foundations of Ibrahim, including the Hijr in it. He also made an eastern door and a western door in the Ka'bah and placed them on ground level. He had heard his aunt 'A'ishah, the Mother of the believers, narrate that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ had wished that. The Ka'bah remained like this throughout his reign, until Al-Hajjaj killed Ibn Az-Zubayr and then rebuilt it the way it was before, by the order of 'Abdul-Malik bin Marwan.\nMuslim recorded that 'Ata' said, \"The House was burnt during the reign of Yazid bin Mu'awiyah, when the people of Ash-Sham raided Makkah. Ibn Az-Zubayr did not touch the House until the people came for Hajj, for he wanted to incite them against the people of Ash-Sham. He said to them, 'O people! Advise me regarding the Ka'bah, should we bring it down and rebuild it, or just repair the damage it sustained' Ibn 'Abbas said, 'I have an opinion about this. You should rebuild the House the way it was when the people became Muslims. You should leave the stones that existed when the people became Muslims and when the Prophet ﷺ was sent. Ibn Az-Zubayr said, 'If the house of one of them gets burned, he will not be satisfied, until he rebuilds it. How about Allah's House? I will invoke my Lord for three days and will then implement what I decide.' When the three days had passed, he decided to bring the Ka'bah down. The people hesitated to bring it down, fearing that the first person to climb on the House would be struck down. A man went on top of the House and threw some stones down, and when the people saw that no harm touched him, they started doing the same. They brought the House down to ground level. Ibn Az-Zubayr surrounded the site with curtains hanging from pillars, so that the House would be covered, until the building was erect. Ibn Az-Zubayr then said, 'I heard 'A'ishah say that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nلَوْلَا أَنَّ النَّاسَ حَدِيثٌ عَهْدُهُمْ بِكُفْرٍ، وَلَيْسَ عِنْدِي مِنَ النَّفَقَةِ مَا يُقَوِّينِي عَلى بِنَائِهِ لَكُنْتُ أَدْخَلْتُ فِيهِ مِنَ الْحِجْرِ خَمْسَةَ أَذْرُعٍ، وَلَجَعَلْتُ لَهُ بَابًا يَدْخُلُ النَّاسُ مِنْهُ وَبَابًا يَخْرُجُونَ مِنْهُ\n(If it was not for the fact that the people have recently abandoned disbelief, and that I do not have enough money to spend on it, I would have included in the House five cubits from Al-Hijr and would have made a door for it that people could enter from, and another door that they could exit from.)\nIbn Az-Zubayr said, 'I can spend on this job, and I do not fear the people.' So he added five cubits from the Hijr, which looked like a rear part for the House that people could clearly see. He then built the House and made it eighteen cubits high. He thought that the House was still short and added ten cubits in the front and built two doors in it, one as an entrance and another as an exit.\nWhen Ibn Az-Zubayr was killed, Al-Hajjaj wrote to 'Abdul-Malik bin Marwan asking him about the House and told him that Ibn Az-Zubayr made a rear section for the House. 'Abdul-Malik wrote back, 'We do not agree with Ibn Az-Zubayr's actions. As, for the Ka'bah's height, leave it as it is. As for what he added from the Hijr, bring it down, and build the House as it was before and close the door.' Therefore, Al-Hajjaj brought down the House and rebuilt it as it was.\" In his Sunan, An-Nasa'i collected the Hadith of the Prophet ﷺ narrated from 'A'ishah, not the whole story,\nThe correct Sunnah conformed to Ibn Az-Zubayr's actions, because this was what the Prophet ﷺ wished he could do, but feared that the hearts of the people who recently became Muslim could not bear rebuilding the House. This Sunnah was not clear to 'Abdul-Malik bin Marwan. Hence, when 'Abdul-Malik realized that 'A'ishah had narrated the Hadith of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ on this subject, he said, \"I wish we had left it as Ibn Az-Zubayr had made it.\" Muslim recorded that 'Ubadydullah bin 'Ubayd said that Al-Harith bin 'Abdullah came to 'Abdul-Malik bin Marwan during his reign. 'Abdul-Malik said, 'I did not think that Abu Khubayb (Ibn Az-Zubayr) heard from 'A'ishah what he said he heard from her.' Al-Harith said, 'Yes he did. I heard the Hadith from her.' 'Abdul-Malik said, 'You heard her say what?' He said, 'She said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ قَوْمَكِ اسْتَقْصَرُوا مِنْ بُنْيَانِ الْبَيْتِ وَلَوْلَا حَدَاثَةُ عَهْدِهِمْ بِالشِّرْكِ أَعَدْتُ مَا تَرَكُوا مِنْهُ، فَإِنْ بَدَا لِقَوْمِكِ مِنْ بَعْدِي أَنْ يَبْنُوهُ فَهَلُمِّي لِأُرِيَكِ مَا تَرَكُوهُ مِنْهُ\n(Your people rebuilt the House smaller. Had it not been for the fact that your people are not far from the time of Shirk, I would add what was left outside of it. If your people afterwards think about rebuilding it, let me show you what they left out of it.) He showed her around seven cubits.'\nOne of the narrators of the Hadith, Al-Walid bin 'Ata', added that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nوَلَجَعَلْتُ لَهَا بَابَيْنِ مَوْضُوعَيْنِ فِي الْأَرْضِ: شَرْقِيًّا وَغَرْبِيًّا، وَهَلْ تَدرِينَ لِمَ كَانَ قَومُكِ رَفَعُوا بَابَهَا؟\nقَالَتْ: قُلْتُ: لَا. قَالَ:\nتَعَزُّزًا أَنْ لَا يَدْخُلَهَا إِلَّا مَنْ أَرَادُوا، فَكَانَ الرَّجُلُ إِذَا هُوَ أَرَادَ أَنْ يَدْخُلَهَا يَدَعُونَهُ يَرْتَقِي حَتَّى إِذَا كَادَ أَنْ يَدْخُلَ دَفَعُوهُ فَسَقَطَ\n(I would have made two doors for the House on ground level, one eastern and one western. Do you know why your people raised its door above ground level?) She said, 'No.' He said, (To allow only those whom they wanted to enter it. When a man whom they did not wish to enter the House climbed to the level of the door, they would push him down)\nAbdul-Malik then said, 'You heard 'A'ishah say this Hadith' He said, 'Yes.' 'Abdul-Malik said, 'I wish I left it as it was.\"\n\n## An Ethiopian will destroy the Ka'bah just before the Last Hour\n\nThe Two Sahihs recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nيُخَرِّبُ الْكَعْبَةَ ذُو السُّوَيْقَتَيْنِ مِنَ الْحَبَشَةِ\n(The Ka'bah will be destroyed by Dhus-Sawiqatayn (literally, a person with two lean legs) from Ethiopia.)\nAlso, Ibn 'Abbas said that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nكَأَنِّي بِهِ أَسْوَدَ أَفْحَجَ يَقْلَعُهَا حَجَرًا حَجَرًا\n(As if I see him now: a black person with thin legs plucking the stones of the Ka'bah one after another.) Al-Bukhari recorded this Hadith.\nImam Ahmad bin Hanbal recorded in his Musnad that 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As said that he heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ say,\nيُخَرِّبُ الْكَعْبَةَ ذُو السُّوَيْقَتَيْنِ مِنَ الْحَبَشَةِ وَيَسْلُبُهَا حِلْيَتَهَا وَيُجَرِّدُهَا مِنْ كِسْوَتِهَا، وَلَكَأَنِّي أَنْظُرُ إِلَيْهِ أُصَيْلِعَ وَ أُفَيْدِعَ يَضْرِبُ عَلَيْهَا بِمِسْحَاتِهِ وَمِعْوَلِهِ\n(Dhus-Sawiqatayn from Ethiopia will destroy the Ka'bah and will loot its adornments and cover. It is as if I see him now: bald, with thin legs striking the Ka'bah with his ax.)\nThis will occur after the appearance of Gog and Magog people. Al-Bukhari recorded that Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nلَيُحَجَّنَّ الْبَيْتُ وَلَيُعْتَمَرَنَّ بَعْدَ خُرُوجِ يَأْجُوجَ وَمَأْجُوجَ\n(There will be Hajj and 'Umrah to the House after the appearance of Gog and Magog people.)\n\n## Al-Khalil's Supplication\n\nAllah said that Ibrahim and Isma'il supplicated to Him,\nرَبَّنَا وَاجْعَلْنَا مُسْلِمَيْنِ لَكَ وَمِن ذُرِّيَّتِنَا أُمَّةً مُّسْلِمَةً لَّكَ وَأَرِنَا مَنَاسِكَنَا وَتُبْ عَلَيْنَا إِنَّكَ أَنتَ التَّوَّابُ الرَّحِيمُ\n(Our Lord! And make us submissive unto You and of our offspring a nation submissive unto You, and show us our Manasik, and accept our repentance. Truly, You are the One Who accepts repentance, the Most Merciful.)\nIbn Jarir said, \"They meant by their supplication, 'Make us submit to Your command and obedience and not associate anyone with You in obedience or worship.\"Also, 'Ikrimah commented on the Ayah,\nرَبَّنَا وَاجْعَلْنَا مُسْلِمَيْنِ لَكَ\n(Our Lord! And make us submissive unto You)\n\"Allah said, 'I shall do that.'\"\nوَمِن ذُرِّيَّتِنَآ أُمَّةً مُّسْلِمَةً لَّكَ\n(And of our offspring a nation submissive unto You)\nAllah said, 'I shall do that.'\"\nThis supplication by Ibrahim and Isma'il is similar to what Allah informed us of about His believing servants,\nوَالَّذِينَ يَقُولُونَ رَبَّنَا هَبْ لَنَا مِنْ أَزْوَاجِنَا وَذُرِّيَّاتِنَا قُرَّةَ أَعْيُنٍ وَاجْعَلْنَا لِلْمُتَّقِينَ إِمَامًا\n(And those who say: 'Our Lord! Bestow on us from our wives and our offspring the comfort of our eyes, and make us leaders of the Muttaqin)(25:74).\nThis type of supplication is allowed, because loving to have offspring who worship Allah alone without partners is a sign of complete love of Allah. This is why when Allah said to Ibrahim,\nإِنِّي جَاعِلُكَ لِلنَّاسِ إِمَامًا\n(Verily, I am going to make you an Imam (a leader) for mankind (to follow you)) Ibrahim said,\nوَمِن ذُرِّيَّتِي قَالَ لَا يَنَالُ عَهْدِي الظَّالِمِينَ\n(\"And of my offspring (to make leaders).\" (Allah) said, \"My covenant (prophethood) includes not the Zalimin (polytheists and wrongdoers)\") which is explained by,\nوَاجْنُبْنِي وَبَنِيَّ أَن نَّعْبُدَ الْأَصْنَامَ\n(And keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols)(14:35)\nMuslim narrated in his Sahih that Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nإِذَا مَاتَ ابْنُ آدَمَ انْقَطَعَ عَمَلُهُ إِلَّا مِنْ ثَلَاثٍ: صَدَقَةٍ جَارِيَةٍ أَوْ عِلْمٍ يُنْتَفَعُ بِهِ أَوْ وَلَدٍ صَالِحٍ يَدْعُو لَهُ\n(When the son of Adam dies, his deeds end except for three deeds: an ongoing charity, a knowledge that is being benefited from and a righteous son who supplicates (to Allah) for him.)\n\n## The Meaning of Manasik\n\nSa'id bin Mansur said that 'Attab bin Bashir informed us from Khasif, from Mujahid who said, \"The Prophet Ibrahim supplicated,\nوَأَرِنَا مَنَاسِكَنَا\n(and show us our Manasik)\nJibril then came down, took him to the House and said, 'Raise its foundations.' Ibrahim raised the House's foundations and completed the building. Jibril held Ibrahim's hand, led him to As-Safa and said, 'This is among the rituals of Allah.' He then took him to Al-Marwah and said, 'And this is among the rituals of Allah.' He then took him to Mina until when they reached the 'Aqabah, they found Iblis standing next to a tree. Jibril said, 'Say Takbir (Allah is the Great) and throw (pebbles) at him.' Ibrahim said the Takbir and threw (pebbles at) Iblis. Iblis moved to the middle Jamrah, and when Jibril and Ibrahim passed by him, Jibril said to Ibrahim, 'Say Takbir and throw at him.' Ibrahim threw at him and said Takbir. The devious Iblis sought to add some evil acts to the rituals of Hajj, but he was unable to succeed. Jibril took Ibrahim's hand and led him to Al-Mash'ar Al-Haram and 'Arafat and said to him, 'Have you 'Arafta (known, learned) what I showed you?' thrice. Ibrahim said, 'Yes I did.'\" Similar statements were reported from Abu Mijlaz and Qatadah.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=125","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:129","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:129","text":"\"Our Lord! Send amongst them a Messenger of their own, who shall recite unto them Your verses and instruct them in the Book (this Qur'an), and purify them. Verily, You are the Mighty, the Wise. (129)\n\n## Ibrahim's Supplication that Allah sends the Prophet (ﷺ)\n\nAllah mentioned Ibrahim's supplication for the benefit of the people of the Sacred Area (to grant them security and provision), and it was perfected by invoking Allah to send a Messenger from his offspring. This accepted supplication, from Ibrahim, conformed with Allah's appointed destiny that Muhammad ﷺ be sent as a Messenger among the Ummiyyin and to all non-Arabs, among the Jinns and mankind.\nHence, Ibrahim was the first person to mention the Prophet ﷺ to the people. Ever since, Muhammad ﷺ was known to the people, until the last Prophet was sent among the Children of Israel, Jesus the son of Mary, who mentioned Muhammad ﷺ by name. Jesus addressed the Children of Israel saying,\nإِنِّي رَسُولُ اللَّهِ إِلَيْكُم مُّصَدِّقًا لِّمَا بَيْنَ يَدَيَّ مِنَ التَّوْرَاةِ وَمُبَشِّرًا بِرَسُولٍ يَأْتِي مِن بَعْدِي اسْمُهُ أَحْمَدُ\n(I am the Messenger of Allah unto you, confirming what is before me in the Tawrah, and giving glad tidings of a Messenger to come after me, whose name shall be Ahmad)(61:6)\nThis is why the Prophet ﷺ said,\nدَعْوَةُ أَبِي إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَبُشْرَى عِيسَى ابْنِ مَرْيـَمَ\n(The supplication of my father Ibrahim and the glad tidings brought forth by Jesus the son of Mary.)\nThe Prophet ﷺ said,\nوَرَأَتْ أُمِّي أَنَّهُ خَرَجَ مِنْهَا نُورٌ أَضَاءَتْ لَهُ قُصُورُ الشَّامِ\n(My mother saw a light that went out of her and radiated the palaces of Ash-Sham.)\nIt was said that the Prophet's mother saw this vision when she was pregnant with, narrated this vision to her people, and the story became popular among them. The light mentioned in the Hadith appeared in Ash-Sham (Greater Syria), testifying to what will later occur when the Prophet's religion will be firmly established in Ash-Sham area. This is why by the end of time, Ash-Sham will be a refuge for Islam and its people. Also, Jesus the son of Mary will descend in Ash-Sham, next to the eastern white minaret in Damascus. The Two Sahihs stated,\nلَا تَزَالُ طَائِفَةٌ مِنْ أُمَّتِي ظَاهِرِينَ عَلَى الْحَقِّ لَا يَضُرُّهُمْ مَنْ خَذَلَهُمْ وَلَا مَنْ خَالَفَهُمْ حَتَّى يَأْتِيَ أَمْرُ اللهِ وَهُمْ كَذَلِكَ\nوفي صحيح البخاري\nوَهُمْ بالشَّامِ\n(There will always be a group of my Ummah who will be on the truth, undeterred by those who fail or oppose them, until the command of Allah comes while they are on this.)\nAl-Bukhari added in his Sahih, (And they will reside in Ash-Sham.)\n\n## The Meaning of Al-Kitab wal-Hikmah\n\nAllah said,\nوَيُعَلِّمُهُمُ الْكِتَابَ\n(and instruct them in the Book) meaning, Al-Qur'an,\nوَالْحِكْمَةَ\n(and Al-Hikmah) meaning, the Sunnah, as Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Muqatil bin Hayyan and Abu Malik asserted. It was also said that 'Al-Hikmah', means 'comprehension in the religion', and both meanings are correct. 'Ali bin Abi Talhah said, that Ibn 'Abbas said that,\nوَيُزَكِّيهِمْ\n(and purify them) means, \"With the obedience of Allah.\"\nإِنَّكَ أَنتَ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ\n(Verily, You are the Mighty, the Wise).\nThis Ayah stated that Allah is able to do anything, and nothing escapes His ability. He is Wise in His decisions, His actions, and He puts everything in its rightful place due to His perfect knowledge, wisdom and justice.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=129","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:130","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:130–132","text":"And who turns away from the religion of Ibrahim (i.e. Islamic Monotheism) except him who fools himself? Truly, We chose him in this world and verily, in the Hereafter he will be among the righteous (130)When his Lord said to him, \"Submit (i.e. be a Muslim)!\" He said, \"I have submitted myself (as a Muslim) to the Lord of the 'Alamin (mankind, Jinn and all that exists). (131)And this (submission to Allah, Islam) was enjoined by Ibrahim (Abraham) upon his sons and by Ya'qub (Jacob)(saying), \"O my sons! Allah has chosen for you the (true) religion, then die not except as Muslims. (132)\n\n## Only the Fools deviate from Ibrahim's Religion\n\nAllah refuted the disbelievers' innovations of associating others with Allah in defiance of the religion of Ibrahim, the leader of the upright. Ibrahim always singled out Allah in worship, with sincerity, and he did not call upon others besides Allah. He did not commit Shirk, even for an instant. He disowned every other deity that was being worshipped instead of Allah and defied all his people in this regard. Prophet Ibrahim said,\nيَا قَوْمِ إِنِّي بَرِيءٌ مِّمَّا تُشْرِكُونَ - إِنِّي وَجَّهْتُ وَجْهِيَ لِلَّذِي فَطَرَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ حَنِيفًا وَمَا أَنَا مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ\n(O my people! I am indeed free from all that you join as partners (in worship with Allah). Verily, I have turned my face towards Him Who has created the heavens and the earth Hanifa (Islamic Monotheism), and I am not of Al-Mushrikin.)(6:78-79). Also, Allah said,\nوَإِذْ قَالَ إِبْرَاهِيمُ لِأَبِيهِ وَقَوْمِهِ إِنَّنِي بَرَاءٌ مِّمَّا تَعْبُدُونَ - إِلَّا الَّذِي فَطَرَنِي فَإِنَّهُ سَيَهْدِينِ\n(And (remember) when Ibrahim said to his father and his people: \"Verily, I am innocent of what you worship. \"Except Him (i.e. I worship none but Allah alone) Who did create me; and verily, He will guide me\")(43:26-27),\nوَمَا كَانَ اسْتِغْفَارُ إِبْرَاهِيمَ لِأَبِيهِ إِلَّا عَن مَّوْعِدَةٍ وَعَدَهَا إِيَّاهُ فَلَمَّا تَبَيَّنَ لَهُ أَنَّهُ عَدُوٌّ لِّلَّهِ تَبَرَّأَ مِنْهُ إِنَّ إِبْرَاهِيمَ لَأَوَّاهٌ حَلِيمٌ\n(And Ibrahim's invoking (of Allah) for his father's forgiveness was only because of a promise he (Ibrahim) had made to him (his father). But when it became clear to him (Ibrahim) that he (his father) was an enemy of Allah, he dissociated himself from him. Verily, Ibrahim was Awwah (one who invokes Allah with humility, glorifies Him and remembers Him much) and was forbearing)(9:114), and,\nإِنَّ إِبْرَاهِيمَ كَانَ أُمَّةً قَانِتًا لِّلَّهِ حَنِيفًا وَلَمْ يَكُ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ - شَاكِرًا لِّأَنْعُمِهِ اجْتَبَاهُ وَهَدَاهُ إِلَىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُّسْتَقِيمٍ - وَآتَيْنَاهُ فِي الدُّنْيَا حَسَنَةً وَإِنَّهُ فِي الْآخِرَةِ لَمِنَ الصَّالِحِينَ\n(Verily, Ibrahim was an Ummah (a leader having all the good qualities, or a nation), obedient to Allah, Hanif (i.e. to worship none but Allah), and he was not one of those who were Al-Mushrikin. (He was) thankful for His (Allah's) favors. He (Allah) chose him (as an intimate friend) and guided him to a straight path. And We gave him good in this world, and in the Hereafter he shall be of the righteous.)(16:120-122).\nThis is why Allah said here,\nوَمَن يَرْغَبُ عَن مِّلَّةِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ\n(And who turns away from the religion of Ibrahim), meaning, abandons his path, way and method\nإِلَّا مَن سَفِهَ نَفْسَهُ\n(except him who fools himself) meaning, who commits injustice against himself by deviating from the truth, to wickedness. Such a person will be defying the path of he who was chosen in this life to be a true Imam, from the time he was young, until Allah chose him to be His Khalil, and who shall be among the successful in the Last Life. Is there anything more insane than deviating from this path and following the path of misguidance and deviation instead? Is there more injustice than this? Allah said,\nإِنَّ الشِّرْكَ لَظُلْمٌ عَظِيمٌ\n(Verily, joining others in worship with Allah is a great Zulm (wrong) indeed)(31:13).\nAbu Al-'Aliyah and Qatadah said, \"This Ayah (2:130) was revealed about the Jews who invented a practice that did not come from Allah and that defied the religion of Ibrahim.\" Allah's statement,\nمَا كَانَ إِبْرَاهِيمُ يَهُودِيًّا وَلَا نَصْرَانِيًّا وَلَٰكِن كَانَ حَنِيفًا مُّسْلِمًا وَمَا كَانَ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ - إِنَّ أَوْلَى النَّاسِ بِإِبْرَاهِيمَ لَلَّذِينَ اتَّبَعُوهُ وَهَٰذَا النَّبِيُّ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَاللَّهُ وَلِيُّ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ\n(Ibrahim was neither a Jew nor a Christian, but he was a true Muslim Hanifa (to worship none but Allah alone) and he was not of Al-Mushrikin. Verily, among mankind who have the best claim to Ibrahim are those who followed him, and this Prophet (Muhammad ﷺ) and those who have believed (Muslims). And Allah is the Wali (Protector and Helper) of the believers.)(3:67-68), testifies to this fact.\nAllah said next,\nإِذْ قَالَ لَهُ رَبُّهُ أَسْلِمْ قَالَ أَسْلَمْتُ لِرَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(When his Lord said to him, \"Submit (i. e. be a Muslim)!\" He said, \"I have submitted myself (as a Muslim) to the Lord of the 'Alamin (mankind, Jinn and all that exists).\")\nThis Ayah indicates that Allah commanded Ibrahim to be sincere with Him and to abide and submit to Him; Ibrahim perfectly adhered to Allah's command. Allah's statement,\nوَوَصَّىٰ بِهَا إِبْرَاهِيمُ بَنِيهِ وَيَعْقُوبُ\n(And this (submission to Allah, Islam) was enjoined by Ibrahim upon his sons and by Ya'qub) means, Ibrahim commanded his offspring to follow this religion, that is, Islam, for Allah. Or, the Ayah might be referring to Ibrahim's words,\nأَسْلَمْتُ لِرَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(I have submitted myself (as a Muslim) to the Lord of the 'Alamin (mankind, Jinn and all that exists)).\nThis means that these Prophets loved these words so much that they preserved them until the time of death and advised their children to adhere to them after them. Similarly, Allah said,\nوَجَعَلَهَا كَلِمَةً بَاقِيَةً فِي عَقِبِهِ\n(And he (Ibrahim) made it [i.e. La ilaha illallah (none has the right to be worshipped but Allah alone)] a Word lasting among his offspring, (true Monotheism))(43:28).\nIt might be that Ibrahim advised his children, including Jacob, Isaac's son, who were present. It appears, and Allah knows best, that Isaac was endowed with Jacob, during the lifetime of Ibrahim and Sarah, for the good news includes both of them in Allah's statement,\nفَبَشَّرْنَاهَا بِإِسْحَاقَ وَمِن وَرَاءِ إِسْحَاقَ يَعْقُوبَ\n(But We gave her (Sarah) glad tidings of Ishaq (Isaac), and after Ishaq, of Ya'qub (Jacob))(11:71).\nAlso, if Jacob was not alive then, there would be no use here in mentioning him specifically among Isaac's children. Also, Allah said in Surat Al-'Ankabut,\nوَوَهَبْنَا لَهُ إِسْحَاقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ وَجَعَلْنَا فِي ذُرِّيَّتِهِ النُّبُوَّةَ وَالْكِتَابَ\n(And We bestowed on him (Ibrahim), Ishaq and Ya'qub, and We ordained among his offspring prophethood and the Book.)(29:27), and,\nوَوَهَبْنَا لَهُ إِسْحَاقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ نَافِلَةً\n(And We bestowed upon him Ishaq, and (a grandson) Ya'qub)(21:72), thus, indicating that this occurred during Ibrahim's lifetime. Also, Jacob built Bayt Al-Maqdis, as earlier books testified. The Two Sahihs recorded that Abu Dharr said, \"I said, 'O Messenger of Allah! Which Masjid was built first?' He said, (Al-Masjid Al-Haram (Al-Ka'bah).) I said, 'Then?' He said, (Bayt Al- Maqdis.) I said, 'How many years later?' He said, (Forty years.)\" Further, the advice that Jacob gave to his children, which we will soon mention, testifies that Jacob was among those who received the advice mentioned in Ayat above (2:130-132).\n\n## Adhering to Tawhid until Death\n\nAllah said,\nيَا بَنِيَّ إِنَّ اللَّهَ اصْطَفَىٰ لَكُمُ الدِّينَ فَلَا تَمُوتُنَّ إِلَّا وَأَنتُم مُّسْلِمُونَ\n((Saying), \"O my sons! Allah has chosen for you the (true) religion, then die not except as Muslims.\") meaning, perform righteous deeds during your lifetime and remain on this path, so that Allah will endow you with the favor of dying upon it. Usually, one dies upon the path that he lived on and is resurrected according to what he died on. Allah, the Most Generous, helps those who seek to do good deeds to remain on the righteous path.\nThis by no means contradicts the authentic Hadith that says,\nإِنَّ الرَّجُلَ لَيَعْمَلُ بِعَمَلِ أَهْلِ الْجَنَّةِ حَتّـى مَا يَكُونُ بَيْنَهُ وَبَيْنَهَا إِلَّا بَاعٌ أَوْ ذِرَاعٌ فَيَسْبِقُ عَلَيْهِ الْكِتَابُ فَيَعمَلُ بِعَمَلِ أَهْلِ النَّار فَيَدْخُلُهَا. وَإِنَّ الرَّجُلَ لَيَعْمَلُ بعَمَلِ أَهلِ النَّارِ حَتَّى مَا يَكُونُ بَيْنَهُ وَبَيْنَهَا إِلَّا بَاعٌ أَو ذِرَاعٌ فَيَسْبِقُ عَلَيْهِ الْكِتَابُ فَيَعْمَلُ بعَمَلِ أَهْلِ الْجَنَّةِ فَيَدْخُلُهَا\n(Man might perform the works of the people of Paradise until only a span of outstretched arms or a cubit separates him from it, then the Book (destiny) takes precedence, and he performs the works of the people of the Fire and thus enters it. Also, man might perform the works of the people of the Fire until only a span of outstretched arms or a cubit separates him from the Fire, but the Book takes precedence and he performs the works of the people of Paradise and thus enters it.) Allah said, (92:5-10),\nفَأَمَّا مَنْ أَعْطَىٰ وَاتَّقَىٰ - وَصَدَّقَ بِالْحُسْنَىٰ - فَسَنُيَسِّرُهُ لِلْيُسْرَىٰ - وَأَمَّا مَن بَخِلَ وَاسْتَغْنَىٰ - وَكَذَّبَ بِالْحُسْنَىٰ - فَسَنُيَسِّرُهُ لِلْعُسْرَىٰ\n(As for him who gives (in charity) and keeps his duty to Allah and fears Him. And believes in Al-Husna. We will make smooth for him the path of ease (goodness). But he who is a greedy miser and thinks himself self-sufficient. And belies Al-Husna (none has the right to be worshipped except Allah). We will make smooth for him the path for evil),","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=130","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:133","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:133–134","text":"Or were you witnesses when death approached Ya'qub (Jacob)? When he said unto his sons, \"What will you worship after me?\" They said, \"We shall worship your AIlah (God ـ Allah) the Ilah of your fathers, Ibrahim (Abraham), Isma'il (Ishmael), Ishaq (Isaac), One Ilah, and to Him we submit (in Islam)) (133)That was a nation who has passed away. They shall receive the reward of what they earned and you of what you earn. And you will not be asked of what they used to do (134)\n\n## Ya'qub's Will and Testament to His Children upon His Death\n\nThis Ayah contains Allah's criticism of the Arab pagans among the offspring of Isma'il as well as the disbelievers among the Children of Israel Jacob the son of Isaac, the son of Ibrahim. When death came to Jacob, he advised his children to worship Allah alone without partners. He said to them,\nمَا تَعْبُدُونَ مِن بَعْدِي قَالُوا نَعْبُدُ إِلَٰهَكَ وَإِلَٰهَ آبَائِكَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَإِسْمَاعِيلَ وَإِسْحَاقَ\n(\"What will you worship after me?\" They said, \"We shall worship your Ilah (God ـ Allah) the Ilah of your fathers, Ibrahim, Isma'il, Ishaq,\")\nMentioning Isma'il here is a figure of speech, because Isma'il is Jacob's uncle. An-Nahas said that the Arabs call the uncle a father, as Al-Qurtubi mentioned).\nThis Ayah is used as evidence that the grandfather is called a father and inherits, rather than the brothers (i.e. when his son dies), as Abu Bakr asserted, according to Al-Bukhari who narrated Abu Bakr's statement from Ibn 'Abbas and Ibn Az-Zubayr. Al-Bukhari then commented that there are no opposing opinions regarding this subject. This is also the opinion of 'A'ishah the Mother of the believers, Al-Hasan Al-Basri, Tawus and 'Ata', Malik, Ash-Shaf'i and Ahmad said that the inheritance is divided between the grandfather and the brothers. It was reported that this was also the opinion of 'Umar, 'Uthman, 'Ali, bin Mas'ud, Zayd bin Thabit and several scholars among the Salaf and later generations.\nThe statement,\nإِلَٰهًا وَاحِدًا\n(One Ilah (God)) means, \"We single Him out in divinity and do not associate anything or anyone with Him.\"\nوَنَحْنُ لَهُ مُسْلِمُونَ\n(And to Him we submit), in obedience meaning, obedient and submissiveness. Similarly, Allah said,\nوَلَهُ أَسْلَمَ مَن فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ طَوْعًا وَكَرْهًا وَإِلَيْهِ يُرْجَعُونَ\n(While to Him submitted all creatures in the heavens and the earth, willingly or unwillingly. And to Him shall they all be returned)(3:83).\nIndeed, Islam is the religion of all the Prophets, even if their rei]spective laws differed. Allah said,\nوَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِن قَبْلِكَ مِن رَّسُولٍ إِلَّا نُوحِي إِلَيْهِ أَنَّهُ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا أَنَا فَاعْبُدُونِ\n(And We did not send any Messenger before you (O Muhammad ﷺ)[but We revealed to him (saying): La ilaha illa Ana [none has the right to be worshipped but I (Allah)], so worship Me (alone and none else))(21:25).\nThere are many other Ayat - and Hadiths - on this subject. For instance, the Prophet ﷺ said,\nنَحْنُ مَعْشَرَ الْأَنْبِيَاءِ أَوْلَادُ عَلَّاتٍ دِينُنا وَاحِدٌ\n(We, the Prophets, are brothers with different mothers, but the same religion.)\nAllah said,\nتِلْكَ أُمَّةٌ قَدْ خَلَتْ\n(That was a nation who has passed away) meaning, existed before your time,\nلَهَا مَا كَسَبَتْ وَلَكُم مَّا كَسَبْتُمْ\n(They shall receive the reward of what they earned and you of what you earn).\nThis Ayah proclaims, Your relationship to the Prophets or righteous people among your ancestors will not benefit you, unless you perform good deeds that bring about you religious benefit. They have their deeds and you have yours,\nوَلَا تُسْأَلُونَ عَمَّا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ\n(And you will not be asked of what they used to do).\"\nThis is why a Hadith proclaims,\nمَنْ بَطَّأَ بِهِ عَمَلُهُ لَمْ يُسْرِعْ بِهِ نَسَبُهُ\n(Whoever was slowed on account of his deeds will not get any faster on account of his family lineage.)'","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=133","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:135","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:135","text":"And they say, \"Be Jews or Christians, then you will be guided.\" Say (to them O Muhammad ﷺ), \"Nay, (we follow) only the religion of Ibrahim, Hanif (Islamic Monotheism), and he was not of Al-Mushrikin (those who worshipped others along with Allah (135)\nMuhammad bin Ishaq reported that Ibn 'Abbas said that 'Abdullah bin Suriya Al-A'war said to the Messenger of Allah, \"The guidance is only what we (Jews) follow. Therefore, follow us, O Muhammad, and you will be rightly guided.\" Also, the Christians said similarly, so Allah revealed,\nوَقَالُوا كُونُوا هُودًا أَوْ نَصَارَىٰ تَهْتَدُوا\n(And they say, \"Be Jews or Christians, then you will be guided.\") Allah's statement,\nقُلْ بَلْ مِلَّةَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ حَنِيفًا\n(Say (to them O Muhammad ﷺ), \"Nay, (we follow) only the religion of Ibrahim, Hanif) means, \"We do not need the Judaism or Christianity that you call us to, rather,\nمِلَّةَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ حَنِيفًا\n((we follow) only the religion of Ibrahim, Hanif) meaning, on the straight path, as Muhammad bin Ka'b Al-Qurazi and 'Isa bin Jariyah stated. Also, Abu Qilabah said, \"The Hanif is what the Messengers, from beginning to end, believed in.\")","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=135","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:136","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:136","text":"Say (O Muslims): \"We believe in Allah and that which has been sent down to us and that which has been sent down to Ibrahim (Abraham), Isma'il (Ishmael), Ishaq (Isaac), Ya'qub (Jacob), and to Al-Asbat (the offspring of the twelve sons of Ya'qub), and that which has been given to Musa (Moses) and 'Isa (Jesus), and that which has been given to the Prophets from their Lord. We make no distinction between any of them, and to Him we have submitted (in Islam). (136)\n\n## The Muslim believes in all that Allah revealed and all the Prophets\n\nAllah directed His believing servants to believe in what He sent down to them through His Messenger Muhammad ﷺ and in what was revealed to the previous Prophets in general. Some Prophets Allah mentioned by name, while He did not mention the names of many others. Allah directed the believers to refrain from differentiating between the Prophets and to believe in them all. They should avoid imitating whomever Allah described as,\nوَيُرِيدُونَ أَن يُفَرِّقُوا بَيْنَ اللَّهِ وَرُسُلِهِ وَيَقُولُونَ نُؤْمِنُ بِبَعْضٍ وَنَكْفُرُ بِبَعْضٍ وَيُرِيدُونَ أَن يَتَّخِذُوا بَيْنَ ذَٰلِكَ سَبِيلًا - أُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْكَافِرُونَ حَقًّا\n(And wish to make distinction between Allah and His Messengers (by believing in Allah and disbelieving in His Messengers) saying, \"We believe in some but reject others,\" and wish to adopt a way in between. They are in truth disbelievers)(4:150-151).\nAl-Bukhari narrated that Abu Hurayrah said, \"The People of the Book used to read the Torah in Hebrew and translate it into Arabic for the Muslims. The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nلَا تُصَدِّقُوا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ وَلَا تُكَذِّبُوهُمْ وقُولُوا: آمَنَّا بِاللهِ وَمَا أُنْزل إِلَيْنَا\n(Do not believe the People of the Book, nor reject what they say. Rather, say, 'We believe in Allah and in what was sent down to us.)\"\nAlso, Muslim, Abu Dawud and An-Nasa'i recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Mostly, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to recite,\nآمَنَّا بِاللَّهِ وَمَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْنَا\n(We believe in Allah and that which has been sent down to us)(2: 136), and,\nآمَنَّا بِاللَّهِ وَاشْهَدْ بِأَنَّا مُسْلِمُونَ\n(We believe in Allah, and bear witness that we are Muslims (i.e. we submit to Allah))(3:52) during the two (voluntary) Rak'at before Fajr.\"\nAbu Al-'Aliyah, Ar-Rabi' and Qatadah said, \"Al-Asbat are the twelve sons of Jacob, and each one of them had an Ummah of people from his descendants. This is why they were called Al-Asbat.\" Al-Khalil bin Ahmad and others said, \"Al-Asbat among the Children of Israel are just like the tribes among the Children of Isma'il.\" This means that the Asbat are the various tribes of the Children of Israel, among whom Allah sent several Prophets. Moses said to the Children of Israel,\nاذْكُرُوا نِعْمَةَ اللَّهِ عَلَيْكُمْ إِذْ جَعَلَ فِيكُمْ أَنبِيَاءَ وَجَعَلَكُم مُّلُوكًا\n(Remember the favor of Allah to you: when He made Prophets among you, made you kings)(5:20). Also, Allah said,\nوَقَطَّعْنَاهُمُ اثْنَتَيْ عَشْرَةَ أَسْبَاطًا\n(And We divided them into twelve tribes)(7:160).\nAl-Qurtubi said, \"Sibt is the group of people or a tribe all belonging to the same ancestors.\"\nQatadah said, \"Allah commanded the believers to believe in Him and in all His Books and Messengers. \" Also, Sulayman bin Habib said, \"We were commanded to believe in the (original) Torah and Injil, but not to implement them.\"","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=136","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:137","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:137–138","text":"So if they believe in the like of that which you believe then they are rightly guided; but if they turn away, then they are only in opposition. So Allah will suffice for you against them. And He is the Hearer, the Knower (137)[Our Sibghah (religion) is] the Sibghah of Allah (Islam) and which Sibghah can be better than Allah's? And we are His worshippers (138)\nAllah said, if they, the disbelievers among the People of the Book and other disbelievers, believe in all of Allah's Books and Messengers and do not differentiate between any of them,\nفَقَدِ اهْتَدَوا\n(then they are rightly guided) meaning, they would acquire the truth and be directed to it.\nوَّإِن تَوَلَّوْا\n(but if they turn away) from truth to falsehood after proof had been presented to them,\nفَإِنَّمَا هُمْ فِي شِقَاقٍ فَسَيَكْفِيكَهُمُ اللَّهُ\n(then they are only in opposition. So Allah will suffice you against them) meaning, Allah will aid the believers against them,\nوَهُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ\n(And He is the Hearer, the Knower). Allah said,\nصِبْغَةَ اللَّهِ\n(The Sibghah of Allah). Ad-Dahhak said that Ibn 'Abbas commented, \"The religion of Allah.\" This Tafsir was also reported of Mujahid, Abu Al-'Aliyah, 'Ikrimah, Ibrahim, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak, 'Abdullah bin Kathir, 'Atiyah Al-'Awfi, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, As-Suddi and other scholars. The Ayah,\nفِطْرَتَ اللَّهِ\n(Allah's Fitrah (i.e. Allah's Islamic Monotheism))(30:30) directs Muslims to, \"Hold to it.\"","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=137","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:139","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:139–141","text":"Say (O Muhammad ﷺ to the Jews and Christians), \"Dispute you with us about Allah while He is our Lord and your Lord? And we are to be rewarded for our deeds and you for your deeds. And we are sincere to Him (i.e. we worship Him alone and none else, and we obey His orders). (139)Or say you that Ibrahim, Isma'il, Ishaq, Ya'qub and Al-Asbat, were Jews or Christians? Say, \"Do you know better or does Allah? And who is more unjust than he who conceals the testimony he has from Allah? And Allah is not unaware of what you do. (140)That was a nation who has passed away. They shall receive the reward of what they earned, and you of what you earn. And you will not be asked of what they used to do (141)\nAllah directed His Prophet ﷺ to pre-empt the arguments with the idolators:\nقُلْ أَتُحَاجُّونَنَا فِي اللَّهِ\n(Say (O Muhammad ﷺ to the Jews and Christians), \"Dispute you with us about Allah) meaning, \"Do you dispute with us regarding the Oneness of Allah, obedience and submission to Him and in avoiding His prohibitions,\nوَهُوَ رَبُّنَا وَرَبُّكُمْ\n(while He is our Lord and your Lord?) meaning, He has full control over us and you, and deserves the worship alone without partners.\nوَلَنَا أَعْمَالُنَا وَلَكُمْ أَعْمَالُكُمْ\n(And we are to be rewarded for our deeds and you for your deeds.) meaning, we disown you and what you worship, just as you disown us. Allah said in another Ayah,\nوَإِن كَذَّبُوكَ فَقُل لِّي عَمَلِي وَلَكُمْ عَمَلُكُمْ ۖ أَنتُم بَرِيئُونَ مِمَّا أَعْمَلُ وَأَنَا بَرِيءٌ مِّمَّا تَعْمَلُونَ\n(And if they belie you, say: \"For me are my deeds and for you are your deeds! You are innocent of what I do, and I am innocent of what you do!\")(10:41), and,\nفَإِنْ حَاجُّوكَ فَقُلْ أَسْلَمْتُ وَجْهِيَ لِلَّهِ وَمَنِ اتَّبَعَنِ\n(So if they dispute with you (Muhammad ﷺ) say: \"I have submitted myself to Allah (in Islam), and (so have) those who follow me\")(3:20). Allah said about Ibrahim,\nوَحَاجَّهُ قَوْمُهُ قَالَ أَتُحَاجُّونِّي فِي اللَّهِ\n(His people disputed with him. He said: \"Do you dispute with me concerning Allah\")(6:80), and,\nأَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِي حَاجَّ إِبْرَاهِيمَ فِي رَبِّهِ\n(Have you not looked at him who disputed with Ibrahim about his Lord (Allah)?)(2:258). He said in this honorable Ayah,\nوَلَنَا أَعْمَالُنَا وَلَكُمْ أَعْمَالُكُمْ وَنَحْنُ لَهُ مُخْلِصُونَ\n(And we are to be rewarded for our deeds and you for your deeds. And we are sincere to Him.) meaning, \"We disown you just as you disown us,\"\nوَنَحْنُ لَهُ مُخْلِصُونَ\n(And we are sincere to Him), in worship and submission.\nAllah then criticized them in the claim that Ibrahim, the Prophets who came after him and the Asbat were following their religion, whether Judaism or Christianity. Allah said,\nقُلْ أَأَنتُمْ أَعْلَمُ أَمِ اللَّهُ\n(Say, \"Do you know better or does Allah?\") meaning, Allah has the best knowledge and He stated that they were neither Jews, nor Christians. Similarly, Allah said in the Ayah,\nمَا كَانَ إِبْرَاهِيمُ يَهُودِيًّا وَلَا نَصْرَانِيًّا وَلَٰكِن كَانَ حَنِيفًا مُّسْلِمًا وَمَا كَانَ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ\n(Ibrahim was neither a Jew nor a Christian, but he was a true Muslim Hanifa (to worship none but Allah alone) and he was not of Al-Mushrikin)(3:67) and the following Ayat. Allah also said,\nوَمَنْ أَظْلَمُ مِمَّن كَتَمَ شَهَادَةً عِندَهُ مِنَ اللَّهِ\nAnd who is more unjust than he who conceals the testimony he has from Allah? (2:140) Al-Hasan Al-Basri said, They used to recite the Book of Allah He sent to them that stated that the true religion is Islam and that Muhammad ﷺ is the Messenger of Allah. Their Book also stated that Ibrahim, Isma'il, Ishaq, Ya'qub and the tribes were neither Jews, nor Christians. They testified to these facts, yet hid them from the people. Allah's statement,\nوَمَا اللَّهُ بِغَافِلٍ عَمَّا تَعْمَلُونَ\n(And Allah is not unaware of what you do), is a threat and a warning that His knowledge encompasses every one's deeds, and He shall award each accordingly. Allah then said,\nتِلْكَ أُمَّةٌ قَدْ خَلَتْ\n(That was a nation who has passed away.) meaning, existed before you,\nلَهَا مَا كَسَبَتْ وَلَكُم مَّا كَسَبْتُمْ\n(They shall receive the reward of what they earned, and you of what you earn.) meaning, they bear their deeds while you bear yours,\nوَلَا تُسْأَلُونَ عَمَّا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ\n(And you will not be asked of what they used to do) meaning, the fact that you are their relatives will not suffice, unless you imitate their good deeds. Further, do not be deceived by the fact that you are their descendants, unless you imitate them in obeying Allah's orders and following His Messengers who were sent as warners and bearers of good news. Indeed, whoever disbelieves in even one Prophet, will have disbelieved in all the Messengers, especially if one disbelieves in the master and Final Messenger from Allah, the Lord of the worlds, to all mankind and the Jinns. May Allah's peace and blessings be on Muhammad ﷺ and the rest of Allah's Prophets.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=139","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:142","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:142–143","text":"The fools (idolators, hypocrites, and Jews) among the people will say: \"What has turned them (Muslims) from their Qiblah [prayer direction (towards Jerusalem)] to which they used to face in prayer.\" Say (O Muhammad ﷺ): \"To Allah belong both, east and the west. He guides whom He wills to the straight way. (142)Thus We have made you [true Muslims ـ real believers of Islamic Monotheism, true followers of Prophet Muhammad ﷺ and his Sunnah (legal ways)], a Wasat (just and the best) nation, that you be witnesses over mankind and the Messenger (Muhammad ﷺ) be a witness over you. And We made the Qiblah which you used to face, only to test those who followed the Messenger (Muhammad ) from those who would turn on their heels (i.e., disobey the Messenger). Indeed it was great (heavy, difficult) except for those whom Allah guided. And Allah would never make your faith (prayers) to be lost (i.e., your prayers offered towards Jerusalem). Truly, Allah is full of kindness, the Most Merciful towards mankind (143)\n\n## Changing the Qiblah - Direction of the Prayer\n\nImam Al-Bukhari reported that Al-Bara' bin 'Azib narrated: \"Allah's Messenger ﷺ offered his prayers facing Bayt Al-Maqdis (Jerusalem) for sixteen or seventeen months, but he wished that he could pray facing the Ka'bah (at Makkah). The first prayer which he offered (facing the Ka'bah) was the 'Asr (Afternoon) prayer in the company of some people. Then one of those who had offered that prayer with him, went out and passed by some people in a mosque who were in the bowing position (in Ruku') during their prayers (facing Jerusalem). He addressed them saying, 'By Allah, I bear witness that I have offered prayer with the Prophet ﷺ facing Makkah (Ka'bah).' Hearing that, those people immediately changed their direction towards the House (Ka'bah) while still as they were (i.e., in the same bowing position). Some Muslims who offered prayer towards the previous Qiblah (Jerusalem) before it was changed towards the House (the Ka'bah in Makkah) had died or had been martyred, and we did not know what to say about them (regarding their prayers towards Jerusalem). Allah then revealed:\nوَمَا كَانَ اللَّهُ لِيُضِيعَ إِيمَانَكُمْ إِنَّ اللَّهَ بِالنَّاسِ لَرَءُوفٌ رَّحِيمٌ\n(And Allah would never make your faith (prayers) to be lost (i.e., the prayers of those Muslims were valid))(2:143).\"\nAl-Bukhari collected this narration, while Muslim collected it using another chain of narrators. Muhammad bin Ishaq reported that Al-Bara' narrated: Allah's Messenger ﷺ used to offer prayers towards Bayt Al-Maqdis (in Jerusalem), but would keep looking at the sky awaiting Allah's command (to change the Qiblah). Then Allah revealed:\nقَدْ نَرَىٰ تَقَلُّبَ وَجْهِكَ فِي السَّمَاءِ فَلَنُوَلِّيَنَّكَ قِبْلَةً تَرْضَاهَا فَوَلِّ وَجْهَكَ شَطْرَ الْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ\n(Verily, We have seen the turning of your (Muhammad's) face towards the heaven. Surely, We shall turn you to a Qiblah (prayer direction) that shall please you, so turn your face in the direction of Al-Masjid Al-Haram (at Makkah).)(2:144)\nA man from among the Muslims then said, \"We wish we could know about those among us who died before the Qiblah was changed (i.e., towards Makkah) and also about our own prayers, that we had performed towards Bayt Al-Maqdis.\" Allah then revealed:\nوَمَا كَانَ اللَّهُ لِيُضِيعَ إِيمَانَكُمْ\n(And Allah would never make your faith (prayers) to be lost.)(2:143)\nThe fools among the people, meaning the People of the Scripture (Jews and Christians), said, \"What made them change the former Qiblah that they used to face?\" Allah then revealed:\nسَيَقُولُ السُّفَهَاءُ مِنَ النَّاسِ\n(The fools (idolators, hypocrites, and Jews) among the people will say...)\nuntil the end of the Ayah.\nAli bin Abu Talhah related that Ibn 'Abbas said: When Allah's Messenger ﷺ migrated to Al-Madinah, Allah commanded him to face Bayt Al-Maqdis (Jerusalem). The Jews were delighted then. Allah's Messenger ﷺ faced Jerusalem for over ten months. However, he liked (to offer prayer in the direction of) Prophet Ibrahim's Qiblah (the Ka'bah in Makkah) and used to supplicate to Allah and kept looking up to the sky (awaiting Allah's command in this regard). Allah then revealed:\nفَوَلُّواْ وُجُوهَكُمْ شَطْرَهُ\n(turn your faces (in prayer) in that direction.) meaning, its direction. The Jews did not like this change and said, \"What made them change the Qiblah that they used to face (meaning Jerusalem)?\" Allah revealed:\nقُل لِّلَّهِ الْمَشْرِقُ وَالْمَغْرِبُ يَهْدِي مَن يَشَاءُ إِلَىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُّسْتَقِيمٍ\n(Say (O Muhammad ﷺ): \"To Allah belong both, east and the west. He guides whom He wills to the straight way.\")\nThere are several other Ahadith on this subject. In summary, Allah's Messenger ﷺ was commanded to face Bayt Al-Maqdis (during the prayer) and he used to offer prayer towards it in Makkah between the two corners (of Ka'bah), so that the Ka'bah would be between him and Bayt Al-Maqdis8. When the Prophet ﷺ migrated to Al-Madinah, this practice was no longer possible; then Allah commanded him to offer prayer towards Bayt Al-Maqdis, as Ibn Abbas and the majority of the scholars have stated.\nAl-Bukhari reported in his Sahih that the news (of the change of Qiblah) was conveyed to some of the Ansar while they were performing the 'Asr (Afternoon) prayer towards Bayt Al-Maqdis, upon hearing that, they immediately changed their direction and faced the Ka'bah.\nIt is reported in the Sahihayn (Al-Bukhari Muslim) that Ibn 'Umar narrated: While the people were in Quba' (Mosque) performing the Fajr (Dawn) prayer, a man came and said, \"A (part of the) Qur'an was revealed tonight to Allah's Messenger and he was commanded to face the Ka'bah. Therefore, face the Ka'bah. They were facing Ash-Sham, so they turned towards the Ka'bah.\nThese Hadiths prove that the Nasikh (a Text that abrogates a previous Text) only applies after one acquires knowledge of it, even if the Nasikh had already been revealed and announced. This is why the Companions mentioned above were not commanded to repeat the previous 'Asr, Maghrib and 'Isha' prayers (although they had prayed them towards Jerusalem after Allah had changed the Qiblah). Allah knows best.\nWhen the change of Qiblah (to Ka'bah in Makkah) occurred, those inflicted with hypocrisy and mistrust, and the disbelieving Jews, both were led astray from the right guidance and fell into confusion. They said:\nمَا وَلَّاهُمْ عَن قِبْلَتِهِمُ الَّتِي كَانُوا عَلَيْهَا\n(What has turned them (Muslims) from their Qiblah to which they used to face in prayer.)\nThey asked, \"What is the matter with these people (Muslims) who one time face this direction (Jerusalem), and then face that direction (Makkah)?\" Allah answered their questions when He stated:\nقُل لِّلَّهِ الْمَشْرِقُ وَالْمَغْرِبُ\n(Say (O Muhammad ﷺ): \"To Allah belong both, east and the west.) meaning, the command, the decision and the authority are for Allah Alone. Hence:\nفَأَيْنَمَا تُوَلُّوا فَثَمَّ وَجْهُ اللَّهِ\n(...so wherever you turn (yourselves or your faces) there is the Face of Allah (and He is High above, over His Throne).)(2:115),\nand:\nلَّيْسَ الْبِرَّ أَن تُوَلُّوا وُجُوهَكُمْ قِبَلَ الْمَشْرِقِ وَالْمَغْرِبِ وَلَٰكِنَّ الْبِرَّ مَنْ آمَنَ بِاللَّهِ\n(It is not Al-Birr (piety, righteousness) that you turn your faces towards east and (or) west (in prayers); but Al-Birr is the one who believes in Allah.)(2:177)\nThis statement means, the best act is to adhere to Allah's commands. Hence, wherever He commands us to face, we should face. Also, since obedience requires implementing Allah's commands, if He commands us every day to face different places, we are His servants and under His disposal, and we face whatever He orders us to face. Certainly, Allah's care and kindness towards His servant and Messenger, Muhammad ﷺ, and certainly, his Ummah (Muslim nation) is profoundly great. Allah has guided them to the Qiblah of (Prophet) Ibrahim – Allah's Khalil (intimate friend). He has commanded them to face the Ka'bah, the most honorable house (of worship) on the face of the earth, which was built by Ibrahim Al-Khalil in the Name of Allah, the One without a partner. This is why Allah said afterwards:\nقُل لِّلَّهِ الْمَشْرِقُ وَالْمَغْرِبُ يَهْدِي مَن يَشَاءُ إِلَىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُّسْتَقِيمٍ\n(Say (O Muhammad ﷺ): \"To Allah belong both, east and the west. He guides whom He wills to the straight way.\")\nImam Ahmad reported that 'A'ishah (the Prophet's wife) said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said about the People of the Scripture (Jews and Christians):\nإنَّهُم لا يَحْسِدونَنَا عَلَى شَيْء كَمَا يَحْسِدونَنا عَلَى يَوْمِ الْجُمُعَةِ الَّتِي هَدَانَا اللهُ لَهَا وَضَلُّوا عَنْهَا وَعَلَى الْقِبْلَةِ الَّتِي هَدَانَا اللهُ لَهَا وَضَلُّوا عَنْهَا وَعَلَى قَوْلِنَا خَلْفَ الإِمَامِ: آمِينَ\n(They do not envy us for a matter more than they envy us for Jumu'ah (Friday) to which Allah has guided us and from which they were led astray; for the (true) Qiblah to which Allah has directed us and from which they were led astray; and for our saying 'Amin' behind the Imam (leader of the prayer).)\n\n## The Virtues of Muhammad's (ﷺ) Nation\n\nAllah said:\nوَكَذَٰلِكَ جَعَلْنَاكُمْ أُمَّةً وَسَطًا لِّتَكُونُوا شُهَدَاءَ عَلَى النَّاسِ وَيَكُونَ الرَّسُولُ عَلَيْكُمْ شَهِيدًا\n(Thus We have made you [true Muslims], a Wasat (just)(and the best) nation, that you be witnesses over mankind and the Messenger (Muhammad ﷺ) be a witness over you.)\nAllah stated that He has changed our Qiblah to the Qiblah of Ibrahim and chose it for us so that He makes us the best nation ever. Hence, we will be the witnesses over the nations on the Day of Resurrection, for all of them will then agree concerning our virtue. The word Wasat in the Ayah means the best and the most honored. Therefore, saying that (the Prophet's tribe) Quraysh is in the Wasat regarding Arab tribes and their areas, means the best. Similarly, saying that Allah's Messenger ﷺ was in the Wasat of his people, means he was from the best subtribe. Also, 'Asr, the prayer that is described as 'Wusta' (a variation of the word Wasat), means the best prayer, as the authentic collections of Ahadith reported. Since Allah made this Ummah (Muslim nation) the Wasat, He has endowed her with the most complete legislation, the best Manhaj (way, method, etc.,) and the clearest Madhhab (methodology, mannerism, etc). Allah said:\nهُوَ اجْتَبَاكُمْ وَمَا جَعَلَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِي الدِّينِ مِنْ حَرَجٍ مِّلَّةَ أَبِيكُمْ إِبْرَاهِيمَ هُوَ سَمَّاكُمُ الْمُسْلِمِينَ مِن قَبْلُ وَفِي هَٰذَا لِيَكُونَ الرَّسُولُ شَهِيدًا عَلَيْكُمْ وَتَكُونُوا شُهَدَاءَ عَلَى النَّاسِ\n(He has chosen you (to convey His Message of Islamic Monotheism to mankind), and has not laid upon you in religion any hardship: it is the religion of your father Ibrahim. It is He (Allah) Who has named you Muslims both before and in this (the Qur'an), that the Messenger (Muhammad ﷺ) may be a witness over you and you be witnesses over mankind!)(22:78)\nMoreover, Imam Ahmad reported that Abu Sa'id narrated: Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nيُدْعَى نُوحٌ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامة، فَيُقَالُ لَهُ: هَلْ بَلَّغْتَ؟ فَيَقُولُ: نَعَمْ، فَيُدْعَى قَوْمُهُ فَيُقَالُ لَهُمْ: هَلْ بَلَّغَكُمْ فَيَقُولُونَ: مَا أتَانَا مِنْ نَذِيرٍ وَمَا أتَانَا مِنْ أَحَدٍ، فَيُقَالُ لِنُوح: مَنْ يَشْهَدُ لَكَ؟ فَيَقُولُ: مُحَمَّدٌ وَأُمَّتُهُ، قال فَذلِكَ قَوْلُهُ:\nوَكَذَٰلِكَ جَعَلْنَاكُمْ أُمَّةً وَسَطًا\nقَالَ: والْوَسَطُ الْعَدْلُ، فَتُدْعَون فَتَشْهَدُونَ لَهُ بِالْبَلَاغِ ثُمَّ أَشْهَدُ عَلَيْكُم\n(Nuh will be called on the Day of Resurrection and will be asked, 'Have you conveyed (the Message)?' He will say, 'Yes.' His people will be summoned and asked, 'Has Nuh conveyed (the Message) to you?' They will say, 'No warner came to us and no one (Prophet) was sent to us.' Nuh will be asked, 'Who testifies for you?' He will say, 'Muhammad and his Ummah.')\nThis is why Allah said:\nوَكَذَلِكَ جَعَلْنَـكُمْ أُمَّةً وَسَطًا\n(Thus We have made you a Wasat nation.)\nThe Prophet ﷺ said; (The Wasat means the 'Adl (just). You will be summoned to testify that Nuh has conveyed (his Message), and I will attest to your testimony.)\nIt was also recorded by Al-Bukhari, At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa'i and Ibn Majah.\nImam Ahmad also reported that Abu Sa'id Khudri narrated: Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nيَجِيءُ النَّبِيُّ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ وَمَعَهُ الرَّجُلَانِ وَأَكْثَرُ مِنْ ذلِكَ، فيُدْعَى قَوْمُهُ، فَيُقَالُ: هَلْ بَلَّغَكُمْ هَذَا؟ فَيَقُولُونَ: لَا فَيُقالُ لَهُ: هَلْ بَلَّغْتَ قَوْمَكَ؟ فَيَقُولُ: نَعَمْ، فَيُقالُ: مَنْ يَشْهَدُ لَكَ؟ فَيَقُولُ: مُحَمَّدٌ وَأُمَّتُهُ، فَيُدْعَى مُحَمَّدٌ وَأُمَّتُهُ، فَيُقَالُ لَهُمْ: هَلْ بَلَّغَ هذَا قَوْمَهُ؟ فَيَقُولُونَ: نَعَمْ، فَيُقَالُ: وَمَا عِلْمُكُمْ؟ فَيَقُولُونَ: جَاءَنَا نَبِيُّنَا صلّى الله عليه وسلّم فأخْبَرَنَا أَنَّ الرُّسُلَ قَدْ بَلَّغُوا، فَذلِك قَوْلُهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ:\nوَكَذَٰلِكَ جَعَلْنَاكُمْ أُمَّةً وَسَطًا\nقَالَ: عَدْلًا\nوَكَذَٰلِكَ جَعَلْنَاكُمْ أُمَّةً وَسَطًا لِّتَكُونُوا شُهَدَاءَ عَلَى النَّاسِ وَيَكُونَ الرَّسُولُ عَلَيْكُمْ شَهِيدًا\n(The Prophet would come on the Day of Resurrection with two or more people (his only following!), and his people would also be summoned and asked, 'Has he (their Prophet) conveyed (the Message) to you?' They would say, 'No.' He would be asked, 'Have you conveyed (the Message) to your people?' He would say, 'Yes.' He would be asked, 'Who testifies for you?' He would say, 'Muhammad and his Ummah.' Muhammad and his Ummah would then be summoned and asked, 'Has he conveyed (the Message) to his people?' They would say, 'Yes.' They would be asked, 'Who told you that?' They would say, 'Our Prophet (Muhammad) came to us and told us that the Messengers have conveyed (their Messages).')\nHence Allah's statement:\nوَكَذَٰلِكَ جَعَلْنَاكُمْ أُمَّةً وَسَطًا\n(Thus We have made you a Wasat nation.)\nHe said, \"(meaning) the 'Adl,' (he then continued reciting the Ayah):\nوَكَذَٰلِكَ جَعَلْنَاكُمْ أُمَّةً وَسَطًا لِّتَكُونُوا شُهَدَاءَ عَلَى النَّاسِ وَيَكُونَ الرَّسُولُ عَلَيْكُمْ شَهِيدًا\n(Thus We have made you, a just (and the best) nation, that you be witnesses over mankind and the Messenger (Muhammad ﷺ) be a witness over you.)\"\nFurthermore, Imam Ahmad reported that Abul-Aswad narrated: I came to Al-Madinah and found that an epidemic had broken out that caused many fatalities. I sat next to 'Umar bin Al-Khattab once when a funeral procession started and the people praised the dead person. 'Umar said, \"Wajabat (it will be recorded as such), Wajabat!\" Then another funeral was brought forth and the people criticized the dead person. Again, 'Umar said, \"Wajabat.\" Abul-Aswad asked, \"What is Wajabat, O Leader of the faithful?\" He said, \"I said just like Allah's Messenger ﷺ had said:\nأَيُّمَا مُسْلِمٍ شَهِدَ لَهُ أَرْبَعَةٌ بِـخَيْر أَدْخَلَهُ اللهُ الْـجَنَّــةَ\nقَالَ: فَقُلْنَا وَثَلَاثَةٌ؟ قَالَ: فَقَالَ:\nوَثَلَاثَةٌ\nقَالَ: فَقُلْنَا وَاثْنَانِ: قَالَ\nوَاثْنَانِ\nثُمَّ لَمْ نَسْأَلْهُ عَنِ الْوَاحِدِ.\n(Any Muslim for whom four testify that he was righteous, then Allah will enter him into Paradise.' We said, 'What about three?' He said, 'And three.' We said, 'And two?' He said, 'And two.' We did not ask him about (the testimony) of one (believing) person.)\"\nThis was also recorded by Al-Bukhari, At-Tirmidhi, and An-Nasa'i.\n\n## The Wisdom behind changing the Qiblah\n\nAllah then said:\nوَمَا جَعَلْنَا الْقِبْلَةَ الَّتِي كُنتَ عَلَيْهَا إِلَّا لِنَعْلَمَ مَن يَتَّبِعُ الرَّسُولَ مِمَّن يَنقَلِبُ عَلَىٰ عَقِبَيْهِ وَإِن كَانَتْ لَكَبِيرَةً إِلَّا عَلَى الَّذِينَ هَدَى اللَّهُ\n(And We made the Qiblah (prayer direction towards Jerusalem) which you used to face, only to test those who followed the Messenger (Muhammad ﷺ) from those who would turn on their heels (i.e., disobey the Messenger). Indeed it was great (heavy, difficult) except for those whom Allah guided.)\nAllah states thus: We have legislated for you, O Muhammad, facing Bayt Al-Maqdis at first and then changed it to the Ka'bah so as to find who will follow and obey you and thus face whatever you face.\nمِمَّن يَنقَلِبُ عَلَىٰ عَقِبَيْهِ\n(...from those who would turn on their heels.) meaning, reverts from his religion. [Allah then said:]\nوَإِن كَانَتْ لَكَبِيرَةً\n(Indeed it was great (heavy, difficult))\nThe Ayah indicates that changing the Qiblah from Bayt Al-Maqdis to the Ka'bah is heavy on the heart, except for whomever Allah has rightly guided their hearts, who believe in the truth of the Messenger ﷺ with certainty and that whatever he was sent with is the truth without doubt. It is they who believe that Allah does what He wills, decides what He wills, commands His servants with what He wills, abrogates any of His commands that He wills, and that He has the perfect wisdom and the unequivocal proof in all this. (The attitude of the believers in this respect is) unlike those who have a disease in their hearts, to whom whenever a matter occurs, it causes doubts, just as this same matter adds faith and certainty to the believers. Similarly, Allah said:\nوَإِذَا مَا أُنزِلَتْ سُورَةٌ فَمِنْهُم مَّن يَقُولُ أَيُّكُمْ زَادَتْهُ هَٰذِهِ إِيمَانًا فَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا فَزَادَتْهُمْ إِيمَانًا وَهُمْ يَسْتَبْشِرُونَ - وَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ فِي قُلُوبِهِم مَّرَضٌ فَزَادَتْهُمْ رِجْسًا إِلَىٰ رِجْسِهِمْ\n(And whenever there comes down a Surah (chapter from the Qur'an), some of them (hypocrites) say: \"Which of you has had his faith increased by it?\" As for those who believe, it has increased their faith, and they rejoice. But as for those in whose hearts is a disease (of doubt, disbelief and hypocrisy), it will add doubt and disbelief to their doubt and disbelief)(9:124-125)\nand:\nوَنُنَزِّلُ مِنَ الْقُرْآنِ مَا هُوَ شِفَاءٌ وَرَحْمَةٌ لِّلْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَلَا يَزِيدُ الظَّالِمِينَ إِلَّا خَسَارًا\n(And We send down of the Qur'an that which is a healing and a mercy to those who believe, and it increases the wrongdoers in nothing but loss.)(17:82)\nCertainly, those who remained faithful to the Messenger ﷺ, obeyed him and faced whatever Allah commanded them, without doubt or hesitation, were the leaders of the Companions. Some scholars stated that the Early Migrants (who migrated with the Prophet ﷺ from Makkah to Al-Madinah) and Ansar (the residents of Al-Madinah who gave aid and refuge to both the Prophet ﷺ and the Migrants) were those who offered prayers towards the two Qiblah (Bayt Al-Maqdis and then the Ka'bah).\nAl-Bukhari reported in the explanation of the Ayah (2:143) that Ibn 'Umar narrated: While the people were performing the Fajr (Dawn) prayer in the Quba' Mosque, a man came and said, \"Qur'an was revealed to the Prophet ﷺ and he was ordered to face the Ka'bah. Therefore, face the Ka'bah.\" They then faced the Ka'bah. Muslim also recorded it.\nAt-Tirmidhi added that they were performing Ruku' (bowing down in prayer), and then changed the direction (of the Qiblah) to the Ka'bah while still bowing down. Muslim reported this last narration from Anas. These Hadiths all indicate the perfect obedience the Companions had for Allah and His Messenger ﷺ and their compliance with Allah's commandments, may Allah be pleased with them all.\nAllah said:\nوَمَا كَانَ اللَّهُ لِيُضِيعَ إِيمَانَكُمْ\n(And Allah would never make your faith (prayers) to be lost.) meaning, the reward of your prayers towards Bayt Al-Maqdis before would not be lost with Allah. It is reported in Sahih that Abu Ishaq As-Sabi'y related that Bara' narrated: \"The people asked about the matter of those who offered prayers towards Bayt Al-Maqdis and died (before the Qiblah was changed to Ka'bah). Allah revealed:\nوَمَا كَانَ اللَّهُ لِيُضِيعَ إِيمَانَكُمْ\n(And Allah would never make your faith (prayers) to be lost.)\"\nIt was also recorded by At-Tirmidhi from Ibn 'Abbas, and At-Tirmidhi graded it Sahih.\nIbn Ishaq reported that Ibn 'Abbas narrated:\nوَمَا كَانَ اللَّهُ لِيُضِيعَ إِيمَانَكُمْ\n(And Allah would never make your faith to be lost.) entails: Your (prayer towards) the first Qiblah and your believing your Prophet and obeying him by facing the second Qiblah; He will grant you the rewards for all these acts. Indeed,\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ بِالنَّاسِ لَرَءُوفٌ رَّحِيمٌ\n(Truly, Allah is full of kindness, the Most Merciful towards mankind.)\"\nFurthermore, it is reported in the Sahih that Allah's Messenger ﷺ saw a woman among the captives who was separated from her child. Whenever she found a boy (infant) among the captives, she would hold him close to her chest, as she was looking for her boy. When she found her child, she embraced him and gave him her breast to nurse. Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nأَتُرَوْنَ هذِهِ طَارِحَةً وَلَدَهَا فِي النَّارِ وَهِي تَقْدِرُ عَلى أَنْ لَا تَطْرَحَهُ؟\nقَالُوا: لَا يَا رَسُولَ اللهِ.\nقَالَ: فَوَاللهِ للهُ أَرْحَمُ بِعِبَادِهِ مِنْ هذِهِ بِوَلَدِهَا\n(Do you think that this woman would willingly throw her son in the fire?) They said, \"No, O Messenger of Allah!\" He said, (By Allah! Allah is more merciful with His servants than this woman with her son.)","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=142","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:144","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:144","text":"Verily, We have seen the turning of your (Muhammad's) face towards the heaven. Surely, We shall turn you to a Qiblah (prayer direction) that shall please you, so turn your face in the direction of Al-Masjid Al-Haram (at Makkah). And wheresoever you people are, turn your faces (in prayer) in that direction. Certainly, the people who were given the Scripture (i.e., Jews and Christians) know well that, that (your turning towards the direction of the Ka'bah at Makkah in prayers) is the truth from their Lord. And Allah is not unaware of what they do (144)\n\n## The First Abrogation in the Qur'an was about the Qiblah\n\nAli bin Abu Talhah related that Ibn 'Abbas narrated: The first abrogated part in the Qur'an was about the Qiblah. When Allah's Messenger ﷺ migrated to Al-Madinah, the majority of its people were Jews, and Allah commanded him to face Bayt Al-Maqdis. The Jews were delighted then. Allah's Messenger ﷺ faced it for ten and some months, but he liked to face the Qiblah of Ibrahim (Ka'bah in Makkah). He used to supplicate to Allah and look up to the sky (awaiting Allah's command). Allah then revealed:\nقَدْ نَرَىٰ تَقَلُّبَ وَجْهِكَ فِي السَّمَاءِ\n(Verily, We have seen the turning of your (Muhammad's) face towards the heaven), until,\nفَوَلُّوا وُجُوهَكُمْ شَطْرَهُ\n(turn your faces (in prayer) in that direction.)\nThe Jews did not like this ruling and said:\nمَا وَلَّاهُمْ عَن قِبْلَتِهِمُ الَّتِي كَانُوا عَلَيْهَا قُل لِّلَّهِ الْمَشْرِقُ وَالْمَغْرِبُ\n(\"What has turned them (Muslims) from their Qiblah (prayer direction) to which they used to face in prayer.\" Say (O Muhammad), \"To Allah belong both, east and the west.\")(2:142)\nAllah said:\nفَأَيْنَمَا تُوَلُّوا فَثَمَّ وَجْهُ اللَّهِ\n(...so wherever you turn (yourselves or your faces) there is the Face of Allah)(2:115),\nand:\nوَمَا جَعَلْنَا الْقِبْلَةَ الَّتِي كُنتَ عَلَيْهَا إِلَّا لِنَعْلَمَ مَن يَتَّبِعُ الرَّسُولَ مِمَّن يَنقَلِبُ عَلَىٰ عَقِبَيْهِ\n(And We made the Qiblah (prayer direction towards Jerusalem) which you used to face, only to test those who followed the Messenger (Muhammad ﷺ) from those who would turn on their heels (i.e., disobey the Messenger).)(2:143)\n\n## Is the Qiblah the Ka'bah itself or its General Direction?\n\nAl-Hakim related that 'Ali bin Abu Talib said:\nفَوَلِّ وَجْهَكَ شَطْرَ الْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ\n(...so turn your face in the direction of Al-Masjid Al-Haram (at Makkah).) means its direction.\"\nAl-Hakim then commented that the chain of this narration is authentic and that they (i.e., Al-Bukhari and Muslim) did not include it in their collections.\nThis ruling concerning the Qiblah is also the opinion of Abu Al-'Aliyah, Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Qatadah, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas and others. Allah's Statement:\nوَحَيْثُ مَا كُنتُمْ فَوَلُّوا وُجُوهَكُمْ شَطْرَهُ\n(And wheresoever you people are, turn your faces (in prayer) in that direction) is a command from Allah to face the Ka'bah from wherever one is on the earth: the east, west, north or south. The exception is of the voluntary prayer (Nafl) while one is traveling, for one is allowed to offer it in any direction his body is facing, while his heart is intending the Ka'bah. Also, when the battle is raging, one is allowed to offer prayer, however he is able. Also, included are those who are not sure of the direction and offer prayer in the wrong direction, thinking that it is the direction of the Qiblah, because Allah does not burden a soul beyond what it can bear.\n\n## The Jews had Knowledge that the (Muslim) Qiblah would later be changed\n\nAllah stated that:\nوَإِنَّ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ لَيَعْلَمُونَ أَنَّهُ الْحَقُّ مِن رَّبِّهِمْ\n(Certainly, the people who were given the Scripture (i.e., Jews and the Christians) know well that, that (your turning towards the direction of the Ka'bah at Makkah in prayers) is the truth from their Lord.)\nThis Ayah means: The Jews, who did not like that you change your Qiblah from Bayt Al-Maqdis, already knew that Allah will command you (O Muhammad) to face the Ka'bah. The Jews read in their Books their Prophets' description of Allah's Messenger ﷺ and his Ummah, and that Allah has endowed and honored him with the complete and honorable legislation. Yet, the People of the Book deny these facts because of their envy, disbelief and rebellion. This is why Allah threatened them when He said:\nوَمَا اللَّهُ بِغَافِلٍ عَمَّا يَعْمَلُونَ\n(And Allah is not unaware of what they do.)","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=144","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:145","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:145","text":"And even if you were to bring to the People of the Scripture (Jews and Christians) all the Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.), they would not follow your Qiblah (prayer direction), nor are you going to follow their Qiblah. And they will not follow each other's Qiblah. Verily, if you follow their desires after that which you have received of knowledge (from Allah), then indeed you will be one of the wrongdoers (145)\n\n## The Stubbornness and Disbelief of the Jews\n\nAllah describes the Jews' disbelief, stubbornness and defiance of what they know of the truth of Allah's Messenger ﷺ, that if the Prophet ﷺ brought forward every proof to the truth of what he was sent with, they will never obey him or abandon following their desires. In another instance, Allah said:\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ حَقَّتْ عَلَيْهِمْ كَلِمَتُ رَبِّكَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ - وَلَوْ جَاءَتْهُمْ كُلُّ آيَةٍ حَتَّىٰ يَرَوُا الْعَذَابَ الْأَلِيمَ\n(Truly, those, against whom the Word (wrath) of your Lord has been justified, will not believe. Even if every sign should come to them, until they see the painful torment.)(10:96-97)\nThis is why Allah said here:\nوَلَئِنْ أَتَيْتَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ بِكُلِّ آيَةٍ مَّا تَبِعُوا قِبْلَتَكَ\n(And even if you were to bring to the People of the Scripture (Jews and Christians) all the Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.), they would not follow your Qiblah (prayer direction)).\nAllah's statement:\nوَمَا أَنتَ بِتَابِعٍ قِبْلَتَهُمْ\n(...nor are you going to follow their Qiblah ), indicates the vigor with which Allah's Messenger ﷺ implements what Allah commanded him. Allah's statement also indicates that as much as the Jews adhere to their opinions and desires, the Prophet ﷺ adheres by Allah's commands, obeying Him and following what pleases Him, and that he would never adhere to their desires in any case. Hence, praying towards Bayt Al-Maqdis was not because it was the Qiblah of the Jews, but because Allah had commanded it. Allah then warns those who knowingly defy the truth, because the proof against those who know is stronger than against other people. This is why Allah said to His Messenger ﷺ and his Ummah:\nوَلَئِنِ اتَّبَعْتَ أَهْوَاءَهُم مِّن بَعْدِ مَا جَاءَكَ مِنَ الْعِلْمِ إِنَّكَ إِذًا لَّمِنَ الظَّالِمِينَ\n(Verily, if you follow their desires after that which you have received of knowledge (from Allah), then indeed you will be one of the wrongdoers.)","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=145","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:146","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:146–147","text":"Those to whom We gave the Scripture (Jews and Christians) recognise him (Muhammad ﷺ or the Ka'bah at Makkah) as they recognize their sons. But verily, a party of them conceal the truth while they know it ـ [i.e., the qualities of Muhammad ﷺ which are written in the Tawrah and the Injil  (146)This is) the truth from your Lord. So be you not one of those who doubt (147)\n\n## The Jews know that the Prophet (ﷺ) is True, but they hide the Truth\n\nAllah states that the scholars of the People of the Scripture know the truth of what Allah's Messenger ﷺ was sent with, just as one of them knows his own child, which is a parable that the Arabs use to describe what is very apparent. Similarly, in a Hadith, Allah's Messenger ﷺ said to a man who had a youngster with him:\nابْنُكَ هَذَا؟\nقَالَ: نَعَمْ يَا رَسُولَ اللهِ أَشْهَدُ بِهِ\n(Is this your son?) He said, \"Yes, O Messenger of Allah! I testify to this fact.\" Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nأَمَا إِنَّهُ لَا يَجْنِي عَلَيْكَ وَلَا تَجْنِي عَلَيْهِ\n(Well, you would not transgress against him nor would he transgress against you.)\nAccording to Al-Qurtubi, it was narrated that 'Umar said to 'Abdullah bin Salam (an Israelite scholar who became a Muslim), \"Do you recognize Muhammad as you recognize your own son?\" He replied, \"Yes, and even more. The Honest One descended from heaven on the Honest One on the earth with his (i.e., Muhammad's) description and I recognized him, although I do not know anything about his mother's story.\"\nAllah states next that although they had knowledge and certainty in the Prophet ﷺ, they still:\nلَيَكْتُمُونَ الْحَقَّ\n(conceal the truth.)\nThe Ayah indicates that they hide the truth from the people, about the Prophet ﷺ, that they find in their Books,\nوَهُمْ يَعْلَمُونَ\n(while they know it.) Allah then strengthens the resolve of His Prophet ﷺ and the believers and affirms that what the Prophet ﷺ came with is the truth without doubt, saying:\nالْحَقُّ مِن رَّبِّكَ فَلَا تَكُونَنَّ مِنَ الْمُمْتَرِينَ\n((This is) the truth from your Lord. So be you not one of those who doubt.)","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=146","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:148","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:148","text":"For every nation there is a direction to which they face (in their prayers). So hasten towards all that is good. Wheresoever you may be, Allah will bring you together (on the Day of Resurrection). Truly, Allah is able to do all things (148)\n\n## Every Nation has a Qiblah\n\nAl-'Awfi reported that Ibn 'Abbas said:\nوَلِكُلٍّ وِجْهَةٌ هُوَ مُوَلِّيهَا\n(For every nation there is a direction to which they face (in their prayers))\n\"This talks about followers of the various religions. Hence, every nation and tribe has its own Qiblah that they choose, while Allah's appointed Qiblah is what the believers face.\"\nAbul-'Aliyah said, \"The Jew has a direction to which he faces (in the prayer). The Christian has a direction to which he faces. Allah has guided you, O (Muslim) Ummah, to a Qiblah which is the true Qiblah.\" This statement was also related to Mujahid, 'Ata' Ad-Dahhak, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, As-Suddi, and others.\nThis last Ayah is similar to what Allah said:\nلِكُلٍّ جَعَلْنَا مِنكُمْ شِرْعَةً وَمِنْهَاجًا وَلَوْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ لَجَعَلَكُمْ أُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً وَلَٰكِن لِّيَبْلُوَكُمْ فِي مَا آتَاكُمْ فَاسْتَبِقُوا الْخَيْرَاتِ إِلَى اللَّهِ مَرْجِعُكُمْ جَمِيعًا\n(To each among you, We have prescribed a law and a clear way. If Allah had willed, He would have made you one nation, but that (He) may test you in what He has given you; so compete in good deeds. The return of you (all) is to Allah.)(5:48)\nIn the Ayah (2:148), Allah said:\nأَيْنَ مَا تَكُونُوا يَأْتِ بِكُمُ اللَّهُ جَمِيعًا إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ\n(Wheresoever you may be, Allah will bring you together (on the Day of Resurrection). Truly, Allah is able to do all things.) meaning: He is able to gather you from the earth even if your bodies and flesh disintegrated and scattered.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=148","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:149","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:149–150","text":"And from wheresoever you start forth (for prayers), turn your face in the direction of Al-Masjid Al-Haram (at Makkah), that is indeed the truth from your Lord. And Allah is not unaware of what you do (149)And from wheresoever you start forth (for prayers), turn your face in the direction of Al-Masjid Al-Haram (at Makkah), and wheresoever you are, turn your faces towards it (when you pray) so that men may have no argument against you except those of them that are wrongdoers, so fear them not, but fear Me! ـ And so that I may complete My blessings on you and that you may be guided (150)\n\n## Why was changing the Qiblah mentioned thrice?\n\nThis is a third command from Allah to face Al-Masjid Al-Haram (the Sacred Mosque) from every part of the world (during prayer). It was said that Allah mentioned this ruling again here because it is connected to whatever is before and whatever is after it. Hence, Allah first said:\nقَدْ نَرَىٰ تَقَلُّبَ وَجْهِكَ فِي السَّمَاءِ فَلَنُوَلِّيَنَّكَ قِبْلَةً تَرْضَاهَا\n(Verily, We have seen the turning of your (Muhammad's) face towards the heaven. Surely, We shall turn you to a Qiblah (prayer direction) that shall please you)(2:144), until:\nوَإِنَّ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ لَيَعْلَمُونَ أَنَّهُ الْحَقُّ مِن رَّبِّهِمْ وَمَا اللَّهُ بِغَافِلٍ عَمَّا يَعْمَلُونَ\n(Certainly, the people who were given the Scripture (i.e., Jews and the Christians) know well that, that (your turning towards the direction of the Ka'bah at Makkah in prayers) is the truth from their Lord. And Allah is not unaware of what they do.)(2:144)\nAllah mentioned in these Ayat His fulfillment of the Prophet's wish and ordered him to face the Qiblah that he liked and is pleased with. In the second command, Allah said:\nوَمِنْ حَيْثُ خَرَجْتَ فَوَلِّ وَجْهَكَ شَطْرَ الْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ وَإِنَّهُ لَلْحَقُّ مِن رَّبِّكَ وَمَا اللَّهُ بِغَافِلٍ عَمَّا تَعْمَلُونَ\n(And from wheresoever you start forth (for prayers), turn your face in the direction of Al-Masid Al-Haram that is indeed the truth from your Lord. And Allah is not unaware of what you do.)\nTherefore, Allah states here that changing the Qiblah is also the truth from Him, thus upgrading the subject more than in the first Ayah, in which Allah agreed to what His Prophet ﷺ had wished for. Thus Allah states that this is also the truth from Him that He likes and is pleased with. In the third command, Allah refutes the Jewish assertion that the Prophet faced their Qiblah ﷺ, as they knew in their Books that the Prophet ﷺ will later on be commanded to face the Qiblah of Ibrahim, the Ka'bah. The Arab disbelievers had no more argument concerning the Prophet's Qiblah after Allah commanded the Prophet ﷺ to face the Qiblah of Ibrahim, which is more respected and honored, rather than the Qiblah of the Jews. The Arabs used to honor the Ka'bah and liked the fact that the Messenger ﷺ was commanded to face it.\n\n## The Wisdom behind abrogating the Previous Qiblah\n\nAllah said:\nلِئَلَّا يَكُونَ لِلنَّاسِ عَلَيْكُمْ حُجَّةٌ\n(...so that men may have no argument against you)\nTherefore, the People of the Book knew from the description of the Muslim Ummah that they would be ordered to face the Ka'bah. If the Muslims did not fit this description, the Jews would have used this fact against the Muslims. If the Muslims had remained on the Qiblah of Bayt Al-Maqdis, which was also the Qiblah of the Jews, this fact could have been used as the basis of argument by the Jews against other people.\nAllah's Statement:\nإِلَّا الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا مِنْهُمْ\n(...except those of them that are wrongdoers,) indicates the Mushrikin (polytheists) of Quraysh. The reasoning of these unjust persons was the unsound statement: \"This man (Muhammad) claims that he follows the religion of Ibrahim! Hence, if his facing Bayt Al-Maqdis was a part of the religion of Ibrahim, why did he change it?\" The answer to this question is that Allah has chosen His Prophet ﷺ to face Bayt Al-Maqdis first for certain wisdom, and he obeyed Allah regarding this command. Then, Allah changed the Qiblah to the Qiblah of Ibrahim, which is the Ka'bah, and he also obeyed Allah in this command. He, obeys Allah in all cases and never engages in the defiance of Allah even for an instant, and his Ummah imitates him in this.\nAllah said:\nفَلَا تَخْشَوْهُمْ وَاخْشَوْنِي\n(...so fear them not, but fear Me!) meaning: 'Do not fear the doubts that the unjust, stubborn persons raise and fear Me Alone.' Indeed, Allah Alone deserves to be feared.\nAllah said:\nوَلِأُتِمَّ نِعْمَتِي عَلَيْكُمْ\n(...so that I may complete My blessings on you.)\nThis Ayah relates to Allah's statement:\nلِئَلَّا يَكُونَ لِلنَّاسِ عَلَيْكُمْ حُجَّةٌ\n(...so that men may have no argument against you), meaning: I will perfect My bounty on you by legislating for you to face the Ka'bah, so that the (Islamic) Shari'ah (law) is complete in every respect. Allah said:\nوَلَعَلَّكُمْ تَهْتَدُونَ\n(...that you may be guided.), meaning: 'To be directed and guided to what the nations have been led astray from, We have guided you to it and preferred you with it.' This is why this Ummah is the best and most honored nation ever.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=149","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:151","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:151–152","text":"Similarly (to complete My blessings on you), We have sent among you a Messenger (Muhammad ﷺ) of your own, reciting to you Our verses (the Qur'an) and purifying you, and teaching you the Book (the Qur'an) and the Hikmah (i. e., Sunnah, Islamic laws and Fiqh ـ jurisprudence), and teaching you that which you did not know (151)Therefore remember Me (by praying, glorifying). I will remember you, and be grateful to Me (for My countless favors on you) and never be ungrateful to Me (152)\n\n## Muhammad's (ﷺ ) Prophecy is a Great Bounty from Allah\n\nAllah reminds His believing servants with what He has endowed them with by sending Muhammad ﷺ as a Messenger to them, reciting to them Allah's clear Ayat and purifying and cleansing them from the worst types of behavior, the ills of the souls and the acts of Jahiliyyah (pre-Islamic era). The Messenger ﷺ also takes them away from the darkness (of disbelief) to the light (of faith) and teaches them the Book, the Qur'an, and the Hikmah (i.e., the wisdom), which is his Sunnah. He also teaches them what they knew not. During the time of Jahiliyyah, they used to utter foolish statements. Later on, and with the blessing of the Prophet's Message and the goodness of his prophecy, they were elevated to the status of the Awliya' (loyal friends of Allah) and the rank of the scholars. Hence, they acquired the deepest knowledge among the people, the most pious hearts, and the most truthful tongues. Allah said:\nلَقَدْ مَنَّ اللَّهُ عَلَى الْمُؤْمِنِينَ إِذْ بَعَثَ فِيهِمْ رَسُولًا مِّنْ أَنفُسِهِمْ يَتْلُو عَلَيْهِمْ آيَاتِهِ وَيُزَكِّيهِمْ\n(Indeed, Allah conferred a great favor on the believers when He sent among them a Messenger (Muhammad ﷺ) from among themselves, reciting unto them His verses (the Qur'an), and purifying them (from sins).)(3:164)\nAllah also criticized those who did not give this bounty its due consideration, when He said:\nأَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ بَدَّلُوا نِعْمَتَ اللَّهِ كُفْرًا وَأَحَلُّوا قَوْمَهُمْ دَارَ الْبَوَارِ\n(Have you not seen those who have changed the favors of Allah into disbelief (by denying Prophet Muhammad ﷺ) and his Message of Islam), and caused their people to dwell in the house of destruction?) (14:28)\nIbn 'Abbas commented, \"Allah's favor means Muhammad.\" Therefore, Allah has commanded the believers to affirm this favor and to appreciate it by thanking and remembering Him:\nفَاذْكُرُونِي أَذْكُرْكُمْ وَاشْكُرُوا لِي وَلَا تَكْفُرُونِ\n(Therefore, remember Me. I will remember you, and be grateful to Me, and never be ungrateful to Me.)\nMujahid said that Allah's statement:\nكَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا فِيكُمْ رَسُولًا مِّنكُمْ\n(Similarly (to complete My favor on you), We have sent among you a Messenger (Muhammad ) of your own,)\nmeans: Therefore, remember Me in gratitude to My favor.\nAl-Hasan Al-Basri commented about Allah's statement:\nفَاذْكُرُونِي أَذْكُرْكُمْ\n(Therefore remember Me. I will remember you), \"Remember Me regarding what I have commanded you and I will remember you regarding what I have compelled Myself to do for your benefit (i.e., His rewards and forgiveness).\"\nAn authentic Hadith states:\nيَقُولُ اللهُ تَعَالَى: مَنْ ذَكَرَنِي فِي نَفْسِهِ ذَكَرْتُهُ فِي نَفْسِي وَمَنْ ذَكَرَنِي فِي مَلَأٍ ذَكَرْتُهُ فِي مَلَأٍ خَيْرٍ مِنْهُ\n(Allah the Exalted said, 'Whoever mentions Me to himself, then I will mention him to Myself; and whoever mentions Me in a gathering, I will mention him in a better gathering.)'\nImam Ahmad reported that Anas narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nقَالَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ: يَا ابْنَ آدَمَ، إِنْ ذَكَرْتَنِي فِي نَفْسِكَ ذَكَرْتُك فِي نَفْسِي، إِنْ ذَكَرْتَنِي فِي مَلَإٍ ذكَرْتُكَ فِي مَلَإٍ مِنَ الْمَلَائِكَةِ - أَوْ قَالَ: فِي مَلَإٍ خَيْرٍ مِنْهُ - وَإِنْ دَنَوْتَ مِنِّي شِبْرًا دَنَوْتُ مِنْكَ ذِرَاعًا، وَإِنْ دَنَوْتَ مِنِّي ذِرَاعًا دَنَوْتُ مِنْكَ بَاعًا، وَإنْ أَتَيْتَنِي تَمْشِي أَتَيْتُكَ هَرْوَلَةً\n(Allah the Exalted said, 'O son of Adam! If you mention Me to yourself, I will mention you to Myself. If you mention Me in a gathering, I will mention you in a gathering of the angels (or said in a better gathering). If you draw closer to Me by a hand span, I will draw closer to you by forearm's length. If you draw closer to Me by a forearm's length, I will draw closer to you by an arm's length. And if you come to Me walking, I will come to you running).\nIts chain is Sahih, it was recorded by Al-Bukhari. Allah said:\nوَاشْكُرُوا لِي وَلَا تَكْفُرُونِ\n(...and be grateful to Me (for My countless favors on you) and never be ungrateful to Me.)\nIn this Ayah, Allah commands that He be thanked and appreciated, and promises even more rewards for thanking Him. Allah said in another Ayah:\nوَإِذْ تَأَذَّنَ رَبُّكُمْ لَئِن شَكَرْتُمْ لَأَزِيدَنَّكُمْ وَلَئِن كَفَرْتُمْ إِنَّ عَذَابِي لَشَدِيدٌ\n(And (remember) when your Lord proclaimed: \"If you give thanks (by accepting faith and worshipping none but Allah), I will give you more (of My blessings); but if you are thankless (i.e., disbelievers), verily, My punishment is indeed severe.)(14:7)\nAbu Raja' Al-'Utaridi said: 'Imran bin Husayn came by us once wearing a nice silken garment that we never saw him wear before or afterwards. He said, \"Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nمَنْ أَنْعَمَ اللهُ عَلَيْهِ نِعْمَةً فَإِنَّ اللهَ يُحِبُّ أَنْ يَرَى أَثَرَ نِعْمَتِهِ عَلَى خَلْقِهِ،\nوَقَالَ رَوْحٌ مَرَّةً:\nعَلَى عَبْدِهِ\n(Those whom Allah has favored with a bounty, then Allah likes to see the effect of His bounty on His creation), or he said, \"on His servant\" - according to Ruh (one of the narrators of the Hadith).","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=151","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:153","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:153–154","text":"O you who believe! Seek help in patience and As-Salah (the prayer). Truly, Allah is with As-Sabirin (the patient)(153)And say not of those who are killed in the way of Allah, \"They are dead.\" Nay, they are living, but you perceive (it) not (154)\n\n## The Virtue of Patience and Prayer\n\nAfter Allah commanded that He be appreciated, He ordained patience and prayer. It is a fact that the servant is either enjoying a bounty that he should be thankful for, or suffering a calamity that he should meet with patience. A Hadith states:\nعَجَبًا لِلْمُؤْمِنِ لَا يَقْضِي اللهُ لَهُ قَضَاءً إلَّا كَانَ خَيْرًا لَهُ: إِنْ أَصَابَتْهُ سَرَّاءُ فَشَكَرَ كَانَ خَيْرًا لَهُ وإنْ أَصَابَتْهُ ضَرَّاءُ فَصَبَرَ كَانَ خَيْرًا لَهُ\n(Amazing is the believer, for whatever Allah decrees for him, it is better for him! If he is tested with a bounty, he is grateful for it and this is better for him; and if he is afflicted with a hardship, he is patient with it and this is better for him.)\nAllah has stated that the best tools to help ease the effects of the afflictions are patience and prayer. Earlier we mentioned Allah's statement:\nوَاسْتَعِينُوا بِالصَّبْرِ وَالصَّلَاةِ وَإِنَّهَا لَكَبِيرَةٌ إِلَّا عَلَى الْخَاشِعِينَ\n(And seek help in patience and As-Salah (the prayer) and truly, it is extremely heavy and hard except for Al-Khashi'in [i.e., the true believers in Allah])(2:45)\nThere are several types of Sabr ـ patience: one for avoiding the prohibitions and sins, one for acts of worship and obedience. The second type carries more rewards than the first type. There is a third type of patience required in the face of the afflictions and hardships, which is mandatory, like repentance.\nAbdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam said, \"Sabr has two parts: patience for the sake of Allah concerning what He is pleased with (i.e., acts of worship and obedience), even if it is hard on the heart and the body, and patience when avoiding what He dislikes, even if it is desired. Those who acquire these qualities will be among the patient persons whom Allah shall greet (when they meet Him in the Hereafter; refer to Surat Al-Ahzab 33:44), Allah willing.\"\n\n## The Life enjoyed by Martyrs\n\nAllah's statement:\nوَلَا تَقُولُوا لِمَن يُقْتَلُ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ أَمْوَاتٌ بَلْ أَحْيَاءٌ\n(And say not of those who are killed in the way of Allah, \"They are dead.\" Nay, they are living,) indicates that the martyrs are alive and receiving their sustenance.\nMuslim reported in his Sahih:\nأَنَّ أَرْوَاحَ الشُّهَدَاءِ فِي حَوَاصِلَ طَيْرٍ خُضْرٍ، تَسْرَحُ فِي الْجَنَّة حَيْثُ شَاءَتْ، ثُمَّ تَأْوِي إلَى قَنَادِيلَ مُعَلَّقَةٍ تَحْتَ الْعَرْشِ، فَاطَّلَعَ عَلَيْهِمْ رَبُّكَ اطِّلَاعَةً، فقَالَ: مَاذَا تَبْغُونَ؟ فَقَالُوا: يَا رَبَّنَا وَأَيَّ شَيْءٍ نَبْغِي، وَقَدْ أَعْطَيْتنَا مَا لَمْ تُعْطِ أَحَدًا مِنْ خَلْقِكَ؟ ثُمَّ عَادَ إِلَيْهِمْ بِمِثْلِ هذَا، فَلَمَّا رَأَوْا أَنَّهُم لَا يُتْرَكُون مِنْ أَنْ يُسْأَلُوا، قَالُوا: نُرِيدُ أَنْ تَرُدَّنَا إِلَى الدَّارِ الدُّنْيَا فَنُقَاتِلَ فِي سَبِيلِكَ حَتَّى نُقْتَلَ فِيكَ مَرَّةً أُخْرَىٰ - لِمَا يَرَوْنَ مِنْ ثَوابِ الشَّهادَةِ - فَيَقُولُ الرَّبُّ جَلَّ جَلَالُهُ: إِنِّي كَتَبْتُ أَنَّهُمْ إلَيْهَا لَا يَرْجِعُونَ\n(The souls of the martyrs are inside green birds and move about in Paradise wherever they wish. Then, they take refuge in lamps that are hanging under the Throne (of Allah). Your Lord looked at them and asked them, 'What do you wish for?' They said, 'What more could we wish for while You have favored us with what You have not favored any other of your creation?' He repeated the question again. When they realize that they will be asked (until they answer), they said, 'We wish that You send us back to the earthly life, so that we fight in Your cause until we are killed in Your cause again,' (because of what they enjoy of the rewards of martyrdom). The Lord then said, 'I have written that they will not be returned to it (earthly life) again.)\nImam Ahmad reported that 'Abdur-Rahman bin Ka'b bin Malik narrated from his father that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nنَسَمَةُ الْمُؤْمِنِ طَائِرٌ تَعْلَقُ فِي شَجَرِ الْجَنَّةِ حَتَّى يَرْجِعَهُ اللهُ إِلَى جَسَدهِ يَوْمَ يَبْعَثُهُ\n(The believer's soul is a bird that feeds on the trees of Paradise until Allah sends it back to its body when the person is resurrected.)\nThis Hadith includes all the believers in its general meaning. Thus, the fact that the Qur'an mentions the martyrs in particular in the above Ayah serves to honor, glorify and favor them (although the other believers share the rewards they enjoy).","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=153","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:155","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:155–157","text":"And certainly, We shall test you with something of fear, hunger, loss of wealth, lives and fruits, but give glad tidings to As-Sabirin (the patient)(155)Who, when afflicted with calamity, say: \"Truly, to Allah we belong and truly, to Him we shall return. (156)They are those on whom are the Salawat (i.e., who are blessed and will be forgiven) from their Lord, and (they are those who) receive His mercy, and it is they who are the guided ones (157)\n\n## The Believer is Patient with the Affliction and thus gains a Reward\n\nAllah informs us that He tests and tries His servants, just as He said in another Ayah:\nوَلَنَبْلُوَنَّكُمْ حَتَّىٰ نَعْلَمَ الْمُجَاهِدِينَ مِنكُمْ وَالصَّابِرِينَ وَنَبْلُوَ أَخْبَارَكُمْ\n(And surely, We shall try you till We test those who strive hard (for the cause of Allah) and As-Sabirin (the patient), and We shall test your facts (i.e., the one who is a liar, and the one who is truthful).)(47:31)\nHence, He tests them with the bounty sometimes and sometimes with the afflictions of fear and hunger. Allah said in another Ayah:\nفَأَذَاقَهَا اللَّهُ لِبَاسَ الْجُوعِ وَالْخَوْفِ\n(So Allah made it taste extreme of hunger (famine) and fear.)(16:112)\nThe frightened and the hungry persons show the effects of the affliction outwardly and this is why Allah has used here the word 'Libas' (cover or clothes) of fear and hunger. In the Ayat above, Allah used the words:\nبِشَيْءٍ مِّنَ الْخَوْفِ وَالْجُوعِ\n(with something of fear, hunger,) meaning, a little of each. Then (Allah said),\nوَنَقْصٍ مِّنَ الْأَمْوَالِ\n(loss of wealth,) meaning, some of the wealth will be destroyed,\nوَالْأَنفُسِ\n(lives) meaning, losing friends, relatives and loved ones to death,\nوَالثَّمَرَاتِ\n(and fruits,) meaning, the gardens and the farms will not produce the usual or expected amounts. This is why Allah said next:\nوَبَشِّرِ الصَّابِرِينَ\n(but give glad tidings to As-Sabirin (the patient).)\nHe then explained whom He meant by 'the patient' whom He praised:\nالَّذِينَ إِذَا أَصَابَتْهُم مُّصِيبَةٌ قَالُوا إِنَّا لِلَّهِ وَإِنَّا إِلَيْهِ رَاجِعُونَ\n(Who, when afflicted with calamity, say: \"Truly, to Allah we belong and truly, to Him we shall return.\") meaning, those who recite this statement to comfort themselves in the face of their loss, know that they belong to Allah and that He does what He wills with His servants. They also know that nothing and no deed, even if it was the weight of an atom, will be lost with Allah on the Day of Resurrection. These facts thus compel them to admit that they are Allah's servants and that their return will be to Him in the Hereafter.\nThis is why Allah said:\nأُولَٰئِكَ عَلَيْهِمْ صَلَوَاتٌ مِّن رَّبِّهِمْ وَرَحْمَةٌ\n(They are those on whom are the Salawat (i. e., who are blessed and will be forgiven) from their Lord, and (they are those who) receive His mercy,) meaning, Allah's praise and mercy will be with them. Sa'id bin Jubayr added, \"Meaning, safety from the torment.\"\nوَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْمُهْتَدُونَ\n(and it is they who are the guided ones.) 'Umar bin Al-Khattab commented: \"What righteous things, and what a great heights.\nأُولَٰئِكَ عَلَيْهِمْ صَلَوَاتٌ مِّن رَّبِّهِمْ وَرَحْمَةٌ\n(They are those on whom are the Salawat from their Lord, and (they are those who) receive His mercy) are the two righteous things.\nوَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْمُهْتَدُونَ\n(and it is they who are the guided ones) are the heights.\"\nThe heights means more rewards, and these people will be awarded their rewards and more.\n\n## The Virtue of asserting that We all belong to Allah, during Afflictions\n\nThere are several Ahadith that mention the rewards of admitting that the return is to Allah by saying:\nإِنَّا لِلَّهِ وَإِنَّا إِلَيْهِ رَاجِعُونَ\n(\"Truly, to Allah we belong and truly, to Him we shall return.\") when afflictions strike. For instance, Imam Ahmad reported that Umm Salamah narrated: Once, Abu Salamah came back after he was with Allah's Messenger ﷺ and said: I heard Allah's Messenger ﷺ recite a statement that made me delighted. He said:\nلَا يُصِيبُ أَحَدًا مِنَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ مُصِيبَةٌ فَيَسْتَرْجِعُ عِنْدَ مُصِيبَتِهِ ثُمَّ يقُولُ: اللَّهُمَّ أْجُرْنِي فِي مُصِيبَتِي وأَخْلِفْ لِي خَيْرًا مِنْهَا، إِلَّا فَعَلَ ذلِكَ بِهِ\n(No Muslim is struck with an affliction and then says Istirja' when the affliction strikes, and then says: 'O Allah! Reward me for my loss and give me what is better than it,' but Allah will do just that.)\nUmm Salamah said: So I memorized these words. When Abu Salamah died I said Istirja' and said: \"O Allah! Compensate me for my loss and give me what is better than it.\" I then thought about it and said, \"Who is better than Abu Salamah?\" When my 'Iddah (the period of time before the widow or divorced woman can remarry) finished, Allah's Messenger ﷺ asked for permission to see me while I was dyeing a skin that I had. I washed my hands, gave him permission to enter and handed him a pillow, and he sat on it. He then asked me for marriage and when he finished his speech, I said, \"O Messenger of Allah! It is not because I do not want you, but I am very jealous and I fear that you might experience some wrong mannerism from me for which Allah would punish me. I am old and have children.\" He said:\nأمَّا مَا ذَكَرْتِ مِنَ الْغَيْرَةِ فَسَوْفَ يُذْهِبُهَا اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ عَنْكِ، وَأَمَّا مَا ذَكَرْتِ مِنَ السِّنِّ فَقَدْ أَصَابَنِي مِثْلُ الَّذِي أَصَابَكِ، وَأَمَّا مَا ذَكَرْتِ مِنَ الْعِيَالِ فَإِنَّمَا عِيَالُكِ عِيَالِي\n(As for the jealousy that you mentioned, Allah the Exalted will remove it from you. As for your being old as you mentioned, I have suffered what you have suffered. And for your having children, they are my children too.)\nShe said, \"I have surrendered to Allah's Messenger.\" Allah's Messenger ﷺ married her and Umm Salamah said later, \"Allah compensated me with who is better than Abu Salamah: Allah's Messenger ﷺ.\" Muslim reported a shorter version of this Hadith.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=155","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:158","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:158","text":"Verily, As-Safa and Al-Marwah are of the symbols of Allah. So it is not a sin on him who performs Hajj or 'Umrah (pilgrimage) of the House to perform Tawaf between them. And whoever does good voluntarily, then verily, Allah is All-Recognizer, All-Knower (158)\n\n## The Meaning of \"it is not a sin\" in the Ayah\n\nImam Ahmad reported that 'Urwah said that he asked 'A'ishah about what Allah stated:\nإِنَّ الصَّفَا وَالْمَرْوَةَ مِن شَعَائِرِ اللَّهِ فَمَنْ حَجَّ الْبَيْتَ أَوِ اعْتَمَرَ فَلَا جُنَاحَ عَلَيْهِ أَن يَطَّوَّفَ بِهِمَا\n(Verily, As-Safa and Al-Marwah (two mountains in Makkah) are of the symbols of Allah. So it is not a sin on him who performs Hajj or 'Umrah (pilgrimage) of the House (the Ka'bah at Makkah) to perform the going (Tawaf) between them (As-Safa and Al-Marwah).)\n\"By Allah! It is not a sin if someone did not perform Tawaf around them.\" 'A'ishah said, \"Worst is that which you said, O my nephew! If this is the meaning of it, it should have read, 'It is not a sin if one did not perform Tawaf around them.' Rather, the Ayah was revealed regarding the Ansar, who before Islam, used to assume Ihlal (or Ihram for Hajj) in the area of Mushallal for their idol Manat that they used to worship. Those who assumed Ihlal for Manat, used to hesitate to perform Tawaf (going) between Mounts As-Safa and Al-Marwah. So they (during the Islamic era) asked Allah's Messenger ﷺ about it, saying, 'O Messenger of Allah! During the time of Jahiliyyah, we used to hesitate to perform Tawaf between As-Safa and Al-Marwah.' Allah then revealed:\nإِنَّ الصَّفَا وَالْمَرْوَةَ مِن شَعَائِرِ اللَّهِ فَمَنْ حَجَّ الْبَيْتَ أَوِ اعْتَمَرَ فَلَا جُنَاحَ عَلَيْهِ أَن يَطَّوَّفَ بِهِمَا\n(Verily, As-Safa and Al-Marwah are of the symbols of Allah. So it is not a sin on him who performs Hajj or 'Umrah of the House to perform the going (Tawaf) between them.)\" 'A'ishah then said, \" Allah's Messenger ﷺ has made it the Sunnah to perform Tawaf between them (As-Safa and Al-Marwah), and thus, no one should abandon performing Tawaf between them.\" This Hadith is reported in the Sahihayn.\nIn another narration, Imam Az-Zuhri reported that 'Urwah said: Later on I ('Urwah) told Abu Bakr bin 'Abdur-Rahman bin Al-Harith bin Hisham (of 'A'ishah's statement) and he said, \"I have not heard of such information. However, I heard learned men saying that all the people, except those whom 'A'ishah mentioned, said, 'Our Tawaf between these two hills is a practice of Jahiliyyah. ' Some others among the Ansar said, 'We were commanded to perform Tawaf of the Ka'bah, but not between As-Safa and Al-Marwah.' So Allah revealed:\nإِنَّ الصَّفَا وَالْمَرْوَةَ مِن شَعَائِرِ اللَّهِ\n(Verily, As-Safa and Al-Marwah are of the symbols of Allah.)\" Abu Bakr bin 'Abdur-Rahman then said, \"It seems that this verse was revealed concerning the two groups.\" Al-Bukhari collected a similar narration by Anas.\nAsh-Sha'bi said, \"Isaf (an idol) was on As-Safa while Na'ilah (an idol) was on Al-Marwah, and they used to touch (or kiss) them. After Islam came, they were hesitant about performing Tawaf between them. Thereafter, the Ayah (2:158 above) was revealed.\"\n\n## The Wisdom behind legislating Sa'i between As-Safa and Al-Marwah\n\nMuslim recorded a long Hadith in his Sahih from Jabir, in which Allah's Messenger ﷺ finished the Tawaf around the House, and then went back to the Rukn (pillar, i.e., the Black Stone) and kissed it. He then went out from the door near As-Safa while reciting:\nإِنَّ الصَّفَا وَالْمَرْوَةَ مِن شَعَائِرِ اللَّهِ\n(Verily, As-Safa and Al-Marwah are of the symbols of Allah.) The Prophet ﷺ then said, (I start with what Allah has commanded me to start with [meaning start the Sa'i (i.e., fast walking) from the As-Safa]). In another narration of An-Nasa'i, the Prophet ﷺ said, (Start with what Allah has started with (i.e., As-Safa).)\nImam Ahmad reported that Habibah bint Abu Tajrah said, \"I saw Allah's Messenger ﷺ performing Tawaf between As-Safa and Al-Marwah, while the people were in front of him and he was behind them walking in Sa'i. I saw his garment twisted around his knees because of the fast walking in Sa'i (he was performing) and he was reciting:\nاسْعَوْا فَإِنَّ اللهَ كَتَبَ عَلَيْكُمُ السَّعْيَ.\n(Perform Sa'i, for Allah has prescribed Sa'i on you.)'\"\nThis Hadith was used as a proof for the fact that Sa'i is a Rukn of Hajj. It was also said that Sa'i is Wajib, and not a Rukn of Hajj and that if one does not perform it by mistake or by intention, he could expiate the shortcoming with Damm. Allah has stated that Tawaf between As-Safa and Al-Marwah is among the symbols of Allah, meaning, among the acts that Allah legislated during the Hajj for Prophet Ibrahim.\nEarlier we mentioned the Hadith by Ibn 'Abbas that the origin of Tawaf comes from the Tawaf of Hajar (Prophet Ibrahim's wife), between As-Safa and Al-Marwah seeking water for her son (Isma'il) Ibrahim had left them in Makkah, where there was no habitation for her. When Hajar feared that her son would die, she stood up and begged Allah for His help and kept going back and forth in that blessed area between As-Safa and Al-Marwah. She was humble, fearful, frightened and meek before Allah. Allah answered her prayers, relieved her of her loneliness, ended her dilemma and made the well of Zamzam bring forth its water for her, which is:\nطَعَامُ طُعْمٍ، وَشِفَاءُ سُقْمٍ\n(A tasty (or nutritional) food and a remedy for the illness.)\nTherefore, whoever performs Sa'i between As-Safa and Al-Marwah should remember his meekness, humbleness and need for Allah to guide his heart, lead his affairs to success and forgive his sins. He should also want Allah to eliminate his shortcomings and errors and to guide him to the straight path. He should ask Allah to keep him firm on this path until he meets death, and to change his situation from that of sin and errors to that of perfection and being forgiven, the same providence which was provided to Hajar.\nAllah then states:\nوَمَن تَطَوَّعَ خَيْرًا\n(And whoever does good voluntarily.)\nIt was said that the Ayah describes performing Tawaf more than seven times, it was also said that it refers to voluntary 'Umrah or Hajj. It was also said that it means volunteering to do good works in general, as Ar-Razi has stated. The third opinion was attributed to Al-Hasan Al-Basri. Allah knows best.\nAllah states:\nفَإِنَّ اللَّهَ شَاكِرٌ عَلِيمٌ\n(...then verily, Allah is All-Recognizer, All-Knower.) meaning, Allah's reward is immense for the little deed, and He knows about the sufficiency of the reward. Hence, He will not award insufficient rewards to anyone. Indeed:\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَظْلِمُ مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ وَإِن تَكُ حَسَنَةً يُضَاعِفْهَا وَيُؤْتِ مِن لَّدُنْهُ أَجْرًا عَظِيمًا\n(Surely, Allah wrongs not even of the weight of an atom, but if there is any good (done), He doubles it, and gives from Him a great reward.)(4:40)","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=158","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:159","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:159–162","text":"Verily, those who conceal the clear proofs, evidences and the guidance, which We have sent down, after We have made it clear for the People in the Book, they are the ones cursed by Allah and cursed by the cursers (159)Except those who repent and do righteous deeds, and openly declare (the truth which they concealed). These, I will accept their repentance. And I am the One Who accepts repentance, the Most Merciful (160)Verily, those who disbelieve, and die while they are disbelievers, it is they on whom is the curse of Allah and of the angels and of mankind, combined (161)They will abide therein (under the curse in Hell), their punishment will neither be lightened nor will they be reprieved (162)\n\n## The Eternal Curse for Those Who hide Religious Commandments\n\nThese Ayat sternly warn against those who hide the clear signs that the Messengers were sent with which guide to the correct path and beneficial guidance for the hearts, after Allah has made such aspects clear for His servants through the Books that He revealed to His Messengers. Abu Al-'Aliyah said that these Ayat, \"were revealed about the People of the Scripture who hid the description of Muhammad ﷺ.\" Allah then states that everything curses such people for this evil act. Certainly, just as everything asks for forgiveness for the scholar, even the fish in the sea and the bird in the air, then those who hide knowledge are cursed by Allah and by the cursers.\nA Hadith in the Musnad, narrated through several chains of narrators, that strengthens the overall judgment of the Hadith, states that Abu Hurayrah narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nمَنْ سُئِلَ عَنْ عِلْمٍ فَكَتَمَهُ، أُلْجِمَ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ بِلِجَامٍ مِنْ نَارٍ\n(Whoever was asked about knowledge that one has, but he hid it, then a bridle made of fire will be tied around his mouth on the Day of Resurrection.)\nIt is also recorded by Al-Bukhari that Abu Hurayrah said, \"If it was not for an Ayah in Allah's Book, I would not have narrated a Hadith for anyone:\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَكْتُمُونَ مَا أَنزَلْنَا مِنَ الْبَيِّنَاتِ وَالْهُدَىٰ\n(Verily, those who conceal the clear proofs, evidences and the guidance, which We have sent down,)\"\nMujahid said, \"When the earth is struck by drought, the animals say, 'This is because of the sinners among the Children of Adam. May Allah curse the sinners among the Children of Adam.'\"\nAbu Al-'Aliyah, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas and Qatadah said that\nوَيَلْعَنُهُمُ اللَّاعِنُونَ\n(and cursed by the cursers) means that the angels and the believers will curse them. Moreover, a Hadith states that everything, including the fish in the sea, asks for forgiveness for the scholars. The Ayah (2:159 above) states that those who hide the knowledge will be cursed, (in this life and) on the Day of Resurrection, by Allah, the angels, all humanity, and those who curse (including the animals) each in its own distinct way. Allah knows best.\nFrom this punishment, Allah excluded all who repent to Him:\nإِلَّا الَّذِينَ تَابُوا وَأَصْلَحُوا وَبَيَّنُوا\n(Except those who repent and do righteous deeds, and openly declare (the truth which they concealed).)\nThis Ayah refers to those who regret what they have been doing and correct their behavior and, thus, explain to the people what they have been hiding.\nفَأُولَٰئِكَ أَتُوبُ عَلَيْهِمْ وَأَنَا التَّوَّابُ الرَّحِيمُ\n(These, I will accept their repentance. And I am the One Who accepts repentance, the Most Merciful.)\nThis Ayah also indicates that those who used to call to innovation, or even disbelief, and repent to Allah, then Allah will forgive them. Allah afterwards states that those who disbelieve in Him and remain in this state until they die, then:\nأُولَٰئِكَ عَلَيْهِمْ لَعْنَةُ اللَّهِ وَالْمَلَائِكَةِ وَالنَّاسِ أَجْمَعِينَ - خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا\n(it is they on whom is the curse of Allah and of the angels and of mankind, combined. They will abide therein (under the curse in Hell).)\nTherefore, they will suffer the eternal curse until the Day of Resurrection and after that in the fire of Jahannam, where,\nلَا يُخَفَّفُ عَنْهُمُ الْعَذَابُ\n(their punishment will neither be lightened)\nHence, the torment will not be decreased for them,\nوَلَا هُمْ يُنظَرُونَ\n(nor will they be reprieved.)\nThe torment will not be changed or tempered for even an hour. Rather, it is continuous and eternal. We seek refuge with Allah from this evil end.\n\n## Cursing the Disbelievers is allowed\n\nThere is no disagreement that it is lawful to curse the disbelievers. 'Umar bin Al-Khattab and the Imams after him used to curse the disbelievers in their Qunut (a type of supplication) during the prayer and otherwise. As for cursing a specific disbeliever, some scholars stated that it is not allowed to curse him, because we do not know how Allah will make his end. Others said that it is allowed to curse individual disbelievers. For proof, they mention the story about the man who was brought to be punished repeatedly for drinking (alcohol), a man said, \"May Allah curse him! He is being brought repeatedly (to be flogged for drinking).\" Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nلَا تَلْعَنْهُ فَإِنَّه يُحِبُّ اللهَ وَرَسُولَهُ\n(Do not curse him, for he loves Allah and His Messenger).\nThis Hadith indicates that it is allowed to curse those who do not love Allah and His Messenger ﷺ. Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=159","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:163","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:163","text":"And your Ilah (God) is One Ilah (God ـ Allah), La ilaha illa Huwa (there is none who has the right to be worshipped but He), the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful (163)\nIn this Ayah, Allah mentions that He is the only deity, and that He has no partners or equals. He is Allah, the One and Only, the Sustainer, and there is no deity worthy of worship except Him. He is the Most Gracious ـ Ar-Rahman, the Most Merciful ـ Ar-Rahim. We explained the meanings of these two Names in the beginning of Surat Al-Fatihah. Shahr bin Hawshab reported that Asma' bint Yazid bin As-Sakan narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nاسْمُ اللهِ الْأَعْظَمُ فِي هَاتَيْنِ الآيَتَيْنِ\n(Allah's Greatest Name is contained in these two Ayat):\nوَإِلَٰهُكُمْ إِلَٰهٌ وَاحِدٌ لَّا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ الرَّحْمَٰنُ الرَّحِيمُ\n(And your Ilah (God) is One Ilah (God ـ Allah), La ilaha illa Huwa (there is none who has the right to be worshipped but He), the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.) and:\nالم - اللَّهُ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ الْحَيُّ الْقَيُّومُ\n(Alif-Lam-Mim. Allah! La ilaha illa Huwa (none has the right to be worshipped but He), Al-Haiyul-Qaiyum (the Ever Living, the One Who sustains and protects all that exists).)(3:1, 2)\"\nThen Allah mentions some of the proof that He is alone as the deity, that He is the One who created the heavens and the earth and all of the various creatures between them, all of which testify to His Oneness. Allah said:","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=163","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:164","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:164","text":"Verily, in the creation of the heavens and the earth, and in the alternation of night and day, and the ships which sail through the sea with that which is of use to mankind, and the water (rain) which Allah sends down from the sky and makes the earth alive therewith after its death, and the moving (living) creatures of all kinds that He has scattered therein, and in the veering of winds and clouds which are held between the sky and the earth, are indeed Ayat (proofs, evidences, signs, etc.) for people of understanding (164)\n\n## The Proofs for Tawhid\n\nAllah said:\nإِنَّ فِي خَلْقِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ\n(Verily, in the creation of the heavens and the earth...)\nTherefore, the sky, with its height, intricate design, vastness, the heavenly objects in orbit, and this earth, with its density, its lowlands, mountains, seas, deserts, valleys, and other structures, and beneficial things that it has. Allah continues:\nوَاخْتِلَافِ اللَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ\n(...and in the alternation of night and day.)\nThis (the night) comes and then goes followed by the other (the day) which does not delay for even an instant, just as Allah said:\nلَا الشَّمْسُ يَنبَغِي لَهَا أَن تُدْرِكَ الْقَمَرَ وَلَا اللَّيْلُ سَابِقُ النَّهَارِ وَكُلٌّ فِي فَلَكٍ يَسْبَحُونَ\n(It is not for the sun to overtake the moon, nor does the night outstrip the day. They all float, each in an orbit.)(36:40)\nSometimes, the day grows shorter and the night longer, and sometimes vice versa, one takes from the length of the other. Similarly Allah said:\nيُولِجُ اللَّيْلَ فِي النَّهَارِ وَيُولِجُ النَّهَارَ فِي اللَّيْلِ\n(Allah merges the night into the day, and He merges the day into the night)(57:6) meaning, He extends the length of one from the other and vice versa. Allah then continues:\nوَالْفُلْكِ الَّتِي تَجْرِي فِي الْبَحْرِ بِمَا يَنفَعُ النَّاسَ\n(...and the ships which sail through the sea with that which is of use to mankind,)\nShaping the sea in this manner, so that it is able to carry ships from one shore to another, so people benefit from what the other region has, and export what they have to them and vice versa.\nAllah then continues:\nوَمَا أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مِن مَّاءٍ فَأَحْيَا بِهِ الْأَرْضَ بَعْدَ مَوْتِهَا\n(...and the water (rain) which Allah sends down from the sky and makes the earth alive therewith after its death), which is similar to Allah's statement:\nوَآيَةٌ لَّهُمُ الْأَرْضُ الْمَيْتَةُ أَحْيَيْنَاهَا وَأَخْرَجْنَا مِنْهَا حَبًّا فَمِنْهُ يَأْكُلُونَ\n(And a sign for them is the dead land. We give it life, and We bring forth from it grains, so that they eat thereof.)(36:33), until:\nوَمِمَّا لَا يَعْلَمُونَ\n(which they know not.)(36:36)\nAllah continues:\nوَبَثَّ فِيهَا مِن كُلِّ دَابَّةٍ\n(and the moving (living) creatures of all kinds that He has scattered therein,) meaning, in various shapes, colors, uses and sizes, whether small or large. Allah knows all that, sustains it, and nothing is concealed from Him. Similarly, Allah said:\nوَمَا مِن دَابَّةٍ فِي الْأَرْضِ إِلَّا عَلَى اللَّهِ رِزْقُهَا وَيَعْلَمُ مُسْتَقَرَّهَا وَمُسْتَوْدَعَهَا كُلٌّ فِي كِتَابٍ مُّبِينٍ\n(And no moving (living) creature is there on earth but its provision is due from Allah. And He knows its dwelling place and its deposit (in the uterus or grave). All is in a Clear Book (Al-Lawh Al-Mahfuz ـ the Book of Decrees with Allah).)(11:6)\nوَتَصْرِيفِ الرِّيَاحِ\n(...and in the veering of winds...)\nSometimes, the wind brings mercy and sometimes torment. Sometimes it brings the good news of the clouds that follow it, sometimes it leads the clouds, herding them, scattering them or directing them. Sometimes, the wind comes from the north (the northern wind), and sometimes from the south, sometimes from the east, and striking the front of the Ka'bah, sometimes from the west, striking its back. There are many books about the wind rain, stars and the regulations related to them, but here is not the place to elaborate on that, and Allah knows best.\nAllah continues:\nوَالسَّحَابِ الْمُسَخَّرِ بَيْنَ السَّمَاءِ وَالْأَرْضِ\n(...and clouds which are held between the sky and the earth,)\nThe clouds run between the sky and the earth to wherever Allah wills of lands and areas.\nAllah said next:\nلَآيَاتٍ لِّقَوْمٍ يَعْقِلُونَ\n(...are indeed Ayat for people of understanding,) meaning, all these things are clear signs that testify to Allah's Oneness. Similarly, Allah said:\nإِنَّ فِي خَلْقِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَاخْتِلَافِ اللَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ لَآيَاتٍ لِّأُولِي الْأَلْبَابِ - الَّذِينَ يَذْكُرُونَ اللَّهَ قِيَامًا وَقُعُودًا وَعَلَىٰ جُنُوبِهِمْ وَيَتَفَكَّرُونَ فِي خَلْقِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ رَبَّنَا مَا خَلَقْتَ هَٰذَا بَاطِلًا سُبْحَانَكَ فَقِنَا عَذَابَ النَّارِ\n(Verily, in the creation of the heavens and the earth, and in the alternation of night and day, there are indeed signs for men of understanding. Those who remember Allah (always, and in prayers) standing, sitting, and lying down on their sides, and think deeply about the creation of the heavens and the earth, (saying): \"Our Lord! You have not created (all) this without purpose, glory to You! (Exalted are You above all that they associate with You as partners). Give us salvation from the torment of the Fire.\")(3:190-191)","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=164","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:165","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:165–167","text":"And of mankind are some who take (for worship) others besides Allah as rivals (to Allah). They love them as they love Allah. But those who believe, love Allah more (than anything else). If only, those who do wrong could see, when they will see the torment, that all power belongs to Allah and that Allah is severe in punishment (165)When those who were followed disown (declare themselves innocent of) those who followed (them), and they see the torment, then all their relations will be cut off from them (166)And those who followed will say: \"If only we had one more chance to return (to the worldly life), we would disown (declare ourselves as innocent from) them as they have disowned (declared themselves as innocent from) us. \" Thus Allah will show them their deeds as regrets for them. And they will never get out of the Fire (167)\n\n## The Condition of the Polytheists in this Life and the Hereafter\n\nIn these Ayat, Allah mentions the condition of the polytheists in this life and their destination in the Hereafter. They appointed equals and rivals with Allah, worshipping them along with Allah and loving them, just as they love Allah. However, Allah is the only deity worthy of worship, Who has neither rival nor opponent nor partner. It is reported in the Sahihayn that 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud said: I said, \"O Messenger of Allah! What is the greatest sin?\" He said:\nأَنْ تَجْعَلَ للهِ نِدًّا وَهُوَ خَلَقَكَ\n(To appoint a rival to Allah while He Alone has created you.)\nAllah said:\nوَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَشَدُّ حُبًّا لِّلَّهِ\n(But those who believe, love Allah more (than anything else))\nBecause these believers love Allah, know His greatness, revere Him, believe in His Oneness, then they do not associate anything or anyone with Him in the worship. Rather, they worship Him Alone, depend on Him and they seek help from Him for each and every need.\nThen, Allah warns those who commit Shirk,\nوَلَوْ يَرَى الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا إِذْ يَرَوْنَ الْعَذَابَ أَنَّ الْقُوَّةَ لِلَّهِ جَمِيعًا\n(If only, those who do wrong could see, when they will see the torment, that all power belongs to Allah.) if these people knew what they will face and the terrible punishment they are to suffer because of their disbelief and Shirk (polytheism), then they would shun the deviation that they live by.\nAllah mentions their false beliefs in their idols, and that those they followed will declare their innocence of them. Allah said:\nإِذْ تَبَرَّأَ الَّذِينَ اتُّبِعُوا مِنَ الَّذِينَ اتَّبَعُوا\n(When those who were followed disown (declare themselves innocent of) those who followed (them).) the angels, whom they used to claim that they worshipped, declare their innocence of them in the Hereafter, saying:\nتَبَرَّأْنَا إِلَيْكَ مَا كَانُوا إِيَّانَا يَعْبُدُونَ\n(We declare our innocence (from them) before You. It was not us they worshipped.)(28:63), and:\nسُبْحَانَكَ أَنتَ وَلِيُّنَا مِن دُونِهِم بَلْ كَانُوا يَعْبُدُونَ الْجِنَّ أَكْثَرُهُم بِهِم مُّؤْمِنُونَ\n(\"Glorified be You! You are our Wali (Lord) instead of them. Nay, but they used to worship the Jinn; most of them were believers in them.\")(34:41)\nThe Jinn will also disown the disbelievers who worshipped them, and they will reject that worship. Allah said:\nوَمَنْ أَضَلُّ مِمَّن يَدْعُو مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ مَن لَّا يَسْتَجِيبُ لَهُ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ وَهُمْ عَن دُعَائِهِمْ غَافِلُونَ - وَإِذَا حُشِرَ النَّاسُ كَانُوا لَهُمْ أَعْدَاءً وَكَانُوا بِعِبَادَتِهِمْ كَافِرِينَ\n(And who is more astray than one who calls on (invokes) besides Allah, such as will not answer him till the Day of Resurrection, and who are (even) unaware of their calls (invocations) to them? And when mankind are gathered (on the Day of Resurrection), they (false deities) will become their enemies and will deny their worshipping.)(46:5-6) Allah said:\nوَاتَّخَذُوا مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ آلِهَةً لِّيَكُونُوا لَهُمْ عِزًّا - كَلَّا ۚ سَيَكْفُرُونَ بِعِبَادَتِهِمْ وَيَكُونُونَ عَلَيْهِمْ ضِدًّا\n(And they have taken (for worship) alihah (gods) besides Allah, that they might give them honor, power and glory (and also protect them from Allah' punishment). Nay, but they (the so-called gods) will deny their worship of them, and become opponents to them (on the Day of Resurrection).)(19:81-82) Prophet Ibrahim said to his people:\nإِنَّمَا اتَّخَذْتُم مِّن دُونِ اللَّهِ أَوْثَانًا مَّوَدَّةَ بَيْنِكُمْ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا ثُمَّ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ يَكْفُرُ بَعْضُكُم بِبَعْضٍ وَيَلْعَنُ بَعْضُكُم بَعْضًا وَمَأْوَاكُمُ النَّارُ وَمَا لَكُم مِّن نَّاصِرِينَ\n(You have taken (for worship) idols instead of Allah. The love between you is only in the life of this world, but on the Day of Resurrection, you shall disown each other, and curse each other, and your abode will be the Fire, and you shall have no helper.)(29:25) Allah said:\nوَلَوْ تَرَىٰ إِذِ الظَّالِمُونَ مَوْقُوفُونَ عِندَ رَبِّهِمْ يَرْجِعُ بَعْضُهُمْ إِلَىٰ بَعْضٍ الْقَوْلَ يَقُولُ الَّذِينَ اسْتُضْعِفُوا لِلَّذِينَ اسْتَكْبَرُوا لَوْلَا أَنتُمْ لَكُنَّا مُؤْمِنِينَ - قَالَ الَّذِينَ اسْتَكْبَرُوا لِلَّذِينَ اسْتُضْعِفُوا أَنَحْنُ صَدَدْنَاكُمْ عَنِ الْهُدَىٰ بَعْدَ إِذْ جَاءَكُم بَلْ كُنتُم مُّجْرِمِينَ - وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ اسْتُضْعِفُوا لِلَّذِينَ اسْتَكْبَرُوا بَلْ مَكْرُ اللَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ إِذْ تَأْمُرُونَنَا أَن نَّكْفُرَ بِاللَّهِ وَنَجْعَلَ لَهُ أَندَادًا وَأَسَرُّوا النَّدَامَةَ لَمَّا رَأَوُا الْعَذَابَ وَجَعَلْنَا الْأَغْلَالَ فِي أَعْنَاقِ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا هَلْ يُجْزَوْنَ إِلَّا مَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ\n(But if you could see when the Zalimun (polytheists and wrongdoers) will be made to stand before their Lord,how they will cast the (blaming) word one to another! Those who were deemed weak will say to those who were arrogant: \"Had it not been for you, we should certainly have been believers!\" And those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed weak: \"Did we keep you back from guidance after it had come to you? Nay, but you were Mujrimin (polytheists, sinners, disbelievers, criminals).\" Those who were deemed weak will say to those who were arrogant: \"Nay, but it was your plotting by night and day, when you ordered us to disbelieve in Allah and set up rivals to Him!\" And each of them (parties) will conceal their own regrets (for disobeying Allah during this worldly life), when they behold the torment. And We shall put iron collars round the necks of those who disbelieved. Are they requited aught except what they used to do?)(34:31-33) Allah said:\nوَقَالَ الشَّيْطَانُ لَمَّا قُضِيَ الْأَمْرُ إِنَّ اللَّهَ وَعَدَكُمْ وَعْدَ الْحَقِّ وَوَعَدتُّكُمْ فَأَخْلَفْتُكُمْ وَمَا كَانَ لِيَ عَلَيْكُم مِّن سُلْطَانٍ إِلَّا أَن دَعَوْتُكُمْ فَاسْتَجَبْتُمْ لِي فَلَا تَلُومُونِي وَلُومُوا أَنفُسَكُم مَّا أَنَا بِمُصْرِخِكُمْ وَمَا أَنتُم بِمُصْرِخِيَّ إِنِّي كَفَرْتُ بِمَا أَشْرَكْتُمُونِ مِن قَبْلُ إِنَّ الظَّالِمِينَ لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ\n(And Shaytan (Satan) will say when the matter has been decided: \"Verily, Allah promised you a promise of truth. And I too promised you, but I betrayed you. I had no authority over you except that I called you, and you responded to me. So blame me not, but blame yourselves. I cannot help you, nor can you help me. I deny your former act in associating me (Satan) as a partner with Allah (by obeying me in the life of the world). Verily, there is a painful torment for the Zalimin (polytheists and wrongdoers).)(14:22)\nAllah then said:\nوَرَأَوُا الْعَذَابَ وَتَقَطَّعَتْ بِهِمُ الْأَسْبَابُ\n(...and they see the torment, then all their relations will be cut off from them.) meaning, when they see Allah's torment, their power and means of salvation are all cut off, and they will have no way of making amends, nor will they find a way of escape from the Fire. 'Ata' reported that Ibn 'Abbas said about:\nوَتَقَطَّعَتْ بِهِمُ الْأَسْبَابُ\n(then all their relations will be cut off from them.) \"meaning the friendship.\" Mujahid reported a similar statement in another narration by Ibn Abu Najih.\nAllah said:\nوَقَالَ الَّذِينَ اتَّبَعُوا لَوْ أَنَّ لَنَا كَرَّةً فَنَتَبَرَّأَ مِنْهُمْ كَمَا تَبَرَّءُوا مِنَّا\n(And those who followed will say: \"If only we had one more chance to return (to the worldly life), we would disown (declare ourselves as innocent from) them as they have disowned (declared themselves as innocent from) us.\")\nThis Ayah means: 'If we only had a chance to go back to the life so that we could disown them (their idols, leaders, etc.) shun their worship, ignore them and worship Allah Alone instead.' But they utter a lie in this regard, because if they were given the chance to go back, they would only return to what they were prohibited from doing, just as Allah said. This is why Allah said:\nكَذَٰلِكَ يُرِيهِمُ اللَّهُ أَعْمَالَهُمْ حَسَرَاتٍ عَلَيْهِمْ\n(Thus Allah will show them their deeds as regrets for them.) meaning, their works will vanish and disappear. Similarly, Allah said:\nوَقَدِمْنَا إِلَىٰ مَا عَمِلُوا مِنْ عَمَلٍ فَجَعَلْنَاهُ هَبَاءً مَّنثُورًا\n(And We shall turn to whatever deeds they (disbelievers, polytheists, sinners) did, and We shall make such deeds as scattered floating particles of dust.)(25:23)\nAllah also said:\nمَّثَلُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِرَبِّهِمْ أَعْمَالُهُمْ كَرَمَادٍ اشْتَدَّتْ بِهِ الرِّيحُ فِي يَوْمٍ عَاصِفٍ\n(The parable of those who disbelieved in their Lord is that their works are as ashes, on which the wind blows furiously on a stormy day.)(14:18), and:\nوَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا أَعْمَالُهُمْ كَسَرَابٍ بِقِيعَةٍ يَحْسَبُهُ الظَّمْآنُ مَاءً\n(As for those who disbelieved, their deeds are like a mirage in a desert. The thirsty one thinks it to be water.)(24:39)\nThis is why Allah said ـ at the end of the Ayah 2:167 above\nوَمَا هُم بِخَارِجِينَ مِنَ النَّارِ\n(And they will never get out of the Fire.)","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=165","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:168","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:168–169","text":"O mankind! Eat of that which is lawful and good on the earth, and follow not the footsteps of Shaytan (Satan). Verily, he is to you an open enemy (168)He (Satan) commands you only what is evil and Fahsha' (sinful), and that you should say about Allah what you know not (169)\n\n## The Order to eat the Lawful Things, and the Prohibition of following the Footsteps of Shaytan\n\nAfter Allah stated that there is no deity worthy of worship except Him and that He Alone created the creation, He stated that He is the Sustainer for all His creation, and He mentioned a favor that He granted them; He has allowed them to eat any of the pure lawful things on the earth that do not cause harm to the body or the mind. He also forbade them from following the footsteps of Shaytan, meaning his ways and methods with which he misguides his followers, like prohibiting the Bahirah (a she-camel whose milk was spared for the idols and nobody was allowed to milk it), or Sa'ibah (a she-camel let loose for free pasture for the idols and nothing was allowed to be carried on it), or a Wasilah (a she-camel set free for idols because it has given birth to a she-camel at its first delivery and then again gives birth to a she-camel at its second delivery), and all of the other things that Shaytan made attractive to them during the time of Jahiliyyah. Muslim recorded 'Iyad bin Himar saying that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said that Allah the Exalted says,\nيَقُولُ اللهُ تَعَالَى:إِنَّ كُلَّ مَالٍ مَنَحْتُهُ عِبَادِي فَهُوَ لَهُمْ حَلَالٌ، - وَفِيهِ - وَإِنِّي خَلَقْتُ عِبَادِي حُنَفَاءَ، فَجَاءَتْهُمُ الشَّيَاطِينُ فَاجْتَالَتْهُمْ عَنْ دِينِهِمْ، وَحَرَّمَتْ عَلَيْهِمْ مَا أَحْلَلْتُ لَهُم\n('Every type of wealth I have endowed My servants is allowed for them...' (until), 'I have created My servants Hunafa' (pure or upright), but the devils came to them and led them astray from their (true) religion and prohibited them from what I allowed for them. ')\nAllah said:\nإِنَّهُ لَكُمْ عَدُوٌّ مُّبِينٌ\n(...he is to you an open enemy.)\nwarning against Satan. Allah said in another instance:\nإِنَّ الشَّيْطَانَ لَكُمْ عَدُوٌّ فَاتَّخِذُوهُ عَدُوًّا إِنَّمَا يَدْعُو حِزْبَهُ لِيَكُونُوا مِنْ أَصْحَابِ السَّعِيرِ\n(Surely, Shaytan is an enemy to you, so take (treat) him as an enemy. He only invites his Hizb (followers) that they may become the dwellers of the blazing Fire.)(35:6), and:\nأَفَتَتَّخِذُونَهُ وَذُرِّيَّتَهُ أَوْلِيَاءَ مِن دُونِي وَهُمْ لَكُمْ عَدُوٌّ بِئْسَ لِلظَّالِمِينَ بَدَلًا\n(Will you then take him (Iblis) and his offspring as protectors and helpers rather than Me while they are enemies to you? What an evil is the exchange for the Zalimin (polytheists, and wrongdoers, etc).)(18:50)\nQatadah and As-Suddi commented on what Allah said:\nوَلَا تَتَّبِعُوا خُطُوَاتِ الشَّيْطَانِ\n(...and follow not the footsteps of Shaytan (Satan)):\nEvery act of disobedience to Allah is among the footsteps of Satan.\nAbd bin Humayd reported that Ibn 'Abbas said: \"Any vow or oath that one makes while angry, is among the footsteps of Shaytan and its expiation is that of the vow. \" Allah's statement:\nإِنَّمَا يَأْمُرُكُم بِالسُّوءِ وَالْفَحْشَاءِ وَأَن تَقُولُوا عَلَى اللَّهِ مَا لَا تَعْلَمُونَ\n(He (Satan) commands you only what is evil and Fahsha (sinful), and that you should say about Allah what you know not.)\nThe verse means: 'Your enemy, Satan, commands you to commit evil acts and what is worse than that, such as adultery and so forth. He commands you to commit what is even worse, that is, saying about Allah without knowledge.' So this includes every innovator and disbeliever.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=168","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:170","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:170–171","text":"And the example of those who disbelieve is as that of him who shouts to those (flock of sheep) that hear nothing but calls and cries. (They are) deaf, dumb and blind. So they do not understand (170)\n\n## The Polytheist imitates Other Polytheists\n\nAllah states that if the disbelievers and polytheists are called to follow what Allah has revealed to His Messenger ﷺ and abandon the practices of misguidance and ignorance that they indulge in, they will say, \"Rather. We shall follow what we found our fathers following,\" meaning, worshipping the idols and the false deities. Allah criticized their reasoning:\nأَوَلَوْ كَانَ آبَاؤُهُمْ\n((Would they do that!) even though their fathers), meaning, those whom they follow and whose practices they imitate, and:\nلَا يَعْقِلُونَ شَيْئًا وَلَا يَهْتَدُونَ\n(...did not understand anything nor were they guided?) meaning, they had no sound understanding or guidance. Ibn Ishaq reported that Ibn 'Abbas said that this was revealed about a group of Jews whom Allah's Messenger ﷺ called to Islam, but they refused, saying, \"Rather, we shall follow what we found our forefathers following.\" So Allah revealed this Ayah (2:170) above.\"\n\n## The Disbeliever is just like an Animal\n\nAllah then made a parable of the disbelievers, just as He said in another Ayah:\nلِلَّذِينَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالْآخِرَةِ مَثَلُ السَّوْءِ\n(For those who believe not in the Hereafter is an evil description.)(16:60)\nSimilarly, Allah said here (2:171 above)\nوَمَثَلُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا\n(And the example of those who disbelieve...) meaning, in their injustice, misguidance and ignorance, they are just like wandering animals, not understanding what they are told; if the shepherd heralds them or calls them to what benefits them, they would not understand what is actually being said to them, for they only hear unintelligible sounds. This is what is reported from Ibn 'Abbas, Abu Al-'Aliyah, Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, 'Ata', Al-Hasan, Qatadah, 'Ata' Al-Khurasani and Ar-Rabi' bin Anas.\nصُمٌّ بُكْمٌ عُمْيٌ\n(They are deaf, dumb, and blind.) means, they are deaf, as they do not hear the truth; mute, as they do not utter it; and blind, as they do not see or recognize its path and way.\nفَهُمْ لَا يَعْقِلُونَ\n(So they do not understand.) means, they do not comprehend or understand anything.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=170","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:172","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:172–173","text":"O you who believe (in the Oneness of Allah ـ Islamic Monotheism)! Eat of the lawful things that We have provided you with, and be grateful to Allah, if it is indeed He Whom you worship (172)He has forbidden you only the Maitah (dead animals), and blood, and the flesh of swine, and that which is slaughtered as a sacrifice for other than Allah. But if one is forced by necessity without willful disobedience nor transgressing due limits, then there is no sin on him. Truly, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful (173)\n\n## The Command to eat Pure Things and the Explanation of the Prohibited Things\n\nAllah commands His believing servants to eat from the pure things that He has created for them and to thank Him for it, if they are truly His servants. Eating from pure sources is a cause for the acceptance of supplications and acts of worship, just as eating from impure sources prevents the acceptance of supplications and acts of worship, as mentioned in a Hadith recorded by Imam Ahmad, that Abu Hurayrah said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nأَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّ اللهَ طَيِّبٌ، لَا يَقْبَلُ إِلَّا طَيِّـبًا، وَإنَّ اللهَ أَمَرَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ بِمَا أَمَرَ بِهِ الْمُرْسَلِينَ، فَقَالَ:\nيَا أَيُّهَا الرُّسُلُ كُلُوا مِنَ الطَّيِّبَاتِ وَاعْمَلُوا صَالِحًا إِنِّي بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ عَلِيمٌ\nوَقَالَ:\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا كُلُوا مِن طَيِّبَاتِ مَا رَزَقْنَاكُمْ\nثُمَّ ذَكَرَ الرَّجُلَ يُطِيلُ السَّفَرَ أَشْعَثَ أَغْبَرَ يَمُدُّ يَدَيْهِ إِلَى السَّمَاءِ: يَا رَبِّ يَا رَبِّ، وَمَطْعَمُهُ حَرَامٌ، وَمَشْرَبُهُ حَرَامٌ، وَملْبَسُهُ حَرَامٌ، وَغُذِّيَ بالْحَرَامِ فَأَنَّى يُسْتَجَابُ لِذٰلِكَ؟\n(O people! Allah is Tayyib (Pure and Good) and only accepts that which is Tayyib. Allah has indeed commanded the believers with what He has commanded the Messengers, for He said: (O (you) Messengers! Eat of the Tayyibat and do righteous deeds. Verily, I am well-acquainted with what you do)(23:51), and: (O you who believe! Eat of the lawful things that We have provided you with)(2:172) He then mentioned a man, (who is engaged in a long journey, whose hair is untidy and who is covered in dust, he raises his hands to the sky, and says, 'O Lord! O Lord!' Yet, his food is from the unlawful, his drink is from the unlawful, his clothes are from the unlawful, and he was nourished by the unlawful, so how can it (his supplication) be accepted?\") It was also recorded by Muslim and At-Tirmidhi\nAfter Allah mentioned how He has blessed His creatures by providing them with provisions, and after commanding them to eat from the pure things that He has provided them, He then stated that He has not prohibited anything for them, except dead animals. Dead animals are those that die before being slaughtered; whether they die by strangling, a violent blow, a headlong fall, the goring of horns or by being partly eaten by a wild animal. Dead animals of the sea are excluded from this ruling, as is explained later, Allah willing, as Allah said:\nأُحِلَّ لَكُمْ صَيْدُ الْبَحْرِ وَطَعَامُهُ\n(Lawful to you is (the pursuit of) watergame and its use for food)(5:96), and because of the Hadith about the whale recorded in the Sahih. The Musnad, Al-Muwatta' and the Sunan recorded the Prophet ﷺ saying about the sea:\nهُوَ الطَّهُورُ مَاؤُهُ والْحِلُّ مَيْتَتُهُ\n(Its water is pure and its dead are permissible.)\nAsh-Shafi'i, Ahmad, Ibn Majah, and Ad-Daraqutni reported that Ibn 'Umar said that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nأُحِلَّ لَنَا مَيْتتَانِ وَدَمَانِ، السَّمَكُ وَالْجَرَادُ وَالْكَبِدُ وَالطِّحَالُ\n(We have been allowed two dead things and two bloody things: fish and locusts; and liver and spleen).\nWe will mention this subject again in Surat Al-Ma'idah (chapter 5 in the Qur'an), In sha' Allah (if Allah wills).\nIssue: According to Ash-Shafi'i and other scholars, milk and eggs that are inside dead unslaughtered animals are not pure, because they are part of the dead animal. In one narration from him, Malik said that they are pure themselves, but become impure because of their location. Similarly, there is a difference of opinion over the cheeses (made with the milk) of dead animals. The popular view of the scholars is that it is impure, although they mentioned the fact that the Companions ate from the cheeses made by the Magians (fire worshippers). Hence, Al-Qurtubi commented: \"Since only a small part of the dead animal is mixed with it, then it is permissible, because a minute amount of impurity does not matter if it is mixed with a large amount of liquid.\" Ibn Majah reported that Salman said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ was asked about butter, cheese and fur. He said:\nالْحَلَالُ مَا أَحَلَّ اللهُ فِي كِتَابِهِ، وَالْحَرَامُ مَا حَرَّمَ اللهُ فِي كِتَابِهِ، وَمَا سَكَتَ عَنْهُ فَهُوَ مِمَّا عَفَا عَنْهُ\n(The allowed is what Allah has allowed in His Book and the prohibited is what Allah has prohibited in His Book. What He has not mentioned is a part of what He has pardoned.)\nAllah has prohibited eating the meat of swine, whether slaughtered or not, and this includes its fat, either because it is implied, or because the term Lahm includes that, or by analogy. Similarly prohibited are offerings to other than Allah, that is what was slaughtered in a name other than His, be it for monuments, idols, divination, or the other practices of the time of Jahiliyyah. Al-Qurtubi mentioned that 'A'ishah was asked about what non-Muslims slaughter for their feasts and then offer some of it as gifts for Muslims. She said, \"Do not eat from what has been slaughtered for that day, (or feast) but eat from their vegetables.\"\n\n## The Prohibited is Allowed in Cases of Emergency\n\nThen Allah permitted eating these things when needed for survival or when there are no permissible types of food available. Allah said:\nفَمَنِ اضْطُرَّ غَيْرَ بَاغٍ وَلَا عَادٍ\n(But if one is forced by necessity without willful disobedience nor transgressing due limits), meaning, without transgression or overstepping the limits,\nفَلَا إِثْمَ عَلَيْهِ\n(...then there is no sin on him.) meaning, if one eats such items, for,\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ\n(Truly, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.)\nMujahid said, \"If one is forced by necessity without willful disobedience nor transgressing the set limits. For example, if he didn't, then he would have to resort to highway robbery, rising against the rulers, or some other kinds of disobedience to Allah, then the permission applies to him. If one does so transgressing the limits, or continually, or out of disobedience to Allah, then the permission does not apply to him even if he is in dire need.\" The same was reported from Sa'id bin Jubayr. Sa'id and Muqatil bin Hayyan are reported to have said that without willful disobedience means, \"Without believing that it is permissible.\" It was reported that Ibn 'Abbas commented on the Ayah:\nغَيْرَ بَاغٍ وَلَا عَادٍ\n(...without willful disobedience nor transgressing) saying, \"Without willful disobedience means eating the dead animal and not continuing to do so. Qatadah said:\nغَيْرَ بَاغٍ\n(without willful disobedience) \"Without transgressing by eating from the dead animals, that is when the lawful is available.\"\nIssue: When one in dire straits finds both ـ dead animals, and foods belong to other people which he could get without risking the loss of his hands or causing harm, then it is not allowed for him to eat the dead animals. Ibn Majah reported that 'Abbad bin Shurahbil Al-Ghubari said, \"One year we suffered from famine. I came to Al-Madinah and entered a garden. I took some grain that I cleaned, and ate, then I left some of it in my garment. The owner of the garden came, roughed me up and took possession of my garment. I then went to Allah's Messenger ﷺ and told him what had happened. He said to the man:\nمَا أَطْعَمْتَهُ إِذْ كَانَ جَائِعًا - أَوْ سَاغِبًا - وَلَا عَلَّمْتَهُ إِذْ كَانَ جَاهِلًا\nفَأَمَرَهُ فَرَدَّ إِلَيْهِ ثَوْبَهُ، فَأمَرَ لَهُ بِوَسْقٍ مِنْ طَعَامٍ أَوْ نِصْفِ وَسْقٍ.\n(You have not fed him when he was hungry - or he said starving - nor have you taught him if he was ignorant.)\nThe Prophet ﷺ commanded him to return 'Abbad's garment to him, and to offer him a Wasq (around 180 kilograms) - or a half Wasq - of food\nThis has a sufficiently strong chain of narrators and there are many other witnessing narrations to support it, such as the Hadith that 'Amr bin Shu'ayb narrated from his father that his grandfather said: Allah's Messenger ﷺ was asked about the hanging clusters of dates. He said:\nمَنْ أَصَابَ مِنْهُ مِنْ ذِي حَاجَةٍ بِفِيهِ غَيْرَ مُتَّخِذٍ خُبْنَةً، فَلَا شَيْءَ عَلَيْهِ\n(There is no harm for whoever takes some of it in his mouth for a necessity without putting it in his garment.)\nMuqatil bin Hayyan commented on:\nفَلَا إِثْمَ عَلَيْهِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ\n(...then there is no sin on him. Truly, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.) \"For what is eaten out of necessity.\" Sa'id bin Jubayr said, \"Allah is pardoning for what has been eaten of the unlawful, and Merciful' in that He allowed the prohibited during times of necessity.\" Masruq said, \"Whoever is in dire need, but does not eat or drink until he dies, he will enter the Fire.\" This indicates that eating dead animals for those who are in need of it for survival is not only permissible but required.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=172","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:174","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:174–176","text":"Verily, those who conceal what Allah has sent down of the Book, and purchase a small gain therewith (of worldly things), they eat into their bellies nothing but fire. Allah will not speak to them on the Day of Resurrection, nor purify them, and theirs will be a painful torment (174)Those are they who have purchased error at the price of guidance, and torment at the price of forgiveness. So how bold they are (for evil deeds which will push them) to the Fire (175)That is because Allah has sent down the Book (the Qur'an) in truth. And verily, those who disputed as regards the Book are far away in opposition (176)\n\n## Criticizing the Jews for concealing what Allah revealed\n\nAllah said:\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَكْتُمُونَ مَا أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ مِنَ الْكِتَابِ\n(Verily, those who conceal what Allah has sent down of the Book.) Meaning the Jews who concealed their Book's descriptions of Muhammad ﷺ, all of which testify to his truth as a Messenger and a Prophet. They concealed this information so that they would not lose authority and the position that they had with the Arabs, where they would bring them gifts, and honor them. The cursed Jews feared that if they announced what they know about Muhammad ﷺ, then the people would abandon them and follow him. So they hid the truth so that they may retain the little that they were getting, and they sold their souls for this little profit. They preferred the little that they gained over guidance and following the truth, believing in the Messenger ﷺ and having faith in what Allah was sent him with. Therefore, they have profited failure and loss in this life and the Hereafter.\nAs for this world, Allah made the truth about His Messenger ﷺ known anyway, by the clear signs and the unequivocal proofs. Thereafter, those whom the Jews feared would follow the Prophet ﷺ, believed in him and followed him anyway, and so they became his supporters against them. Thus, the Jews earned anger on top of the wrath that they already had earned before, and Allah criticized them again many times in His Book. For instance, Allah said in this Ayah (2:174 above):\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَكْتُمُونَ مَا أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ مِنَ الْكِتَابِ وَيَشْتَرُونَ بِهِ ثَمَنًا قَلِيلًا\n(Verily, those who conceal what Allah has sent down of the Book, and purchase a small gain therewith (of worldly things).) meaning, the joys and delights of this earthly life. Allah said:\nأُولَٰئِكَ مَا يَأْكُلُونَ فِي بُطُونِهِمْ إِلَّا النَّارَ\n(...they eat into their bellies nothing but fire,) meaning, whatever they eat in return for hiding the truth, will turn into a raging fire in their stomachs on the Day of Resurrection.\nSimilarly, Allah said:\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَأْكُلُونَ أَمْوَالَ الْيَتَامَىٰ ظُلْمًا إِنَّمَا يَأْكُلُونَ فِي بُطُونِهِمْ نَارًا وَسَيَصْلَوْنَ سَعِيرًا\n(Verily, those who unjustly eat up the property of orphans, they eat up only fire into their bellies, and they will be burnt in the blazing Fire!)(4:10)\nAlso, reported in an authentic Hadith is that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nالَّذِي يَأْكُلُ أَوْ يَشْرَبُ فِي آنِيةِ الذَّهَبِ وَالْفِضَّةِ إنَّمَا يُجَرْجِرُ فِي بَطْنِهِ نَارَ جَهَنَّمَ\n(Those who eat or drink in golden or silver plates are filling their stomachs with the fire of Jahannam (Hell).)\nAllah said:\nوَلَا يُكَلِّمُهُمُ اللَّهُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ وَلَا يُزَكِّيهِمْ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ\n(Allah will not speak to them on the Day of Resurrection, nor purify them, and theirs will be a painful torment.)\nThis is because Allah is furious with them for concealing the truth. They thus deserve Allah's anger, so Allah will not look at them or purify them, meaning that He will not praise them but will cause them to taste a severe torment. Then, Allah said about them:\nأُولَٰئِكَ الَّذِينَ اشْتَرَوُا الضَّلَالَةَ بِالْهُدَىٰ\n(Those are they who have purchased error for guidance.)\nHence, they opposed the guidance, that is, not announcing the Prophet's description they find in their Books, the news about his prophecy and the good news of his coming which the previous Prophets proclaimed, as well as following and believing in him. Instead, they preferred misguidance by denying him, rejecting him and concealing his descriptions that were mentioned in their Books. Allah said:\nوَالْعَذَابَ بِالْمَغْفِرَةِ\n(...and torment at the price of forgiveness,) meaning, they preferred torment over forgiveness due to the sins they have committed. Allah then said:\nفَمَا أَصْبَرَهُمْ عَلَى النَّارِ\n(So how bold they are (for evil deeds which will push them) to the Fire.)\nAllah states that they will suffer such severe, painful torment that those who see them will be amazed at how they could bear the tremendous punishment, torture and pain that they will suffer. We seek refuge with Allah from this evil end. Allah's Statement:\nذَٰلِكَ بِأَنَّ اللَّهَ نَزَّلَ الْكِتَابَ بِالْحَقِّ\n(That is because Allah has sent down the Book (the Qur'an) in truth.) means, they deserve this painful torment because Allah has revealed Books to His Messenger Muhammad ﷺ, and the Prophets before him, and these revelations bring about truth and expose falsehood. Yet, they took Allah's signs for mockery. Their Books ordered them to announce the truth and to spread the knowledge, but instead, they defied the knowledge and rejected it. This Final Messenger ـ Muhammad ﷺ ـ called them to Allah, commanded them to work righteousness and forbade them from committing evil. Yet, they rejected, denied and defied him and hid the truth that they knew about him. They, thus, mocked the Ayat that Allah revealed to His Messengers, and this is why they deserved the torment and the punishment. This is why Allah said here (2:176):\nذَٰلِكَ بِأَنَّ اللَّهَ نَزَّلَ الْكِتَابَ بِالْحَقِّ وَإِنَّ الَّذِينَ اخْتَلَفُوا فِي الْكِتَابِ لَفِي شِقَاقٍ بَعِيدٍ\n(That is because Allah has sent down the Book (the Qur'an) in truth. And verily, those who disputed about the Book are far away in opposition.)","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=174","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:177","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:177","text":"It is not Birr that you turn your faces towards east and (or) west; but Birr is the one who believes in Allah, the Last Day, the Angels, the Book, the Prophets and gives his wealth, in spite of love for it, to the kinsfolk, to the orphans, and to Al-Masakin (the poor), and to the wayfarer, and to those who ask, and to set servants free, performs As-Salah (Iqamat-As-Salah), and gives the Zakah, and who fulfill their covenant when they make it, and who are patient in extreme poverty and ailment (disease) and at the time of fighting (during the battles). Such are the people of the truth and they are Al-Muttaqun (the pious)(177)\n\n## Al-Birr (Piety, Righteousness)\n\nThis Ayah contains many great wisdoms, encompassing rulings and correct beliefs.\nAs for the explanation of this Ayah, Allah first commanded the believers to face Bayt Al-Maqdis, and then to face the Ka'bah during the prayer. This change was difficult for some of the People of the Book, and even for some Muslims. Then Allah sent revelation which clarified the wisdom behind this command, that is, obedience to Allah, adhering to His commands, facing wherever He commands facing, and implementing whatever He legislates, that is the objective. This is Birr, Taqwa and complete faith. Facing the east or the west does not necessitate righteousness or obedience, unless it is legislated by Allah. This is why Allah said:\nلَّيْسَ الْبِرَّ أَن تُوَلُّوا وُجُوهَكُمْ قِبَلَ الْمَشْرِقِ وَالْمَغْرِبِ وَلَٰكِنَّ الْبِرَّ مَنْ آمَنَ بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الْآخِرِ\n(It is not Birr that you turn your faces towards east and (or) west (in prayers); but Birr is the one who believes in Allah and the Last Day,)\nSimilarly, Allah said about the sacrifices:\nلَن يَنَالَ اللَّهَ لُحُومُهَا وَلَا دِمَاؤُهَا وَلَٰكِن يَنَالُهُ التَّقْوَىٰ مِنكُمْ\n(It is neither their meat nor their blood that reaches Allah, but it is the piety from you that reaches Him.)(22:37)\nAbu Al-'Aliyah said, \"The Jews used to face the west for their Qiblah, while the Christians used to face the east for their Qiblah. So Allah said:\nلَّيْسَ الْبِرَّ أَن تُوَلُّوا وُجُوهَكُمْ قِبَلَ الْمَشْرِقِ وَالْمَغْرِبِ\n(It is not Birr that you turn your faces towards east and (or) west (in prayers))(2: 177) meaning, \"this is faith, and its essence requires implementation.\" Similar was reported from Al-Hasan and Ar-Rabi' bin Anas. Ath-Thawri recited:\nوَلَٰكِنَّ الْبِرَّ مَنْ آمَنَ بِاللَّهِ\n(but Birr is the one who believes in Allah,) and said that what follows are the types of Birr. He has said the truth. Certainly, those who acquire the qualities mentioned in the Ayah will have indeed embraced all aspects of Islam and implemented all types of righteousness; believing in Allah, that He is the only God worthy of worship, and believing in the angels the emissaries between Allah and His Messengers.\nThe 'Books' are the Divinely revealed Books from Allah to the Prophets, which were finalized by the most honorable Book (the Qur'an). The Qur'an supercedes all previous Books, it mentions all types of righteousness, and the way to happiness in this life and the Hereafter. The Qur'an abrogates all previous Books and testfies to all of Allah's Prophets, from the first Prophet to the Final Prophet, Muhammad, may Allah's peace and blessings be upon them all.\nAllah's statement:\nوَآتَى الْمَالَ عَلَىٰ حُبِّهِ\n(...and gives his wealth, in spite of love for it,) refers to those who give money away while desiring it and loving it. It is recorded in the Sahihayn that Abu Hurayrah narrated that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nأَفْضَلُ الصَّدَقةِ أَنْ تَصَدَّقَ وَأَنْتَ صَحِيحٌ شَحِيحٌ، تَأْمُلُ الْغِنَى وتَخْشَى الْفقْرَ\n(The best charity is when you give it away while still healthy and thrifty, hoping to get rich and fearing poverty.)\nAllah said:\nوَيُطْعِمُونَ الطَّعَامَ عَلَىٰ حُبِّهِ مِسْكِينًا وَيَتِيمًا وَأَسِيرًا - إِنَّمَا نُطْعِمُكُمْ لِوَجْهِ اللَّهِ لَا نُرِيدُ مِنكُمْ جَزَاءً وَلَا شُكُورًا\n(And they give food, inspite of their love for it, to the Miskin (the poor), the orphan, and the captive (saying): \"We feed you seeking Allah's Face only. We wish for no reward, nor thanks from you.\")(76:8-9)\nand:\nلَن تَنَالُوا الْبِرَّ حَتَّىٰ تُنفِقُوا مِمَّا تُحِبُّونَ\n(By no means shall you attain Birr unless you spend of that which you love.)(3:92) Allah's statement:\nوَيُؤْثِرُونَ عَلَىٰ أَنفُسِهِمْ وَلَوْ كَانَ بِهِمْ خَصَاصَةٌ\n(...and give them preference over themselves even though they were in need of that)(59:9) refers to a higher category and status, as the people mentioned here give away what they need, while those mentioned in the previous Ayat give away what they covet (but not necessarily need).\nAllah's statement:\nذَوِي الْقُرْبَىٰ\n(the kinsfolk) refers to man's relatives, who have more rights than anyone else to one's charity, as the Hadith supports:\nالصَّدَقَةُ عَلَى الْمَسَاكِينِ صَدَقَةٌ، وعَلَى ذِي الرَّحِمِ اثْنتَانِ: صَدَقَةٌ وَصِلَـةٌ، فَهُمْ أَوْلَى النَّاسِ بِكَ وَبِبِرِّكَ وَإِعْطَائِكَ\n(Sadaqah (i. e., charity) given to the poor is a charity, while the Sadaqah given to the relatives is both Sadaqah and Silah (nurturing relations), for they are the most deserving of you and your kindness and charity).\nAllah has commanded kindness to the relatives in many places in the Qur'an.\nوَالْيَتَامَىٰ\n(to the orphans) The orphans are children who have none to look after them, having lost their fathers while they are still young, weak and unable to find their own sustenance since they have not reached the age of work and adolescence. 'Abdur-Razzaq reported that 'Ali said that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nوَالْمَسَاكِينَ\n(and to Al-Masakin) The Miskin is the person who does not have enough food, clothing, or he has no dwelling. So the Miskin should be granted the provisions to sustain him enough so that he can acquire his needs. In the Sahihayn it is recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nلَيْسَ الْمِسْكِينُ بِـهٰذَا الطَّوَّافِ الَّذِي تَرُدُّه التَّمْرَةُ والتَّمْرَتَانِ، واللُّقْمَةُ واللُّقْمَتَانِ، وَلٰكِنِ الْمِسْكِينُ الَّذِي لَا يَجِدُ غِنىً يُغْنِيه وَلَا يُفْطَنُ لَهُ فَيُتصَدَّقَ عَلَيْهِ\n(The Miskin is not the person who roams around, and whose need is met by one or two dates or one or two bites. Rather, the Miskin is he who does not have what is sufficient, and to whom the people do not pay attention and, thus, do not give him from the charity.)\nوَابْنَ السَّبِيلِ\n(and to the wayfarer) is the needy traveler who runs out of money and should, thus, be granted whatever amount that helps him to go back to his land. Such is the case with whoever intends to go on a permissible journey, he is given what he needs for his journey and back. The guests are included in this category. 'Ali bin Abu Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Ibn As-Sabil (wayfarer) is the guest who is hosted by Muslims.\" Furthermore, Mujahid, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Abu Ja'far Al-Baqir, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak, Az-Zuhri, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas and Muqatil bin Hayyan said similarly.\nوَالسَّائِلِينَ\n(and to those who ask) refers to those who beg people and are thus given a part of the Zakah and general charity.\nوَفِي الرِّقَابِ\n(and to set servants free) These are the servants who seek to free themselves, but cannot find enough money to buy their freedom. We will mention several of these categories and types under the Tafsir of the Ayah on Sadaqah in Surat Bara'ah [chapter 9 in the Qur'an], In sha' Allah.\nAllah's statement:\nوَأَقَامَ الصَّلَاةَ\n(performs As-Salah (Iqamat-As-Salah)) means those who pray on time and give the prayer its due right; the bowing, prostration, and the necessary attention and humbleness required by Allah. Allah's statement:\nوَآتَى الزَّكَاةَ\n(and gives the Zakah) means the required charity (Zakah) due on one's money, as Sa'id bin Jubayr and Muqatil bin Hayyan have stated.\nAllah's statement:\nوَالْمُوفُونَ بِعَهْدِهِمْ إِذَا عَاهَدُوا\n(and who fulfill their covenant when they make it,)\nis similar to:\nالَّذِينَ يُوفُونَ بِعَهْدِ اللَّهِ وَلَا يَنقُضُونَ الْمِيثَاقَ\n(Those who fulfill the covenant of Allah and break not the Mithaq (bond, treaty, covenant).)(13:20)\nThe opposite of this characteristic is hypocrisy. As found in a Hadith:\nآيَةُ الْمُنَافِقِ ثَلَاثٌ: إِذَا حَدَّثَ كَذَبَ، وَإذَا وَعَدَ أَخْلَفَ، وَإذَا ائْتُمِنَ خَانَ\n(The signs of a hypocrite are three: if he speaks, he lies; if he promises, he breaks his promise; and if he is entrusted, he breaches the trust.)\nIn another version:\nإِذَا حَدَّثَ كَذَبَ، وَإذَا عَاهَدَ غَدَرَ، وَإذَا خَاصَمَ فَجَرَ\n(If he speaks, he lies; if he vows, he breaks his vow; and if he disputes, he is lewd.)\nAllah's statement:\nوَالصَّابِرِينَ فِي الْبَأْسَاءِ وَالضَّرَّاءِ وَحِينَ الْبَأْسِ\n(...and who are patient in extreme poverty and ailment (disease) and at the time of fighting (during the battles).) means, during the time of meekness and ailment.\nوَحِينَ الْبَأْسِ\n(...and at the time of fighting (during the battles).) means on the battlefield while facing the enemy, as Ibn Mas'ud, Ibn 'Abbas, Abu Al-'Aliyah, Murrah Al-Hamdani, Mujahid, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, As-Suddi, Muqatil bin Hayyan, Abu Malik, Ad-Dahhak and others have stated.\nAnd calling them the patient here, is a form of praise, because of the importance of patience in these circumstances, and the suffering and difficulties that accompany them. And Allah knows best, it is He Whom help is sought from, and upon Him we rely.\nAllah's statement:\nأُولَٰئِكَ الَّذِينَ صَدَقُوا\n(Such are the people of the truth) means, whoever acquires these qualities, these are truthful in their faith. This is because they have achieved faith in the heart and realized it in deed and upon the tongue. So they are the truthful,\nوَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْمُتَّقُونَ\n(and they are Al-Muttaqun (the pious).) because they avoided the prohibitions and performed the acts of obedience.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=177","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:178","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:178–179","text":"O you who believe! Al-Qisas (the Law of equality) is prescribed for you in case of murder: the free for the free, the slave for the slave, and the female for the female. But if the killer is forgiven by the brother (or the relatives) of the killed (against blood money), then it should be sought in a good manner, and paid to him respectfully. This is an alleviation and a mercy from your Lord. So after this, whoever transgresses the limits (i.e. kills the killer after taking the blood money), he shall have a painful torment (178)And there is (a saving of) life for you in Al-Qisas (the Law of equality in punishment), O men of understanding, that you may acquire Taqwa (179)\n\n## The Command and the Wisdom behind the Law of Equality\n\nAllah states: O believers! The Law of equality has been ordained on you (for cases of murder), the free for the free, the slave for the slave and the female for the female. Therefore, do not transgress the set limits, as others before you transgressed them, and thus changed what Allah has ordained for them. The reason behind this statement is that (the Jewish tribe of) Banu An-Nadir invaded Qurayzah (another Jewish tribe) during the time of Jahiliyyah (before Islam) and defeated them. Hence, (they made it a law that) when a person from Nadir kills a person from Quraizah, he is not killed in retaliation, but only pays a hundred Wasq of dates. However, when a person from Quraizah kills a Nadir man, he would be killed for him. If Nadir wanted (to forfeit the execution of the murderer and instead require him) to pay a ransom, the Quraizah man pays two hundred Wasq of dates [double the amount Nadir pays in Diyah (blood money)]. So Allah commanded that justice be observed regarding the penal code, and that the path of the misguided and mischievous persons be avoided, who in disbelief and transgression, defy and alter what Allah has commanded them. Allah said:\nكُتِبَ عَلَيْكُمُ الْقِصَاصُ فِي الْقَتْلَى الْحُرُّ بِالْحُرِّ وَالْعَبْدُ بِالْعَبْدِ وَالْأُنثَىٰ بِالْأُنثَىٰ\n(Al-Qisas (the Law of equality in punishment) is prescribed for you in case of murder: the free for the free, the slave for the slave, and the female for the female.)\nAllah's statement:\nالْحُرُّ بِالْحُرِّ وَالْعَبْدُ بِالْعَبْدِ وَالْأُنثَىٰ بِالْأُنثَىٰ\n(the free for the free, the slave for the slave, and the female for the female.) was abrogated by the statement life for life (5:45). However, the majority of scholars agree that the Muslim is not killed for a disbeliever whom he kills. Al-Bukhari reported that 'Ali narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nوَلَا يُقْتَلُ مُسْلِمٌ بِكَافِرٍ\n(The Muslim is not killed for the disbeliever (whom he kills).)\nNo opinion that opposes this ruling could stand correct, nor is there an authentic Hadith to contradict it. However, Abu Hanifah thought that the Muslim could be killed for a disbeliever, following the general meaning of the Ayah (5:45) in Surat Al-Ma'idah (chapter 5 in the Qur'an).\nThe Four Imams (Abu Hanifah, Malik, Shafi'i and Ahmad) and the majority of scholars stated that the group is killed for one person whom they murder. 'Umar said, about a boy who was killed by seven men, \"If all the residents of San'a' (capital of Yemen today) collaborated on killing him, I would kill them all.\" No opposing opinion was known by the Companions during that time which constitutes a near Ijma' (consensus). There is an opinion attributed to Imam Ahmad that a group of people is not killed for one person whom they kill, and that only one person is killed for one person. Ibn Al-Mundhir also attributed this opinion to Mu'adh, Ibn Az-Zubayr, 'Abdul-Malik bin Marwan, Az-Zuhri, Ibn Sirin and Habib bin Abu Thabit. Allah's statement:\nفَمَنْ عُفِيَ لَهُ مِنْ أَخِيهِ شَيْءٌ فَاتِّبَاعٌ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَأَدَاءٌ إِلَيْهِ بِإِحْسَانٍ\n(But if the killer is forgiven by the brother (or the relatives) of the killed (against blood money), then it should be sought in a good manner, and paid to him respectfully.) refers to accepting blood money (by the relatives of the victim in return for pardoning the killer) in cases of intentional murder. This opinion is attributed to Abu Al-'Aliyah, Abu Sha'tha', Mujahid, Sa'id bin Jubayr, 'Ata' Al-Hasan, Qatadah and Muqatil bin Hayyan. Ad-Dahhak said that Ibn 'Abbas said:\nفَمَنْ عُفِيَ لَهُ مِنْ أَخِيهِ شَيْءٌ\n(But if the killer is forgiven by the brother (or the relatives) of the killed (against blood money)) means the killer is pardoned by his brother (i.e., the relative of the victim) and accepting the Diyah after capital punishment becomes due (against the killer), this is the 'Afw (pardon mentioned in the Ayah).\" Allah's statement:\nفَاتِّبَاعٌ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ\n(...then it should be sought in a good manner,) means, when the relative agrees to take the blood money, he should collect his rightful dues with kindness:\nوَأَدَاءٌ إِلَيْهِ بِإِحْسَانٍ\n(and paid to him respectfully.) means, the killer should accept the terms of settlement without causing further harm or resisting the payment.\nAllah's statement:\nذَٰلِكَ تَخْفِيفٌ مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ وَرَحْمَةٌ\n(This is an alleviation and a mercy from your Lord.) means the legislation that allows you to accept the blood money for intentional murder is an alleviation and a mercy from your Lord. It lightens what was required from those who were before you, either applying capital punishment or forgiving.\nSa'id bin Mansur reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"The Children of Israel were required to apply the Law of equality in murder cases and were not allowed to offer pardons (in return for blood money). Allah said to this Ummah (the Muslim nation):\nكُتِبَ عَلَيْكُمُ الْقِصَاصُ فِي الْقَتْلَى الْحُرُّ بِالْحُرِّ وَالْعَبْدُ بِالْعَبْدِ وَالْأُنثَىٰ بِالْأُنثَىٰ فَمَنْ عُفِيَ لَهُ مِنْ أَخِيهِ شَيْءٌ\n(The Law of equality in punishment is prescribed for you in case of murder: the free for the free, the servant for the servant, and the female for the female. But if the killer is forgiven by the brother (or the relatives) of the killed (against blood money),)\nHence, 'pardoning' or 'forgiving' means accepting blood money in intentional murder cases.\" Ibn Hibban also recorded this in his Sahih. Qatadah said:\nذَٰلِكَ تَخْفِيفٌ مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ\n(This is an alleviation from your Lord)\nAllah had mercy on this Ummah by giving them the Diyah which was not allowed for any nation before it. The People of the Torah (Jews) were allowed to either apply the penal code (for murder, i.e., execution) or to pardon the killer, but they were not allowed to take blood money. The People of the Injil (the Gospel - the Christians) were required to pardon (the killer, but no Diyah was legislated). This Ummah (Muslims) is allowed to apply the penal code (execution) or to pardon and accept the blood money.\" Similar was reported from Sa'id bin Jubayr, Muqatil bin Hayyan and Ar-Rabi' bin Anas.\nAllah's statement:\nفَمَنِ اعْتَدَىٰ بَعْدَ ذَٰلِكَ فَلَهُ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ\n(So after this whoever transgresses the limits, he shall have a painful torment.) means, those who kill in retaliation after taking the Diyah or accepting it, they will suffer a painful and severe torment from Allah. The same was reported from Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, 'Ata' 'Ikrimah, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, As-Suddi and Muqatil bin Hayyan.\n\n## The Benefits and Wisdom of the Law of Equality\n\nAllah's statement:\nوَلَكُمْ فِي الْقِصَاصِ حَيَاةٌ\n(And there is life for you in Al-Qisas) legislating the Law of equality, i.e., killing the murderer, carries great benefits for you. This way, the sanctity of life will be preserved because the killer will refrain from killing, as he will be certain that if he kills, he would be killed. Hence life will be preserved. In previous Books, there is a statement that killing stops further killing! This meaning came in much clearer and eloquent terms in the Qur'an:\nوَلَكُمْ فِي الْقِصَاصِ حَيَاةٌ\n(And there is (a saving of) life for you in Al-Qisas (the Law of equality in punishment).)\nAbu Al-'Aliyah said, \"Allah made the Law of equality a 'life'. Hence, how many a man who thought about killing, but this Law prevented him from killing for fear that he will be killed in turn.\" Similar statements were reported from Mujahid, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Abu Malik, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas and Muqatil bin Hayyan. Allah's statement:\nيَا أُولِي الْأَلْبَابِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَّقُونَ\n(O men of understanding, that you may acquire Taqwa.) means, 'O you who have sound minds, comprehension and understanding! Perhaps by this you will be compelled to refrain from transgressing the prohibitions of Allah and what He considers sinful. ' Taqwa (mentioned in the Ayah) is a word that means doing all acts of obedience and refraining from all prohibitions.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=178","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:180","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:180–182","text":"It is prescribed for you, when death approaches any of you, if he leaves wealth, that he makes a bequest to parents and next of kin, according to reasonable manners. (This is) a duty upon Al-Muttaqin (the pious)(180)Then whoever changes it after hearing it, the sin shall be on those who make the change. Truly, Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower (181)But he who fears from a testator some unjust act or wrongdoing, and thereupon he makes peace between the parties concerned, there shall be no sin on him. Certainly, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful (182)\n\n## Including Parents and Relatives in the Will was later abrogated\n\nThis Ayah contains the command to include parents and relatives in the will, which was obligatory, according to the most correct view, before the Ayah about inheritance was revealed. When the Ayah of inheritance was revealed, this Ayah was abrogated, so fixed shares of the inheritance for deserving recipients were legislated by Allah. Therefore, deserving inheritors take their fixed inheritance without the need to be included in the will or to be reminded of the favor of the inherited person. For this reason we see the Hadith narrated in the Sunan and other books that 'Amr bin Kharijah said: I heard Allah's Messenger ﷺ saying in a speech:\nإِنَّ اللهَ قَدْ أَعْطَى كُلَّ ذِي حَقٍّ حَقَّهُ، فَلَا وَصِيَّــةَ لِوَارِثٍ\n(Allah has given each heir his fixed share. So there is no will for a deserving heir.)\nImam Ahmad recorded that Muhammad bin Sirin said: Ibn 'Abbas recited Surat Al-Baqarah (chapter 2 in the Qur'an) until he reached the Ayah:\nإِن تَرَكَ خَيْرًا الْوَصِيَّةُ لِلْوَالِدَيْنِ وَالْأَقْرَبِينَ\n(...if he leaves wealth, that he makes a bequest to parents and next of kin.)\nHe then said, \"This Ayah was abrogated.\" This was recorded by Sa'id bin Mansur and Al-Hakim in his Mustadrak Al-Hakim Said, \"It is Sahih according to their criteria (Al-Bukhari and Muslim)\". Ibn Abu Hatim reported that Ibn 'Abbas said that Allah's statement:\nالْوَصِيَّةُ لِلْوَالِدَيْنِ وَالْأَقْرَبِينَ\n(a bequest to parents and next of kin)\nwas abrogated by the Ayah:\nلِّلرِّجَالِ نَصِيبٌ مِّمَّا تَرَكَ الْوَالِدَانِ وَالْأَقْرَبُونَ وَلِلنِّسَاءِ نَصِيبٌ مِّمَّا تَرَكَ الْوَالِدَانِ وَالْأَقْرَبُونَ مِمَّا قَلَّ مِنْهُ أَوْ كَثُرَ نَصِيبًا مَّفْرُوضًا\n(There is a share for men and a share for women from what is left by parents and those nearest related, whether the property be small or large ـ a legal share.)(4:7)\nIbn Abu Hatim then said, \"It was reported from Ibn 'Umar, Abu Musa, Sa'id bin Musayyib, Al-Hasan, Mujahid, 'Ata' Sa'id bin Jubayr, Muhammad bin Sirin, 'Ikrimah, Zayd bin Aslam and Ar-Rabi' bin Anas. Qatadah, As-Suddi, Muqatil bin Hayyan, Tawus, Ibrahim An-Nakha'i, Shurayh, Ad-Dahhak and Az-Zuhri said that this Ayah (2:180 above) was abrogated by the Ayah about the inheritors (4:7).\"\n\n## The Will for the Relatives that do not qualify as Inheritors\n\nIt is recommended that the remaining relatives who do not have a designated fixed share of the inheritance, be willed up to a third, due to the general meaning of the Ayah about the will. It is recorded in the Sahihayn that Ibn 'Umar said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nمَا حَقُّ امْرِىءٍ مُسْلِمٍ لَهُ شَيْءٌ يُوصِي فِيه يَبِيتُ لَيْلَتَيْنِ إلَّا وَوَصِيَّتُهُ مَكْتُوبَةٌ عِنْدَهُ\n(It is not permissible for any Muslim who has something to will to stay for two nights without having his last will and testament written and kept ready with him.)\nIbn 'Umar commented, \"Ever since I heard this statement from Allah's Messenger ﷺ, no night has passed, but my will is kept ready with me.\" There are many other Ayat and Ahadith ordering kindness and generosity to one's relatives.\n\n## The Will should observe Justice\n\nThe will should be fair, in that one designates a part of the inheritance to his relatives without committing injustice against his qualified inheritors and without extravagance or stinginess. It is recorded in the Sahihayn that Sa'd bin Abu Waqqas said, \"O Allah's Messenger! I have some money and only a daughter inherits from me, should I will all my remaining property (to others)?\" He said, \"No.\" Sa'd said, \"Then may I will half of it?\" He said, \"No.\" Sa'd said, \"One-third?\" He said, \"Yes, one-third, yet even one-third is too much. It is better for you to leave your inheritors wealthy than to leave them poor, begging from others.\" Al-Bukhari mentioned in his Sahih that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"I recommend that people reduce the proportion of what they bequeath by will to a fourth (of the whole legacy) rather than a third, for Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nالثُّلُثُ وَالثُّلُثُ كَثِيرٌ\n(One-third, yet even one-third is too much.)\"\nAllah's statement:\nفَمَن بَدَّلَهُ بَعْدَمَا سَمِعَهُ فَإِنَّمَا إِثْمُهُ عَلَى الَّذِينَ يُبَدِّلُونَهُ إِنَّ اللَّهَ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ\n(Then whoever changes it after hearing it, the sin shall be on those who make the change. Truly, Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower.) means, whoever changed the will and testament or altered it by addition or deletion, including hiding the will as is obvious, then\nفَإِنَّمَا إِثْمُهُ عَلَى الَّذِينَ يُبَدِّلُونَهُ\n(the sin shall be on those who make the change.)\nIbn 'Abbas and others said, \"The dead person's reward will be preserved for him by Allah, while the sin is acquired by those who change the will.\"\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ\n(Truly, Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower.) means, Allah knows what the dead person has bequeathed and what the beneficiaries (or others) have changed in the will.\nAllah's statement:\nفَمَنْ خَافَ مِن مُّوصٍ جَنَفًا أَوْ إِثْمًا\n(But he who fears from a testator some unjust act or wrongdoing,)\nIbn 'Abbas, Abu Al-'Aliyah, Mujahid, Ad-Dahhak, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas and As-Suddi said, \"Error.\" These errors include such cases as when the inheritor indirectly acquires more than his fair share, such as by being allocated that a certain item mentioned in the legacy be sold to him. Or, the testator might include his daughter's son in the legacy to increase his daughter's share in the inheritance, and so forth. Such errors might occur out of the kindness of the heart without thinking about the consequences of these actions, or by sinful intention. In such cases, the executive of the will and testament is allowed to correct the errors and to replace the unjust items in the will with a better solution, so that both the Islamic law and what the dead person had wished for are respected and observed. This act would not constitute an alteration in the will and this is why Allah mentioned it specifically, so that it is excluded from the prohibition (that prohibits altering the will and testament) mentioned in the previous Ayah. And Allah knows best.\n\n## The Virtue of Fairness in the Will\n\nAbdur-Razzaq reported that Abu Hurayrah said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nإِنَّ الرَّجُلَ لَيَعْمَلُ بِعَمَلِ أَهْلِ الْخَيْرِ سَبْعِينَ سَنَةً، فَإِذَا أَوْصَى حَافَ فِي وَصِيَّتِهِ، فَيُخْتَمُ لَه بِشَرِّ عَمَلِهِ، فَيَدْخُلُ النَّارَ. وَإِنَّ الرَّجُلَ لَيَعْمَلُ بِعَمَلِ أَهْلِ الشَّرِّ سَبْعِينَ سَنَةً، فَيَعْدِلُ فِي وَصِيَّتِهِ، فَيُخْتَمُ لَهُ بِخَيْرِ عَمَلِهِ، فَيَدْخُلُ الْـجَنَّــةَ\n(A man might perform the works of righteous people for seventy years, but when he dictates his will, he commits injustice and thus his works end with the worst of his deeds and he enters the Fire. A man might perform the works of evil people for seventy years, but then dictates a just will and thus ends with the best of his deeds and then enters Paradise.)\nAbu Hurayrah then said, \"Read if you wish:\nتِلْكَ حُدُودُ اللَّهِ فَلَا تَعْتَدُوهَا\n(These are the limits ordained by Allah, so do not transgress them.)\" (2:229)","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=180","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:183","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:183–184","text":"O you who believe! Fasting is prescribed for you as it was prescribed for those before you, that you may acquire Taqwa (183)Fast for a fixed number of days, but if any of you is ill or on a journey, the same number (should be made up) from other days. And as for those who can fast with difficulty, (e.g., an old man), they have (a choice either to fast or) to feed a Miskin (poor person)(for every day). But whoever does good of his own accord, it is better for him. And that you fast is better for you if only you know (184)\n\n## The Order to Fast\n\nIn an address to the believers of this Ummah, Allah ordered them to fast, that is, to abstain from food, drink and sexual activity with the intention of doing so sincerely for Allah the Exalted alone. This is because fasting purifies the souls and cleanses them from the evil that might mix with them and their ill behavior. Allah mentioned that He has ordained fasting for Muslims just as He ordained it for those before them, they being an example for them in that, so they should vigorously perform this obligation more obediently than the previous nations. Similarly, Allah said:\nلِكُلٍّ جَعَلْنَا مِنكُمْ شِرْعَةً وَمِنْهَاجًا وَلَوْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ لَجَعَلَكُمْ أُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً وَلَٰكِن لِّيَبْلُوَكُمْ فِي مَا آتَاكُمْ فَاسْتَبِقُوا الْخَيْرَاتِ\n(To each among you, We have prescribed a law and a clear way. If Allah had willed, He would have made you one nation, but that (He) may test you in what He has given you; so compete in good deeds.)(5:48)\nAllah said in this Ayah:\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا كُتِبَ عَلَيْكُمُ الصِّيَامُ كَمَا كُتِبَ عَلَى الَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَّقُونَ\n(O you who believe! Fasting is prescribed for you as it was prescribed for those before you, that you may have Taqwa).) since the fast cleanses the body and narrows the paths of Shaytan. In the Sahihayn the following Hadith was recorded:\nيَا مَعْشَرَ الشَّبَابِ مَنِ اسْتَطَاعَ مِنْكُمُ الْبَاءَةَ فَلْيتَـزَوَّجْ وَمَنْ لَمْ يَسْتَطِع فَعَلَيْهِ بِالصَّوْمِ فَإِنَّهُ لَهُ وِجَاءٌ\n(O young people! Whoever amongst you can afford marriage, let him marry. Whoever cannot afford it, let him fast, for it will be a shield for him.)\nAllah then states that the fast occurs during a fixed number of days, so that it does not become hard on the hearts, thereby weakening their resolve and endurance.)\n\n## The various Stages of Fasting\n\nAl-Bukhari and Muslim recorded that 'A'ishah said, \"(The day of) 'Ashura' was a day of fasting. When the obligation to fast Ramadan was revealed, those who wished fasted, and those who wished did not.\" Al-Bukhari recorded the same from Ibn 'Umar and Ibn Mas'ud.\nAllah said:\nوَعَلَى الَّذِينَ يُطِيقُونَهُ فِدْيَةٌ طَعَامُ مِسْكِينٍ\n(...those who can fast with difficulty, (e.g., an old man), they have (a choice either to fast or) to feed a Miskin (poor person)(for every day).)\nMu'adh commented, \"In the beginning, those who wished, fasted and those who wished, did not fast and fed a poor person for each day.\" Al-Bukhari recorded Salamah bin Al-Akwa' saying that when the Ayah:\nوَعَلَى الَّذِينَ يُطِيقُونَهُ فِدْيَةٌ طَعَامُ مِسْكِينٍ\n(...those who can fast with difficulty, (e.g., an old man), they have (a choice either to fast or) to feed a Miskin (poor person)(for every day).) was revealed, those who did not wish to fast, used to pay the Fidyah (feeding a poor person for each day they did not fast) until the following Ayah (2:185) was revealed abrogating the previous Ayah. It was also reported from 'Ubaydullah from Nafi' that Ibn 'Umar said; \"It was abrogated.\" As-Suddi reported that Murrah narrated that 'Abdullah said about this Ayah:\nوَعَلَى الَّذِينَ يُطِيقُونَهُ فِدْيَةٌ طَعَامُ مِسْكِينٍ\n(those who can fast with difficulty, (e.g., an old man), they have (a choice either to fast or) to feed a Miskin (poor person)(for every day).) \"It means 'those who find it difficult (to fast).' Formerly, those who wished, fasted and those who wished, did not but fed a poor person instead.\" Allah then said:\nفَمَن تَطَوَّعَ خَيْرًا\n(But whoever does good of his own accord) meaning whoever fed an extra poor person,\nفَهُوَ خَيْرٌ لَّهُ وَأَن تَصُومُوا خَيْرٌ لَّكُمْ\n(it is better for him. And that you fast is better for you) Later the Ayah:\nفَمَن شَهِدَ مِنكُمُ الشَّهْرَ فَلْيَصُمْهُ\n(So whoever of you sights (the crescent on the first night of) the month (of Ramadan, i.e., is present at his home), he must observe Sawm (fasting) that month)(2:185) was revealed and this abrogated the previous Ayah (2:184).\n\n## The Fidyah (Expiation) for breaking the Fast is for the Old and the Ailing\n\nAl-Bukhari reported that 'Ata heard Ibn 'Abbas recite:\nوَعَلَى الَّذِينَ يُطِيقُونَهُ فِدْيَةٌ طَعَامُ مِسْكِينٍ\n(And as for those who can fast with difficulty, (e.g., an old man), they have (a choice either to fast or) to feed a Miskin (poor person)(for every day).)\nIbn 'Abbas then commented, \"(This Ayah) was not abrogated, it is for the old man and the old woman who are able to fast with difficulty, but choose instead to feed a poor person for every day (they do not fast).\" Others reported that Sa'id bin Jubayr mentioned this from Ibn 'Abbas. So the abrogation here applies to the healthy person, who is not traveling and who has to fast, as Allah said:\nفَمَن شَهِدَ مِنكُمُ الشَّهْرَ فَلْيَصُمْهُ\n(So whoever of you sights (the crescent on the first night of) the month (of Ramadan, i.e., is present at his home), he must observe Sawm (fasting) that month.)(2:185)\nAs for the old man (and woman) who cannot fast, he is allowed to abstain from fasting and does not have to fast another day instead, because he is not likely to improve and be able to fast other days. So he is required to pay a Fidyah for every day missed. This is the opinion of Ibn 'Abbas and several others among the Salaf who read the Ayah:\nوَعَلَى الَّذِينَ يُطِيقُونَهُ\n(And as for those who can fast with difficulty, (e.g., an old man)) to mean those who find it difficult to fast as Ibn Mas'ud stated. This is also the opinion of Al-Bukhari who said, \"As for the old man (person) who cannot fast, (he should do like) Anas who, for one or two years after he became old fed some bread and meat to a poor person for each day he did not fast.\"\nThis point, which Al-Bukhari attributed to Anas without a chain of narrators, was collected with a continuous chain of narrators by Abu Ya'la Mawsuli in his Musnad, that Ayyub bin Abu Tamimah said; \"Anas could no longer fast. So he made a plate of Tharid (broth, bread and meat) and invited thirty poor persons and fed them.\" The same ruling applies for the pregnant and breast-feeding women if they fear for themselves or their children or fetuses. In this case, they pay the Fidyah and do not have to fast other days in place of the days that they missed.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=183","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:185","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:185","text":"The month of Ramadan in which was revealed the Qur'an, a guidance for mankind and clear proofs for the guidance and the criterion (between right and wrong). So whoever of you sights (the crescent on the first night of) the month (of Ramadan, i.e., is present at his home), he must observe Sawm (fasting) that month, and whoever is ill or on a journey, the same number [of days which one did not observe Sawm (fasting) must be made up] from other days. Allah intends for you ease, and He does not want to make things difficult for you. (He wants that you) must complete the same number (of days), and that you must magnify Allah [i.e., to say Takbir (Allahu Akbar: Allah is the Most Great)] for having guided you so that you may be grateful to Him (185)\n\n## The Virtue of Ramadan and the Revelation of the Qur'an in it\n\nAllah praised the month of Ramadan out of the other months by choosing it to send down the Glorious Qur'an, just as He did for all of the Divine Books He revealed to the Prophets. Imam Ahmad reported Wathilah bin Al-Asqa' that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nأُنْزِلَتْ صُحُفُ إِبْرَاهِيمَ فِي أَوَّلِ لَيْلَةٍ مِنْ رَمَضَانَ، وَأُنْزِلَتِ التَّوْرَاةُ لِسِتٍّ مَضَيْنَ مِنْ رَمَضَانَ، وَالْإِنْجِيلُ لِثَلاثَ عَشَرةَ خَلَتْ مِنْ رَمَضَانَ، وَأَنْزَلَ اللهُ الْقُرْآنَ لأَرْبَعٍ وَعِشْرِينَ خَلَتْ مِنْ رَمَضَانَ\n(The Suhuf (Pages) of Ibrahim were revealed during the first night of Ramadan. The Torah was revealed during the sixth night of Ramadan. The Injil was revealed during the thirteenth night of Ramadan. Allah revealed the Qur'an on the twenty-fourth night of Ramadan.)\n\n## The Virtues of the Qur'an\n\nAllah said:\nهُدًى لِّلنَّاسِ وَبَيِّنَاتٍ مِّنَ الْهُدَىٰ وَالْفُرْقَانِ\n(...a guidance for mankind and clear proofs for the guidance and the criterion (between right and wrong).)\nHere Allah praised the Qur'an, which He revealed as guidance for the hearts of those who believe in it and adhere to its commands. Allah said:\nوَبَيِّنَاتٍ\n(and clear proofs) meaning, as clear and unambiguous signs and unequivocal proof for those who understand them. These proofs testify to the truth of the Qur'an, its guidance, the opposite of misguidance, and how it guides to the straight path, the opposite of the wrong path, and the distinction between the truth and falsehood, and the permissible and the prohibited.\n\n## The Obligation of Fasting Ramadan\n\nAllah said:\nفَمَن شَهِدَ مِنكُمُ الشَّهْرَ فَلْيَصُمْهُ\n(So whoever of you sights (the crescent on the first night of) the month (of Ramadan, i.e., is present at his home), he must observe Sawm (fasting) that month.)\nThis Ayah requires the healthy persons who witness the beginning of the month, while residing in their land, to fast the month. This Ayah abrogated the Ayah that allows a choice of fasting or paying the Fidyah. When Allah ordered fasting, He again mentioned the permission for the ill person and the traveler to break the fast and to fast other days instead as compensation. Allah said:\nوَمَن كَانَ مَرِيضًا أَوْ عَلَىٰ سَفَرٍ فَعِدَّةٌ مِّنْ أَيَّامٍ أُخَرَ\n(...and whoever is ill or on a journey, the same number [of days which one did not observe Sawm (fasting) must be made up] from other days.)\nThis Ayah indicates that ill persons who are unable to fast or fear harm by fasting, and the traveler, are all allowed to break the fast. When one does not fast in this case, he is obliged to fast other days instead. Allah said:\nيُرِيدُ اللَّهُ بِكُمُ الْيُسْرَ وَلَا يُرِيدُ بِكُمُ الْعُسْرَ\n(Allah intends for you ease, and He does not want to make things difficult for you.)\nThis Ayah indicates that Allah allowed such persons, out of His mercy and to make matters easy for them, to break the fast when they are ill or traveling, while the fast is still obligatory on the healthy persons who are not traveling.\n\n## Several Rulings Concerning the Fast\n\nThe authentic Sunnah states that Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) traveled during the month of Ramadan for the battle for Makkah. The Prophet (ﷺ) marched until he reached the area of Kadid and then broke his fast and ordered those who were with him to do likewise. This was recorded in the Two Sahihs. Breaking the fast mentioned in this Hadith was not required, for the Companions used to go out with Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) during the month of Ramadan, then, some of them would fast while some of them would not fast and neither category would criticize the others. If the command mentioned in the Hadith required breaking the fast, the Prophet ﷺ would have criticized those who fasted. Allah's Messenger ﷺ himself sometimes fasted while traveling. For instance, it is reported in the Two Sahihs that Abu Ad-Darda' said, \"We once went with Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) during Ramadan while the heat was intense. One of us would place his hand on his head because of the intense heat. Only Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) and 'Abdullah bin Rawahah were fasting at that time.\"\nWe should state that observing the permission to break the fast while traveling is better, as Allah's Messenger ﷺ said about fasting while traveling:\nمَنْ أَفْطَرَ فَحَسَنٌ، وَمَنْ صَامَ فَلَا جُنَاحَ عَلَيْهِ\n(Those who did not fast have done good, and there is no harm for those who fasted.)\nIn another Hadith, the Prophet ﷺ said:\nعَلَيْكُمْ بِرُخْصَةِ اللهِ الَّتِي رُخِّصَ لَكُم\n(Hold to Allah's permission that He has granted you.)\nSome scholars say that the two actions are the same, as 'A'ishah narrated that Hamzah bin 'Amr Al-Aslami said, \"O Messenger of Allah! I fast a lot, should I fast while traveling?\" The Prophet ﷺ said:\nإِنْ شِئْتَ فَصُمْ، وَإِنْ شِئْتَ فَأَفْطِر\n(Fast if you wish or do not fast if you wish.)\nThis Hadith is in the Two Sahihs. It was reported that if the fast becomes difficult (while traveling), then breaking the fast is better. Jabir said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ saw a man who was being shaded (by other people while traveling). The Prophet ﷺ asked about him and he was told that man was fasting. The Prophet ﷺ said:\nلَيْسَ مِنَ الْبِرِّ الصِّيَامُ فِي السَّفَرِ\n(It is not a part of Birr (piety) to fast while traveling.) This was recorded by Al-Bukhari and Muslim.\nAs for those who ignore the Sunnah and believe in their hearts that breaking the fast while traveling is disliked, they are required to break the fast and are not allowed to fast.\nAs for making up for missed fasting days, it is not required to be consecutive. One may do so consecutively or not consecutively. There are ample proofs to this fact. We should mention that fasting consecutive days is only required exclusively during Ramadan. After the month of Ramadan, what is required then is to merely make up for missed days. This is why Allah said:\nفَعِدَّةٌ مِّنْ أَيَّامٍ أُخَرَ\n(...the same number (should be made up) from other days.)\n\n## Ease and not Hardship\n\nAllah then said:\nيُرِيدُ اللَّهُ بِكُمُ الْيُسْرَ وَلَا يُرِيدُ بِكُمُ الْعُسْرَ\n(Allah intends for you ease, and He does not want to make things difficult for you.)\nImam Ahmad recorded Anas bin Malik saying that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nيَسِّرُوا وَلَا تُعَسِّرُوا وَسَكِّنُوا وَلَا تُنَفِّرُوا\n(Treat the people with ease and don't be hard on them; give them glad tidings and don't fill them with aversion.)\nThis Hadith was also collected in the Two Sahihs. It is reported in the Sahihayn that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said to Mu'adh and Abu Musa when he sent them to Yemen:\nبَشِّرَا وَلَا تُنَفِّرَا، وَيَسِّرَا وَلَا تُعَسِّرَا، وَتَطَاوَعَا وَلَا تَخْتَلِفَا\n(Treat the people with ease and don't be hard on them; give them glad tidings and don't fill them with aversion; and love each other, and don't differ.)\nThe Sunan and the Musnad compilers recorded that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nبُعِثْتُ بِالْحَنِيفِيَّةِ السَّمْحَةِ\n(I was sent with the easy Hanifiyyah (Islamic Monotheism).)\nAllah's statement:\nيُرِيدُ اللَّهُ بِكُمُ الْيُسْرَ وَلَا يُرِيدُ بِكُمُ الْعُسْرَ وَلِتُكْمِلُوا الْعِدَّةَ\n(Allah intends for you ease, and He does not want to make things difficult for you. (He wants that you) must complete the same number (of days)) means: You were allowed to break the fast while ill, while traveling, and so forth, because Allah wanted to make matters easy for you. He only commanded you to make up for missed days so that you complete the days of one month.\n\n## Remembering Allah upon performing the Acts of Worship\n\nAllah's statement:\nوَلِتُكَبِّرُوا اللَّهَ عَلَىٰ مَا هَدَاكُمْ\n(...and that you must magnify Allah [i.e., to say Takbir (Allahu Akbar: Allah is the Most Great)] for having guided you) means: So that you remember Allah upon finishing the act of worship. This is similar to Allah's statement:\nفَإِذَا قَضَيْتُم مَّنَاسِكَكُمْ فَاذْكُرُوا اللَّهَ كَذِكْرِكُمْ آبَاءَكُمْ أَوْ أَشَدَّ ذِكْرًا\n(So when you have accomplished your Manasik, (rituals) remember Allah as you remember your forefathers or with far more remembrance.)(2:200) and:\nفَإِذَا قُضِيَتِ الصَّلَاةُ فَانتَشِرُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ وَابْتَغُوا مِن فَضْلِ اللَّهِ وَاذْكُرُوا اللَّهَ كَثِيرًا لَّعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ\n(...Then when the (Jumu'ah) Salah (prayer) is ended, you may disperse through the land, and seek the bounty of Allah (by working), and remember Allah much, that you may be successful.)(62:10) and:\nوَسَبِّحْ بِحَمْدِ رَبِّكَ قَبْلَ طُلُوعِ الشَّمْسِ وَقَبْلَ الْغُرُوبِ - وَمِنَ اللَّيْلِ فَسَبِّحْهُ وَأَدْبَارَ السُّجُودِ\n(...and glorify the praises of your Lord, before the rising of the sun and before (its) setting. And during a part of the night, glorify His praises, and after the prayers.)(50:39-40)\nThis is why the Sunnah encouraged Tasbih (saying Subhan Allah, i.e., all praise is due to Allah), Tahmid (saying Al-Hamdu Lillah, i.e., all the thanks are due to Allah) and Takbir (saying Allahu Akbar, i.e., Allah is the Most Great) after the compulsory prayers. Ibn 'Abbas said, \"We used to know that Allah's Messenger ﷺ has finished the prayer by the Takbir.\" Similarly, several scholars have stated that reciting Takbir the during 'Id-ul-Fitr was specified by the Ayah that states:\nوَلِتُكْمِلُوا الْعِدَّةَ وَلِتُكَبِّرُوا اللَّهَ عَلَىٰ مَا هَدَاكُمْ\n((He wants that you) must complete the same number (of days), and that you must magnify Allah [i.e., to say Takbir (Allahu Akbar: Allah is the Most Great)] for having guided you...) Allah's statement:\nوَلَعَلَّكُمْ تَشْكُرُونَ\n(...so that you may be grateful to Him.) means: If you adhere to what Allah commanded you, obeying Him by performing the obligations, abandoning the prohibitions and abiding by the set limits, then perhaps you will be among the grateful.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=185","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:186","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:186","text":"And when My servants ask you (O Muhammad ﷺ concerning Me, then answer them), I am indeed near (to them by My knowledge). I respond to the invocations of the supplicant when he calls on Me (without any mediator or intercessor). So let them obey Me and believe in Me, so that they may be led aright (186)\n\n## Allah hears the Servant's Supplication\n\nImam Ahmad reported that Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari said, \"We were in the company of Allah's Messenger ﷺ during a battle. Whenever we climbed a high place, went up a hill or went down a valley, we used to say, 'Allah is the Most Great,' raising our voices. The Prophet ﷺ came by us and said:\nيَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ، ارْبَعُوا عَلى أَنْفُسِكُمْ، فَإِنَّكُمْ لَا تَدْعُونَ أَصَمَّ ولَا غَائِبًا، إنَّمَا تَدْعُونَ سَمِيعًا بَصِيرًا، إنَّ الَّذي تَدْعُونَ أَقْربُ إِلَى أَحَدِكُمْ مِنْ عُنُقِ رَاحِلَتِهِ، يا عَبْدَ اللهِ بْنَ قَيْسٍ، أَلَا أُعَلِّمُكَ كَلِمَةً مِنْ كُنُوزِ الْجَنَّةِ؟ لَا حَوْلَ وَلَا قُوَّةَ إِلَّا بِاللهِ\n(O people! Be merciful to yourselves (i.e., don't raise your voices), for you are not calling a deaf or an absent one, but One Who is All-Hearer, All-Seer. The One Whom you call is closer to one of you than the neck of his animal. O 'Abdullah bin Qais (Abu Musa's name) should I teach you a statement that is a treasure of Paradise: 'La hawla wa la quwwata illa billah (there is no power or strength except from Allah).')\nThis Hadith was also recorded in the Two Sahihs, and Abu Dawud, An-Nasa'i, At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah recorded similar wordings. Furthermore, Imam Ahmad recorded that Anas said that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nيَقُولُ اللهُ تَعَالى أَنَا عِنْدَ ظَنِّ عَبْدِي بِي وَأَنَا مَعَهُ إِذَا دَعَانِي\n(\"Allah the Exalted said, 'I am as My servant thinks of Me, and I am with him whenever he invokes Me.')\n\n## Allah accepts the Invocation\n\nImam Ahmad also recorded Abu Sa'id saying that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nمَا مِنْ مُسْلِمٍ يَدْعُو اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ بِدَعْوَةٍ لَيْسَ فِيها إِثْمٌ ولَا قَطِيعَةُ رَحِمٍ، إلَّا أَعْطَاهُ اللهُ بِهَا إِحْدَى ثَلَاثِ خِصَالٍ: إِمَّا أَنْ يُعَجِّل لَهُ دَعْوَتَهُ، وَإِمَّا أَنْ يَدَّخِرَهَا لَهُ فِي الأُخْرَى، وَإِمَّا أَنْ يَصْرِفَ عَنْهُ مِنَ السُّوءِ مِثْلَهَا\nقَالُوا: إذًا نُكْثِرُ؟\nقَالَ: اللهُ أَكْثَرُ\n(No Muslim supplicates to Allah with a Du'a that does not involve sin or cutting the relations of the womb, but Allah will grant him one of the three things. He will either hasten the response to his supplication, save it for him until the Hereafter, or would turn an equivalent amount of evil away from him.\") They said, \"What if we were to recite more (Du'a).\" He said, (There is more with Allah.)\nAbdullah the son of Imam Ahmad recorded 'Ubadah bin As-Samit saying that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nمَا عَلى ظَهْرِ الأَرْضِ مِنْ رَجُلٍ مُسْلِمٍ يَدْعُو اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ بَدَعْوَةٍ إِلَّا آتَاهُ اللهُ إيَّاهَا، أَوْ كَفَّ عَنْهُ مِنَ السُّوءِ مِثْلَهَا مَا لَمْ يَدْعُ بِإِثْمٍ أَوْ قَطِيعَةِ رَحِمٍ\n(There is no Muslim man on the face of the earth who supplicates to Allah but Allah would either grant it to him, or avert a harm from him of equal proportions, as long as his supplication does not involve sin or cutting the relations of the womb.) At-Tirmidhi recorded this Hadith.\nImam Malik recorded that Abu Hurayrah narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nيُسْتَجَابُ لأَحَدِكُمْ مَالَمْ يَعْجَلْ، يَقُولُ: دَعَوْتُ فَلَمْ يُسْتَجَبْ لِي\n(One's supplication will be accepted as long as he does become get hasty and say, 'I have supplicated but it has not been accepted from me.\")\nThis Hadith is recorded in the Two Sahihs from Malik, and this is the wording of Al-Bukhari.\nMuslim recorded that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nلا يَزَالُ يُسْتَجابُ لِلْعَبْدِ مَا لَمْ يَدْعُ بِإِثْم أَوْ قَطِيعَةِ رَحِمٍ مَا لَمْ يَسْتَعْجِل\nقِيَل: يَا رَسُولَ اللهِ، وَمَا الاسْتِعْجَالُ؟\nقَالَ: يَقُولُ: قَدْ دَعَوْتُ وقَدْ دَعَوْتُ، فَلَمْ أَرَ يُسْتَجَابُ لِي، فَيَسْتَحْسِرُ عِنْدَ ذلِكَ وَيَدَعُ الدُّعَاءَ\n(The supplication of the servant will be accepted as long as he does not supplicate for what includes sin, or cutting the relations of the womb, and as long as he does not become hasty.) He was asked, \"O Messenger of Allah! How does one become hasty?\" He said, (He says, 'I supplicated and supplicated, but I do not see that my supplication is being accepted from me.' He thus looses interest and abandons supplicating (to Allah).)\n\n## Three Persons Whose Supplication will not be rejected\n\nIn the Musnad of Imam Ahmad and the Sunans of At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa'i and Ibn Majah it is recorded that Abu Hurayrah narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nثَلاَثةٌ لَا تُرَدُّ دَعْوَتُهُمْ: الْإمَامُ الْعَادِلُ، وَالصَّائِمُ حَتَّى يُفْطِرَ، وَدَعْوَةُ الْمَظْلُومِ، يَرْفَعُهَا اللهُ دُونَ الْغَمَامِ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ، وَتُفْتَحُ لَهَا أَبْوَابُ السَّمَاءِ، يَقُولُ: بِعِزَّتِي لَأَنْصُرَنَّكَ وَلَوْ بَعْدَ حِينٍ\n(Three persons will not have their supplication rejected: the just ruler, the fasting person until breaking the fast, and the supplication of the oppressed person, for Allah raises it above the clouds on the Day of Resurrection, and the doors of heaven will be opened for it, and Allah says, 'By My grace! I will certainly grant it for you, even if after a while.')","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=186","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:187","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:187","text":"It is made lawful for you to have sexual relations with your wives on the night of As-Siyam (fasting). They are Libas [i.e., body-cover, or screen] for you and you are Libas for them. Allah knows that you used to deceive yourselves, so He turned to you (accepted your repentance) and forgave you. So now have sexual relations with them and seek that which Allah has ordained for you (offspring), and eat and drink until the white thread (light) of dawn appears to you distinct from the black thread (darkness of night), then complete your fast till the nightfall. And do not have sexual relations with them (your wives) while you are in I'tikaf in the Masjids. These are the limits (set) by Allah, so approach them not. Thus does Allah make clear His Ayat to mankind that they may acquire Taqwa (187)\n\n## Eating, Drinking and Sexual Intercourse are allowed during the Nights of Ramadan\n\nThese Ayat contain a relief from Allah for the Muslims by ending the practice that was observed in the early years of Islam. At that time, Muslims were allowed to eat, drink and have sexual intercourse only until the 'Isha' (Night) prayer, unless one sleeps before the 'Isha' prayer. Those who slept before 'Isha' or offered the 'Isha' prayer, were not allowed to drink, eat or sexual intervourse sex until the next night. The Muslims found that to be difficult for them.\nThe Ayat used the word 'Rafath' to indicate sexual intercourse, according to Ibn 'Abbas, 'Ata' and Mujahid. Similar Tafsir was offered by Sa'id bin Jubayr, Tawus, Salim bin 'Abdullah, 'Amr bin Dinar, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Az-Zuhri, Ad-Dahhak, Ibrahim An-Nakha'i, As-Suddi, 'Ata' Al-Khurasani and Muqatil bin Hayyan.\nAllah said:\nهُنَّ لِبَاسٌ لَّكُمْ وَأَنتُمْ لِبَاسٌ لَّهُنَّ\n(They are Libas [i.e., body-cover, or screen] for you and you are Libas for them.)\nIbn 'Abbas, Mujahid, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, As-Suddi and Muqatil bin Hayyan said that this Ayah means, \"Your wives are a resort for you and you for them.\" Ar-Rabi' bin Anas said, \"They are your cover and you are their cover.\" In short, the wife and the husband are intimate and have sexual intercourse with each other, and this is why they were permitted to have sexual activity during the nights of Ramadan, so that matters are made easier for them.\nAbu Ishaq reported that Al-Bara' bin 'Azib said, \"When the Companions of Allah's Messenger ﷺ observed fast but would sleep before breaking their fast, they would continue fasting until the following night. Qays bin Sirmah Al-Ansari was fasting one day and was working in his land. When the time to break the fast came, he went to his wife and said, 'Do you have food' She said, 'No. But I could try to get you some.' His eyes then were overcome by sleep and when his wife came back, she found him asleep. She said, 'Woe unto you! Did you sleep' In the middle of the next day, he lost consciousness and mentioned what had happened to the Prophet ﷺ. Then, this Ayah was revealed:\nأُحِلَّ لَكُمْ لَيْلَةَ الصِّيَامِ الرَّفَثُ إِلَىٰ نِسَائِكُمْ\n(It is made lawful for you to have sexual relations with your wives on the night of As-Siyam (fasting)) until...\nوَكُلُوا وَاشْرَبُوا حَتَّىٰ يَتَبَيَّنَ لَكُمُ الْخَيْطُ الْأَبْيَضُ مِنَ الْخَيْطِ الْأَسْوَدِ مِنَ الْفَجْرِ\n(and eat and drink until the white thread (light) of dawn appears to you distinct from the black thread (darkness of night), then complete your fast till the nightfall.) Consequently, they were very delighted.\"\nAl-Bukhari reported this Hadith by Abu Ishaq who related that he heard Al-Bara' say, \"When fasting Ramadan was ordained, Muslims used to refrain from sleeping with their wives the entire month, but some men used to deceive themselves. Allah revealed:\nعَلِمَ اللَّهُ أَنَّكُمْ كُنتُمْ تَخْتَانُونَ أَنفُسَكُمْ فَتَابَ عَلَيْكُمْ وَعَفَا عَنكُمْ\n(Allah knows that you used to deceive yourselves, so He turned to you (accepted your repentance) and forgave you.)\nAli bin Abu Talhah narrated that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"During the month of Ramadan, after Muslims would pray 'Isha', they would not touch their women and food until the next night. Then some Muslims, including 'Umar bin Al-Khattab, touched (had sex with) their wives and had some food during Ramadan after 'Isha'. They complained to Allah's Messenger ﷺ. Then Allah sent down:\nعَلِمَ اللَّهُ أَنَّكُمْ كُنتُمْ تَخْتَانُونَ أَنفُسَكُمْ فَتَابَ عَلَيْكُمْ وَعَفَا عَنكُمْ فَالْآنَ بَاشِرُوهُنَّ\n(Allah knows that you used to deceive yourselves, so He turned to you (accepted your repentance) and forgave you. So now have sexual relations with them)\" This is the same narration that Al-'Awfi related from Ibn 'Abbas.\nAllah said:\nوَابْتَغُوا مَا كَتَبَ اللَّهُ لَكُمْ\n(...and seek that which Allah has ordained for you (offspring),)\nAbu Hurayrah, Ibn 'Abbas, Anas, Shurayh Al-Qadi, Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Sa'id bin Jubayr, 'Ata', Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, As-Suddi, Zayd bin Aslam, Hakam bin 'Utbah, Muqatil bin Hayyan, Al-Hasan Al-Basri, Ad-Dahhak, Qatadah, and others said that this Ayah refers to having offspring. Qatadah said that the Ayah means, \"Seek the permission that Allah has allowed for you.\" Sa'id narrated that Qatadah said,\nوَابْتَغُوا مَا كَتَبَ اللَّهُ لَكُمْ\n(and seek that which Allah has ordained for you,)\n\n## Time for Suhur\n\nAllah said:\nوَكُلُوا وَاشْرَبُوا حَتَّىٰ يَتَبَيَّنَ لَكُمُ الْخَيْطُ الْأَبْيَضُ مِنَ الْخَيْطِ الْأَسْوَدِ مِنَ الْفَجْرِ ثُمَّ أَتِمُّوا الصِّيَامَ إِلَى اللَّيْلِ\n(...and eat and drink until the white thread (light) of dawn appears to you distinct from the black thread (darkness of night), then complete your fast till the nightfall.)\nAllah has allowed eating and drinking, along with having sexual intercourse, as we have stated, during any part of the night until the light of dawn is distinguished from the darkness of the night. Allah has described that time as 'distinguishing the white thread from the black thread.' He then made it clearer when He said:\nمِنَ الْفَجْرِ\n(of dawn.)\nAs stated in a Hadith that Imam Abu 'Abdullah Al-Bukhari recorded, Sahl bin Sa'd said, \"When the following verse was revealed:\nوَكُلُوا وَاشْرَبُوا حَتَّىٰ يَتَبَيَّنَ لَكُمُ الْخَيْطُ الْأَبْيَضُ مِنَ الْخَيْطِ الْأَسْوَدِ\n(Eat and drink until the white thread appears to you, distinct from the black thread) and (of dawn) was not revealed, some people who intended to fast, tied black and white threads to their legs and went on eating till they differentiated between the two. Allah then revealed the words, (of dawn), and it became clear to them that it meant (the darkness of) night and (the light of) day. \"\nAl-Bukhari recorded that Ash-Sha'bi said that 'Adi said, \"I took two strings, one black and the other white and kept them under my pillow and went on looking at them throughout the night, but could not make any distinction between the two. So, the next morning I went to Allah's Messenger ﷺ and told him the whole story. He said:\nإِنَّ وِسَادَكَ إِذًا لَعَرِيضٌ، أَنْ كَانَ الْخَيْطُ الْأَبْيَضُ وَالْأَسْوَدُ تَحْتَ وِسَادَتِكَ\n(Your pillow is very wide if the white and black threads are under it!) Some wordings for this Hadith read,\nإِنَّكَ لَعَرِيضُ الْقَفَا\n(Your Qafa (back side of your neck) is wide!)\nSome people said that these words meant that 'Adi was not smart. This is a weak opinion. The narration that Al-Bukhari collected explains this part of the Hadith. Al-Bukhari recorded that 'Adi bin Hatim narrated: I said, \"O Messenger of Allah! What is the white thread from the black thread? Are they actual threads?\" He said:\nإنَّكَ لَعَرِيضُ الْقَفَا أَنْ أَبْصَرْتَ الْخَيْطَيْنِ، ثُمَّ قَالَ: لَا بَلْ هُوَ سَوَادُ اللَّيْلِ وَبَيَاضُ النَّهَارِ\n(Your Qafa is wide if you see the two threads. Rather, they are the blackness of the night and the whiteness of the daylight.)\n\n## Suhur is recommended\n\nAllah allowed eating and drinking until dawn, it represents proof that Suhur is encouraged, since it is a Rukhsah (concession or allowance) and Allah likes that the Rukhsah is accepted and implemented. The authentic Sunnah indicates that eating the Suhur is encouraged. It is reported in the Two Sahihs that Anas narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nتَسَحَّرُوا فَإِنَّ فِي السَّحُورِ بَرَكَةً\n(Eat the Suhur, for there is a blessing in Suhur.)\nMuslim reported that 'Amr bin Al-'As narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nإِنَّ فَصْلَ مَا بَيْنَ صِيَامِنَا وصِيَامِ أَهْلِ الْكِتَابِ أَكْلَةُ السَّحَرِ\n(The distinction between our fast and the fast of the People of the Book is the meal of Suhur.)\nImam Ahmad reported that Abu Sa'id narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nالسَّحُورُ أَكْلُهُ بَرَكَةٌ فَلَا تَدَعُوهُ، وَلَوْ أَنَّ أَحَدَكُمْ تَجْرَعُ جُرْعَةَ مَاءٍ، فَإِنَّ اللهَ وَمَلَائِكَتَهُ يُصَلُّون عَلَى الْمُتَسَحِّرِينَ\n(Suhur is a blessed meal. Hence, do not abandon it, even if one just takes a sip of water. Indeed, Allah and His angels send Salah (blessings) upon those who eat Suhur.)\nThere are several other Hadiths that encourage taking the Suhur, even if it only consists of a sip of water.\nIt is preferred that Suhur be delayed until the time of dawn. It is recorded in the Two Sahihs that Anas bin Malik narrated that Zayd bin Thabit said, \"We had Suhur with Allah's Messenger ﷺ and then went on to pray.\" Anas asked, \"How much time was there between the Adhan (call to prayer) and the Suhur?\" He said, \"The time that fifty Ayat take (to recite).\"\nImam Ahmad recorded Abu Dharr saying that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nلَا تَزَالُ أُمَّتِي بِخَيْرٍ مَا عَجَّلُوا الْإِفْطَارَ وَأَخَّرُوا السُّحُورَ\n(My Ummah will always retain goodness as long as they hasten in breaking the fast and delay the Suhur.)\nThere are several Hadiths that narrate that the Prophet ﷺ called Suhur \"the blessed meal.\"\nThere are narrations from several of the Salaf that they allowed the Suhur to be eaten later until close to Fajr. This is is reported from Abu Bakr, 'Umar, 'Ali, Ibn Mas'ud, Hudhayfah, Abu Hurayrah, Ibn 'Umar, Ibn 'Abbas and Zayd bin Thabit. It is also reported from many of the Tabi'in, such as Muhammad bin 'Ali bin Husayn, Abu Mijlaz, Ibrahim An-Nakha'i, Abu Ad-Duha, Abu Wa'il and other companions of Ibn Mas'ud. This is also the opinion of 'Ata', Al-Hasan, Hakam bin 'Uyainah, Mujahid, 'Urwah bin Az-Zubayr, Abu Sha'tha' Jabir bin Zayd, Al-A'mash and Ma'mar bin Rashid. We have mentioned the chains of narrations for their statements in our (Ibn Kathir's) book about Siyam (Fasting), and all praise is due to Allah.\nIt is also recorded in the Two Sahihs that Al-Qasim said that 'A'ishah narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nلَا يَـمْنَعُكُمْ أَذَانُ بِلَالٍ عَنْ سَحُورِكُمْ، فَإِنَّهُ يُنَادِي بِلَيْلٍ، فَكُلُوا وَاشْرَبُوا حَتَّى تَسْمَعُوا أَذَانَ ابْنِ أُمِّ مَكْتُومٍ، فَإِنَّهُ لاَ يُؤَذِّنُ حَتَّى يَطْلُعَ الْفَجْرُ\n(The Adhan pronounced by Bilal should not stop you from taking Suhur, for he pronounces the Adhan at night. Hence, eat and drink until you hear the Adhan by Ibn Umm Maktum, for he does not call the Adhan until dawn.)\nThis is the wording collected by Al-Bukhari.\nImam Ahmad reported that Qays bin Talq quoted from his father that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nلَيْسَ الْفَجْرُ الْمُسْتَطِيلَ فِي الْأُفُقِ وَلَكِنِ الْمُعْتَرِضُ الْأَحْمَرُ\n(Dawn is not the (ascending) glow of white light of the horizon. Rather, it is the red (radiating) light.)\nAbu Dawud and At-Tirmidhi also recorded this Hadith, but their wording is:\nكُلُوا واشْرَبُوا، وَلَا يَهِيدَنَّكُمُ السَّاطِعُ الْمُصْعِدُ، فَكُلُوا واشْرَبُوا حَتَّى يَعْتَرِضَ لَكُمُ الْأَحْمَرُ\n(Eat and drink and do not be rushed by the ascending (white) light. Eat and drink until the redness (of the dawn) appears.)\nIbn Jarir (At-Tabari) recorded that Samurah bin Jundub narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nلَا يَغُرَّنَّكُمْ أَذَانُ بِلَالٍ وَلَا هَذَا الْبَيَاضُ - لِعَمُودِ الصُّبْحِ - حَتَّى يَسْتَطِيرَ\n(Do not be stopped by Bilal's Adhan or the (ascending) whiteness, until it spreads.) Muslim also recorded this Hadith.\n\n## There is No Harm in beginning the Fast while Junub (a sate of major ritual impurity)\n\nIssue: Among the benefits of allowing sexual activity, eating and drinking until dawn for those who are fasting, is that it is allowed to start the fast while Junub (in the state of impurity after sexual discharge), and there is no harm in this case if one takes a bath any time in the morning after waking up, and completes the fast. This is the opinion of the Four Imams and the majority of the scholars. Al-Bukhari and Muslim recorded that 'A'ishah and Umm Salamah said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ used to wake up while Junub from sexual intercourse, not wet dreams, and he would take a bath and fast. Umm Salamah added that he would not break his fast or make up for that day.\nMuslim recorded that 'A'ishah said that a man asked:\nيَا رَسُولَ اللهِ، تُدْرِكُنِي الصَّلَاةُ وَأَنَا جَنُبٌ فَأَصُومُ؟ فَقَالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ صلّى الله عليه وسلّم:\nوَأَنَا تُدْرِكُنِي الصَّلاةُ وَأَنَا جُنُبٌ فَأَصُومُ\n\"O Messenger of Allah! The (Dawn) prayer time starts while I am Junub, should I fast?\" Allah's Messenger ﷺ replied, (And I. The prayer time starts while I am Junub and I fast.)\nHe said, \"You are not like us, O Messenger of Allah! Allah has forgiven your previous and latter sins.\" Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nوَاللهِ إِنَّي لَأَرْجُو أَنْ أَكُونَ أَخْشَاكُمْ للهِ وَأَعْلَمَكُمْ بِمَا أَتَّقِي\n(By Allah! I hope that I have the most fear from Allah among you and the best knowledge of what Taqwa is.)\nAnd Allah Knows Best\n\n## Fasting Ends at Sunset\n\nAllah said:\nثُمَّ أَتِمُّوا الصِّيَامَ إِلَى اللَّيْلِ\n(...then complete your fast till the nightfall.)\nThis Ayah orders breaking the fast at sunset. It is recorded in the Two Sahihs that 'Umar bin Al-Khattab said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nإِذَا أَقْبَلَ اللَّيْلُ مِنْ هٰهُنَا، وَأَدْبَرَ النَّهَارُ مِنْ هٰهُنَا فَقَدْ أَفْطَرَ الصَّائِمُ\n(If the night comes from this direction (the east), and the day departs from that direction (the west), then the fasting person breaks his fast.)\nIt is reported that Sahl bin Sa'd As-Sa'idi narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nلَا يَزَالُ النَّاسُ بِخَيْرٍ مَا عَجَّلُوا الْفِطْرَ\n(The people will retain goodness as long as they hasten in breaking the fast.)\nImam Ahmad recorded that Abu Hurayrah narrated that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nيَقُولُ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ: إِنَّ أَحَبَّ عِبَادِي إِلَيَّ أَعْجَلُهُمْ فِطْرًا\n(Allah the Exalted said, 'The dearest among My servants to Me are those who hasten in breaking the fast the most.')\nAt-Tirmidhi recorded this Hadith and said that this Hadith is Hasan Gharib.\n\n## Prohibition of Uninterrupted Fasting (Wisal)\n\nThere are several authentic Hadiths that prohibit Al-Wisal, which means continuing the fast through the night to the next night, without eating. Imam Ahmad recorded Abu Hurayrah saying that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nلَا تُوَاصِلُوا\nقَالُوا: يَارَسُولَ اللهِ إِنَّكَ تُوَاصِلُ،\nقَالَ: فَإِنِّي لَسْتُ مِثْلَكُمْ إِنِّي أَبِيتُ يُطْعِمُنِي رَبِّي وَيَسْقِينِي\n(Do not practice Al-Wisal in fasting.) So, they said to him, \"But you practice Al-Wisal, O Allah's Messenger!\" The Prophet ﷺ replied, \"(I am not like you, I am given food and drink during my sleep by my Lord.) ,So, when the people refused to stop Al-Wisal, the Prophet fasted two days and two nights (along with those who practiced Wisal) and then they saw the crescent moon (of the month of Shawwal). The Prophet ﷺ said to them (angrily):\nلَوْ تَأَخَّرَ الْهِلَالُ لَزِدْتُكُم\n(If the crescent had not appeared, I would have made you fast for a longer period.)\nThat was as a punishment for them (when they refused to stop practicing Al-Wisal). This Hadith is also recorded in the Sahihayn.\nThe prohibition of Al-Wisal was also mentioned in a number of other narrations. It is a fact that practicing Al-Wisal was one of the special qualities of the Prophet ﷺ, for he was capable and assisted in his practice of it. It is obvious that the food and drink that the Prophet ﷺ used to get while practicing Al-Wisal was spiritual and not material, otherwise he would not be practicing Al-Wisal. We should mention that it is allowed to refrain from breaking the fast from sunset until before dawn (Suhur). A Hadith narrated by Abu Sa'id Khudri states that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nلَا تُوَاصِلُوا فَأَيُّكُمْ أَرَادَ أَنْ يُوَاصِلَ فَلْيُوَاصِلْ إِلَى السَّحَرِ\n(Do not practice Al-Wisal, but whoever wishes is allowed to practice it until the Suhur.)\nThey said, \"You practice Al-Wisal, O Messenger of Allah!\" He said:\nإِنِّي لَسْتُ كَهَيْئَتِكُمْ، إِنِّي أَبِيتُ لِي مُطْعِمٌ يُطْعِمُنِي وَسَاقٍ يَسْقِينِي\n(I am not similar to you, for I have One Who makes me eat and drink during the night.) This Hadith is also collected in the Two Sahihs.\n\n## The Rulings of I'tikaf\n\nAllah said:\nوَلَا تُبَاشِرُوهُنَّ وَأَنتُمْ عَاكِفُونَ فِي الْمَسَاجِدِ\n(And do not have sexual relations with them (your wives) while you are in I'tikaf in the Masjids.)\nAli bin Abu Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"This Ayah is about the man who stays in I'tikaf at the mosque during Ramadan or other months, Allah prohibited him from touching (having sexual intercourse with) women, during the night or day, until he finishes his I'tikaf.\" Ad-Dahhak said, \"Formerly, the man who practiced I'tikaf would go out of the mosque and, if he wished, would have sexual intercourse (with his wife). Allah then said:\nوَلَا تُبَاشِرُوهُنَّ وَأَنتُمْ عَاكِفُونَ فِي الْمَسَاجِدِ\n(And do not have sexual relations with them (your wives) while you are in I'tikaf in the Masjids.) meaning, 'Do not touch your wives as long as you are in I'tikaf, whether you were in the mosque or outside of it'.\" It is also the opinion of Mujahid, Qatadah and several other scholars, that the Muslims used to have sexual intercourse with the wife while in I'tikaf if they departed the mosque until the Ayah was revealed. Ibn Abu Hatim commented, \"It was reported that Ibn Mas'ud, Muhammad bin Ka'b, Mujahid, 'Ata' Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak, As-Suddi, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas and Muqatil said that the Ayah means, 'Do not touch the wife while in I'tikaf.'\"\nWhat Ibn Abu Hatim reported from these people is the agreed upon practice among the scholars. Those who are in I'tikaf are not allowed to have sexual intercourse as long as they are still in I'tikaf in the mosque. If one has to leave the mosque to attend to a need, such as to relieve the call of nature or to eat, he is not allowed to kiss or embrace his wife or to busy himself with other than his I'tikaf. He is not even allowed to visit ailing persons, but he can merely ask about their condition while passing by. I'tikaf has several other rulings that are explained in the books (of Fiqh), and we have mentioned several of these rulings at the end of our book on Siyam (Fasting), all praise is due to Allah. Furthermore, the scholars of Fiqh used to follow their explanation of the rules for fasting with the explanation of the rules for I'tikaf, as this is the way these acts of worship were mentioned in the Qur'an.\nBy mentioning I'tikaf after fasting, Allah draws attention to practicing I'tikaf during the month of the fast, especially the last part of the month. The Sunnah of Allah's Messenger ﷺ is that he used to perform I'tikaf during the last ten nights of the month of Ramadan until he died. Afterwards, the Prophet's wives used to perform I'tikaf as the Two Sahihs recorded from 'A'ishah the Mother of the believers.\nIt is reported in the Two Sahihs that Safiyyah, the daughter of Huyai, went to Allah's Messenger ﷺ to visit him in the mosque while he was in I'tikaf. She had a talk with him for a while, then she got up in order to return home. The Prophet ﷺ accompanied her back home, as it was night. Her house was at Usamah bin Zayd's house on the edge of Al-Madinah. While they were walking, two Ansari men met them and passed by them in a hurry, for they were shy to bother the Prophet ﷺ while he was walking with his wife. He told them:\nعَلى رِسْلِكُمَا، إِنَّهَا صَفِيَّةُ بِنْتُ حُيَيٍّ\n(Do not run away! She is (my wife) Safiyyah bint Huyai.) Both of them said, \"All praise is due to Allah, (How dare we think of any evil) O Allah's Messenger!\" The Prophet ﷺ said (to them):\nإِنَّ الشَّيْطَانَ يَجْرِي مِنِ ابْنِ آدَمَ مَجْرَى الدَّمِ، وَإِنِّي خَشِيتُ أَنْ يَقْذِفَ فِي قُلُوبِكُمَا شَيْئًا، أَوْ قَالَ: شَرًّا\n(Shaytan reaches everywhere in the human body, that the blood reaches. I was afraid lest Shaytan might suggest an evil thought in your minds.)\nImam Ash-Shafi'i commented, \"Allah's Messenger ﷺ sought to teach his Ummah to instantly eliminate any evil thought, so that they do not fall into the prohibited. They (the two Ansari men) had more fear of Allah than to think evil of the Prophet ﷺ. Allah knows best.\"\nThe Ayah (2:187) prohibits sexual intercourse and anything like kissing or embracing that might lead to it during I'tikaf. As for having the wife helping the husband, it is allowed. It is reported in the Two Sahihs that 'A'ishah said, \"Allah's Messenger ﷺ would bring his head near me (in her room) and I would comb his hair, while I was on my menses. He would enter the room only to attend to what a man needs.\"\nAllah's statement:\nتِلْكَ حُدُودُ اللَّهِ\n(These are the limits (set) by Allah) means, 'This is what We have explained, ordained, specified, allowed and prohibited for fasting. We also mentioned the fast's objectives, what is permitted during it, and what is required of it. These are the set limits that Allah has legislated and explained, so do not come near them or transgress them.' 'Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam said, \"(Allah's set limits mentioned in the Ayah) mean these four limits (and he then recited):\nأُحِلَّ لَكُمْ لَيْلَةَ الصِّيَامِ الرَّفَثُ إِلَىٰ نِسَائِكُمْ\n(It is made lawful for you to have sexual relations with your wives on the night of As-Siyam (fasting).) and he recited up to:\nثُمَّ أَتِمُّوا الصِّيَامَ إِلَى اللَّيْلِ\n(then complete your Sawm (fast) till the nightfall.) My father and other's used to say similarly and recite the same Ayah to us.\"\nAllah said:\nكَذَٰلِكَ يُبَيِّنُ اللَّهُ آيَاتِهِ لِلنَّاسِ\n(Thus does Allah make clear His Ayat to mankind) meaning, 'Just as He explains the fast and its rulings, He also explains the other rulings by the words of His servant and Messenger, Muhammad ﷺ.' Allah continues:\nلِلنَّاسِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَّقُونَ\n(to mankind that they may attain Taqwa.) meaning, 'So that they know how to acquire the true guidance and how to worship (Allah).' Similarly, Allah said:\nهُوَ الَّذِي يُنَزِّلُ عَلَىٰ عَبْدِهِ آيَاتٍ بَيِّنَاتٍ لِّيُخْرِجَكُم مِّنَ الظُّلُمَاتِ إِلَى النُّورِ وَإِنَّ اللَّهَ بِكُمْ لَرَءُوفٌ رَّحِيمٌ\n(It is He Who sends down manifest Ayat to His servant (Muhammad ﷺ) that He may bring you out from (types of) darkness into the light. And verily, Allah is to you full of kindness, Most Merciful.)(57:9)","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=187","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:188","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:188","text":"And eat up not one another's property unjustly (in any illegal way, e.g., stealing, robbing, deceiving), nor give bribery to the rulers (judges before presenting your cases) that you may knowingly eat up a part of the property of others sinfully (188)\n\n## Bribery is prohibited and is a Sin\n\nAli bin Abu Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"This (Ayah 2:188) is about the indebted person when there is no evidence of the loan. So he denies taking the loan and the case goes to the authorities, even though he knows that it is not his money and that he is a sinner, consuming what is not allowed for him.\" This opinion was also reported from Mujahid, Sa'id bin Jubayr, 'Ikrimah, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, As-Suddi, Muqatil bin Hayan and 'Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam. They all stated, \"Do not dispute when you know that you are being unjust.\"\n\n## The Judge's Ruling does not allow the Prohibited or prohibit the Lawful\n\nIt is reported in the Two Sahihs that Umm Salamah narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nأَلَا إِنَّمَا أَنَا بَشَرٌ، وَإِنَّمَا يَأْتِينِي الْخَصْمُ، فَلَعَلَّ بَعْضَكُمْ أَنْ يَكُونَ أَلْحَنَ بِحُجَّتِهِ مِنْ بَعْضٍ فَأَقْضِيَ لَهُ، فَمَنْ قَضَيْتُ لَهُ بِحَقِّ مُسْلِمٍ فَإِنَّمَا هِيَ قِطْعَةٌ مِنْ نَارٍ، فَلْيَحْمِلْهَا أَوْ لِيَذَرْهَا\n(I am only human! You people present your cases to me, and as some of you may be more eloquent and persuasive in presenting his argument, I might issue a judgment in his benefit. So, if I give a Muslim's right to another, I am really giving him a piece of fire; so he should not take it.)\nThe Ayah and the Hadith prove that the judgment of the authorities in any case does not change the reality of the truth. Hence, the ruling does not allow what is in fact prohibited or prohibit what is in fact allowed. It is only applicable in that case. So if the ruling agrees with the truth, then there is no harm in this case. Otherwise, the judge will acquire his reward, while the cheater will acquire the evil burden.\nThis is why Allah said:\nوَلَا تَأْكُلُوا أَمْوَالَكُم بَيْنَكُم بِالْبَاطِلِ وَتُدْلُوا بِهَا إِلَى الْحُكَّامِ لِتَأْكُلُوا فَرِيقًا مِّنْ أَمْوَالِ النَّاسِ بِالْإِثْمِ وَأَنتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ\n(And eat up not one another's property unjustly, nor give bribery to the rulers (judges before presenting your cases) that you may knowingly eat up a part of the property of others sinfully.)\nmeaning, 'While you know the falsehood of what you claim. ' Qatadah said, \"O son of Adam! Know that the judge's ruling does not allow you what is prohibited or prohibit you from what is allowed. The judge only rules according to his best judgment and according to the testimony of the witnesses. The judge is only human and is bound to make mistakes. Know that if the judge erroneously rules in some one's favor, then that person will still encounter the dispute when the disputing parties meet Allah on the Day of Resurrection. Then, the unjust person will be judged swiftly and precisely with that which will surpass whatever he acquired by the erroneous judgment he received in the life of this world.\"","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=188","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:189","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:189","text":"They ask you (O Muhammad) about the crescents. Say: \"These are signs to mark fixed periods of time for mankind and for the pilgrimage.\" It is not Al-Birr (piety, righteousness, etc.) that you enter the houses from the back, but Al-Birr is from Taqwa. So enter houses through their proper doors, and have Taqwa of Allah that you may be successful (189)\n\n## The Crescent Moons\n\nAl-'Awfi related that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"The people asked Allah's Messenger ﷺ about the crescent moons. Thereafter, this Ayah was revealed:\nيَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْأَهِلَّةِ قُلْ هِيَ مَوَاقِيتُ لِلنَّاسِ\n(They ask you (O Muhammad) about the crescents. Say, \"These are signs to mark fixed periods of time for mankind...) so that they mark their acts of worship, the 'Iddah (the period of time a divorced woman or a widow is required to wait before remarrying) of their women and the time of their Hajj (pilgrimage to Makkah).\" 'Abdur-Razzaq reported that Ibn 'Umar narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nجَعَلَ اللهُ الْأَهِلَّةَ مَوَاقِيتَ لِلنَّاسِ، فَصُومُوا لِرُؤْيَتِهِ، وَأَفْطِرُوا لِرُؤْيَتِهِ، فَإِنْ غُمَّ عَلَيْكُمْ فَعُدُّوا ثَلَاثِينَ يَوْمًا\n(Allah has made the crescents signs to mark fixed periods of time for mankind. Hence, fast on seeing it (the crescent for Ramadan) and break the fast on seeing it (the crescent for Shawwal). If it (the crescent) was obscure to you then count thirty days (mark that month as thirty days).)\nThis Hadith was also collected by Al-Hakim in his Mustadrak, and he said, \"The chain is Sahih, and they (Al-Bukhari and Muslim) did not recorded it.\"\n\n## Righteousness comes from Taqwa\n\nAllah said:\nوَلَيْسَ الْبِرُّ بِأَن تَأْتُوا الْبُيُوتَ مِن ظُهُورِهَا وَلَٰكِنَّ الْبِرَّ مَنِ اتَّقَىٰ وَأْتُوا الْبُيُوتَ مِنْ أَبْوَابِهَا\n(It is not Al-Birr (piety, righteousness, etc.) that you enter the houses from the back, but Al-Birr is from Taqwa. So enter houses through their proper doors.)\nAl-Bukhari recorded that Al-Bara' said, \"During the time of Jahiliyyah, they used to enter the house from the back upon assuming the Ihram. Thereafter, Allah revealed (the following Ayah):\nوَلَيْسَ الْبِرُّ بِأَن تَأْتُوا الْبُيُوتَ مِن ظُهُورِهَا وَلَٰكِنَّ الْبِرَّ مَنِ اتَّقَىٰ وَأْتُوا الْبُيُوتَ مِنْ أَبْوَابِهَا\n(It is not Al-Birr (piety, righteousness, etc.) that you enter the houses from the back but Al-Birr is from Taqwa. So enter houses through their proper doors.)\nAbu Dawud At-Tayalisi recorded the same Hadith from Al-Bara' but with the wording; \"The Ansar used to enter their houses from the back when returning from a journey. Thereafter, this Ayah (2:189 above) was revealed...\"\nAl-Hasan said, \"When some people during the time of Jahiliyyah would leave home to travel, and then decide not to travel, they would not enter the house from its door. Rather, they would climb over the back wall. Allah the Exalted said:\nوَلَيْسَ الْبِرُّ بِأَن تَأْتُوا الْبُيُوتَ مِن ظُهُورِهَا\n(It is not Al-Birr (piety, righteousness) that you enter the houses from the back,).\"\nAllah's statement:\nوَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ\n(...and have Taqwa of Allah that you may be successful.) Have Taqwa of Allah, means to do what He has commanded you and refrain from what He has forbidden for you,\nلَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ\n(that you may be successful.) tomorrow when you stand before Him and He thus rewards you perfectly.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=189","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:190","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:190–193","text":"And fight in the way of Allah those who fight you, but transgress not the limits. Truly, Allah likes not the transgressors (190)And kill them wherever you find them, and turn them out from where they have turned you out. And Al-Fitnah is worse than killing. And fight not with them at Al-Masjid Al-Haram (the sanctuary at Makkah), unless they (first) fight you there. But if they attack you, then kill them. Such is the recompense of the disbelievers (191)But if they cease, then Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful (192)And fight them until there is no more Fitnah (disbelief and worshipping of others along with Allah) and the religion (all and every kind of worship) is for Allah (Alone). But if they cease, let there be no transgression except against Az-Zalimin (the polytheists and wrongdoers)(193)\n\n## The Command to fight Those Who fight Muslims and killing Them wherever They are found\n\nAbu Ja'far Ar-Razi said that Ar-Rabi' bin Anas said that Abu Al-'Aliyah commented on what Allah said:\nوَقَاتِلُوا فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ الَّذِينَ يُقَاتِلُونَكُمْ\n(And fight in the way of Allah those who fight you,)\nAbu Al-'Aliyah said, \"This was the first Ayah about fighting that was revealed in Al-Madinah. Ever since it was revealed, Allah's Messenger ﷺ used to fight only those who fought him and avoid non-combatants. Later, Surat Bara'ah (chapter 9 in the Qur'an) was revealed.\" 'Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam said similarly, then he said that this was later abrogated by the Ayah:\nفَاقْتُلُوا الْمُشْرِكِينَ حَيْثُ وَجَدتُّمُوهُمْ\n(then kill them wherever you find them)(9:5).\nHowever, this statement is not plausible, because Allah's statement:\nالَّذِينَ يُقَاتِلُونَكُمْ\n(...those who fight you) applies only to fighting the enemies who are engaged in fighting Islam and its people. So the Ayah means, 'Fight those who fight you', just as Allah said (in another Ayah):\nوَقَاتِلُوا الْمُشْرِكِينَ كَافَّةً كَمَا يُقَاتِلُونَكُمْ كَافَّةً\n(...and fight against the Mushrikin collectively as they fight against you collectively.)(9:36)\nThis is why Allah said later in the Ayah:\nوَاقْتُلُوهُمْ حَيْثُ ثَقِفْتُمُوهُمْ وَأَخْرِجُوهُم مِّنْ حَيْثُ أَخْرَجُوكُمْ\n(And kill them wherever you find them, and turn them out from where they have turned you out.) meaning, 'Your energy should be spent on fighting them, just as their energy is spent on fighting you, and on expelling them from the areas from which they have expelled you, as a law of equality in punishment.'\n\n## The Prohibition of mutilating the Dead and stealing from the captured Goods\n\nAllah said:\nوَلَا تَعْتَدُوا إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يُحِبُّ الْمُعْتَدِينَ\n(but transgress not the limits. Truly, Allah likes not the transgressors.)\nThis Ayah means, 'Fight for the sake of Allah and do not be transgressors,' such as, by committing prohibitions. Al-Hasan Al-Basri stated that transgression (indicated by the Ayah), \"includes mutilating the dead, theft (from the captured goods), killing women, children and old people who do not participate in warfare, killing priests and residents of houses of worship, burning down trees and killing animals without real benefit.\" This is also the opinion of Ibn 'Abbas, 'Umar bin 'Abdul-'Aziz, Muqatil bin Hayyan and others. Muslim recorded in his Sahih that Buraydah narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nاغْزُوا فِي سَبِيلِ اللهِ، قَاتِلُوا مَنْ كَفَرَ بِاللهِ، اغْزُوا وَلَا تَغُلُّوا وَلَا تَغْدِرُوا وَلَا تَـمْثُلُوا وَلَا تَقْتُلُوا وَلِيدًا وَلَا أَصْحَابَ الصَّوَامِعِ\n(Fight for the sake of Allah and fight those who disbelieve in Allah. Fight, but do not steal (from the captured goods), commit treachery, mutilate (the dead), or kill a child, or those who reside in houses of worship.)\nIt is reported in the Two Sahihs that Ibn 'Umar said, \"A woman was found dead during one of the Prophet's battles and the Prophet ﷺ then forbade killing women and children. \" There are many other Hadiths on this subject.\n\n## Shirk is worse than Killing\n\nSince Jihad involves killing and shedding the blood of men, Allah indicated that these men are committing disbelief in Allah, associating with Him (in the worship) and hindering from His path, and this is a much greater evil and more disastrous than killing. Abu Malik commented about what Allah said:\nوَالْفِتْنَةُ أَشَدُّ مِنَ الْقَتْلِ\n(And Al-Fitnah is worse than killing.) Meaning what you (disbelievers) are committing is much worse than killing.\" Abu Al-'Aliyah, Mujahid, Sa'id bin Jubayr, 'Ikrimah, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak and Ar-Rabi' bin Anas said that what Allah said:\nوَالْفِتْنَةُ أَشَدُّ مِنَ الْقَتْلِ\n(And Al-Fitnah is worse than killing.) \"Shirk (polytheism) is worse than killing.\"\n\n## Fighting in the Sacred Area is prohibited, except in Self-Defense\n\nAllah said:\nوَلَا تُقَاتِلُوهُمْ عِندَ الْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ\n(And fight not with them at Al-Masjid Al-Haram (the sanctuary at Makkah))\nIt is reported in the Two Sahihs that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nإنَّ هَذَا الْبَلَدَ حَرَّمَهُ اللهُ يَوْمَ خَلَقَ السَّمٰوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ، فَهُوَ حَرَامٌ بِحُرْمَةِ اللهِ إِلى يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ، وَلَمْ يَحِلَّ لِي إِلَّا سَاعَةً مِنْ نَهَارٍ، وَإِنَّهَا سَاعَتِي هذِهِ حَرامٌ بحُرْمَةِ اللهِ إِلى يَوْمِ الْقِيامَةِ، لا يُعْضَدُ شَجَرُهُ، وَلَا يُخْتَلىَ خَلَاهُ، فَإِنْ أَحَدٌ تَرَخَّصَ بِقِتَالِ رَسُولِ اللهِ صلّى الله عليه وسلّم، فَقُولُوا: إنَّ اللهَ أَذِنَ لِرَسُولِهِ وَلَمْ يَأْذَنْ لَكُم\n(Allah has made this city a sanctuary since the day He created the heavens and the earth. So, it is a sanctuary by Allah's decree till the Day of Resurrection. Fighting in it was made legal for me only for an hour in the daytime. So, it (i.e., Makkah) is a sanctuary, by Allah's decree, from now on until the Day of Resurrection. Its trees should not be cut, and its grass should not be uprooted. If anyone mentions the fighting in it that occurred by Allah's Messenger, then say that Allah allowed His Messenger, but did not allow you.)\nIn this Hadith, Allah's Messenger ﷺ mentions fighting the people of Makkah when he conquered it by force, leading to some deaths among the polytheists in the area of the Khandamah. This occurred after the Prophet ﷺ proclaimed:\nمَنْ أَغْلَقَ بَابَهُ فهُوَ آمِنٌ، وَمَنْ دَخَلَ الْمَسْجِدَ فَهُو آمِنٌ، ومَنْ دَخَلَ دَارَ أَبِي سُفْيَانَ فَهُوَ آمِنٌ\n(Whoever closed his door is safe. Whoever entered the (Sacred) Mosque is safe. Whoever entered the house of Abu Sufyan is also safe.)\nAllah said:\nحَتَّىٰ يُقَاتِلُوكُمْ فِيهِ فَإِن قَاتَلُوكُمْ فَاقْتُلُوهُمْ كَذَٰلِكَ جَزَاءُ الْكَافِرِينَ\n(...unless they (first) fight you there. But if they attack you, then kill them. Such is the recompense of the disbelievers.)\nAllah states: 'Do not fight them in the area of the Sacred Mosque unless they start fighting you in it. In this case, you are allowed to fight them and kill them to stop their aggression.' Hence, Allah's Messenger ﷺ took the pledge from his Companions under the tree (in the area of Al-Hudaybiyyah) to fight (the polytheists), after the tribes of Quraysh and their allies, Thaqif and other groups, collaborated against the Muslims (to stop them from entering Makkah to visit the Sacred House). Then, Allah stopped the fighting before it started between them and said:\nوَهُوَ الَّذِي كَفَّ أَيْدِيَهُمْ عَنكُمْ وَأَيْدِيَكُمْ عَنْهُم بِبَطْنِ مَكَّةَ مِن بَعْدِ أَنْ أَظْفَرَكُمْ عَلَيْهِمْ\n(And He it is Who has withheld their hands from you and your hands from them in the midst of Makkah, after He had made you victors over them.)(48:24) and:\nوَلَوْلَا رِجَالٌ مُّؤْمِنُونَ وَنِسَاءٌ مُّؤْمِنَاتٌ لَّمْ تَعْلَمُوهُمْ أَن تَطَئُوهُمْ فَتُصِيبَكُم مِّنْهُم مَّعَرَّةٌ بِغَيْرِ عِلْمٍ لِّيُدْخِلَ اللَّهُ فِي رَحْمَتِهِ مَن يَشَاءُ لَوْ تَزَيَّلُوا لَعَذَّبْنَا الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنْهُمْ عَذَابًا أَلِيمًا\n(Had there not been believing men and believing women whom you did not know, that you may kill them and on whose account a sin would have been committed by you without (your) knowledge, that Allah might bring into His mercy whom He wills ـ if they (the believers and the disbelievers) had been apart, We verily, would have punished those of them who disbelieved with painful torment.)(48:25)\nAllah's statement:\nفَإِنِ انتَهَوْا فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ\n(But if they cease, then Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.) which means, 'If they (polytheists) cease fighting you in the Sacred Area, and come to Islam and repent, then Allah will forgive them their sins, even if they had before killed Muslims in Allah's Sacred Area.' Indeed, Allah's forgiveness encompasses every sin, whatever its enormity, when the sinner repents it.\n\n## The Order to fight until there is no more Fitnah\n\nAllah then commanded fighting the disbelievers when He said:\nحَتَّىٰ لَا تَكُونَ فِتْنَةٌ\n(...until there is no more Fitnah) meaning, Shirk. This is the opinion of Ibn 'Abbas, Abu Al-'Aliyah, Mujahid, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ar-Rabi', Muqatil bin Hayyan, As-Suddi and Zayd bin Aslam.\nAllah's statement:\nوَيَكُونَ الدِّينُ لِلَّهِ\n(...and the religion (all and every kind of worship) is for Allah (Alone).) means, 'So that the religion of Allah becomes dominant above all other religions.' It is reported in the Two Sahihs that Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari said: \"The Prophet ﷺ was asked, 'O Allah's Messenger! A man fights out of bravery, and another fights to show off, which of them fights in the cause of Allah?' The Prophet ﷺ said:\nمَنْ قَاتَلَ لِتَكُونَ كَلِمَةُ اللهِ هِيَ الْعُلْيا فَهُوَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللهِ\n(He who fights so that Allah's Word is superior, then he fights in Allah's cause.) In addition, it is reported in the Two Sahihs:\nأُمِرْتُ أَنْ أُقَاتِلَ النَّاسَ حَتَّى يَقُولُوا لَا إِلهَ إلَّا اللهُ، فَإِذَا قَالُوهَا عَصَمُوا مِنِّي دِمَاءَهُم وَأَمْوَالَهُمْ إلَّا بِحَقِّهَا وَحِسَابُهُمْ عَلَى اللهِ\n(I have been ordered (by Allah) to fight the people until they proclaim, 'None has the right to be worshipped but Allah'. Whoever said it, then he will save his life and property from me, except for cases of the law, and their account will be with Allah.)\nAllah's statement:\nفَإِنِ انتَهَوْا فَلَا عُدْوَانَ إِلَّا عَلَى الظَّالِمِينَ\n(But if they cease, let there be no transgression except against the wrongdoers.) indicates that, 'If they stop their Shirk and fighting the believers, then cease warfare against them. Whoever fights them afterwards will be committing an injustice. Verily aggression can only be started against the unjust.' This is the meaning of Mujahid's statement that only combatants should be fought. Or, the meaning of the Ayah indicates that, 'If they abandon their injustice, which is Shirk in this case, then do not start aggression against them afterwards.' The aggression here means retaliating and fighting them, just as Allah said:\nفَمَنِ اعْتَدَىٰ عَلَيْكُمْ فَاعْتَدُوا عَلَيْهِ بِمِثْلِ مَا اعْتَدَىٰ عَلَيْكُمْ\n(Then whoever transgresses against you, you transgress likewise against him.)(2:194)\nSimilarly, Allah said:\nوَجَزَاءُ سَيِّئَةٍ سَيِّئَةٌ مِّثْلُهَا\n(The recompense for an evil is an evil like thereof.)(42:40), and:\nوَإِنْ عَاقَبْتُمْ فَعَاقِبُوا بِمِثْلِ مَا عُوقِبْتُم بِهِ\n(And if you punish them, then punish them with the like of that with which you were afflicted.)(16:126)\nIkrimah and Qatadah stated, \"The unjust person is he who refuses to proclaim, 'There is no God worthy of worship except Allah'.\"\nUnder Allah's statement:\nوَقَاتِلُوهُمْ حَتَّىٰ لَا تَكُونَ فِتْنَةٌ\n(And fight them until there is no more Fitnah) Al-Bukhari recorded that Nafi' said that two men came to Ibn 'Umar during the conflict of Ibn Az-Zubayr and said to him, \"The people have fallen into shortcomings and you are the son of 'Umar and the Prophet's Companion. Hence, what prevents you from going out?\" He said, \"What prevents me is that Allah has forbidden shedding the blood of my (Muslim) brother.\" They said, \"Did not Allah say:\nوَقَاتِلُوهُمْ حَتَّىٰ لَا تَكُونَ فِتْنَةٌ\n(And fight them until there is no more Fitnah (disbelief and worshipping of others along with Allah))?\" He said, \"We did fight until there was no more Fitnah and the religion became for Allah Alone. You want to fight until there is Fitnah and the religion becomes for other than Allah!\"\nUthman bin Salih added that a man came to Ibn 'Umar and asked him, \"O Abu 'Abdur-Rahman! What made you perform Hajj one year and 'Umrah another year and abandon Jihad in the cause of Allah, although you know how much He has encouraged performing it?\" He said, \"O my nephew! Islam is built on five (pillars): believing in Allah and His Messenger, the five daily prayers, fasting Ramadan, paying the Zakah and performing Hajj (pilgrimage) to the House.\" They said, \"O Abu 'Abdur-Rahman! Did you not hear what Allah said in His Book:\nوَإِن طَائِفَتَانِ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ اقْتَتَلُوا فَأَصْلِحُوا بَيْنَهُمَا فَإِن بَغَتْ إِحْدَاهُمَا عَلَى الْأُخْرَىٰ فَقَاتِلُوا الَّتِي تَبْغِي حَتَّىٰ تَفِيءَ إِلَىٰ أَمْرِ اللَّهِ\n(And if two parties (or groups) among the believers fall to fighting, then make peace between them both. But if one of them outrages against the other, then fight you (all) against the one that which outrages till it complies with the command of Allah.)(49:9) and:\nوَقَاتِلُوهُمْ حَتَّىٰ لَا تَكُونَ فِتْنَةٌ\n(And fight them until there is no more Fitnah (disbelief))\nHe said, \"That we did during the time of Allah's Messenger ﷺ when Islam was still weak and (the Muslim) man used to face trials in his religion, such as killing or torture. When Islam became stronger (and apparent), there was no more Fitnah.\" He asked, \"What do you say about 'Ali and 'Uthman?\" He said, \"As for 'Uthman, Allah has forgiven him. However, you hated the fact that Allah had forgiven him! As for 'Ali, he is the cousin of Allah's Messenger ﷺ and his son-in-law.\" He then pointed with his hand, saying, \"This is where his house is located (meaning, 'so close to the Prophet's house just as 'Ali was so close to the Prophet ﷺ himself').\"","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=190","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:194","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:194","text":"The sacred month is for the sacred month, and for the prohibited things, there is the Law of equality (Qisas). Then whoever transgresses against you, you transgress likewise against him. And fear Allah, and know that Allah is with Al-Muttaqin (194)\n\n## Fighting during the Sacred Months is prohibited, except in Self-Defense\n\nIbn 'Abbas, Ad-Dahhak, As-Suddi, Qatadah, Miqsam, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas and 'Ata said, \"Allah's Messenger ﷺ went for 'Umrah on the sixth year of Hijrah. Then, the idolators prevented him from entering the Sacred House (the Ka'bah in Makkah) along with the Muslims who came with him. This incident occurred during the sacred month of Dhul-Qa'dah. The idolators agreed to allow them to enter the House the next year. Hence, the Prophet ﷺ entered the House the following year, along with the Muslims who accompanied him, and Allah permitted him to avenge the idolators' treatment of him, when He said:\nالشَّهْرُ الْحَرَامُ بِالشَّهْرِ الْحَرَامِ وَالْحُرُمَاتُ قِصَاصٌ\n(The sacred month is for the sacred month, and for the prohibited things, there is the Law of equality (Qisas).)\nImam Ahmad recorded that Jabir bin 'Abdullah said, \"Allah's Messenger ﷺ would not engage in warfare during the Sacred Month unless he was first attacked, then he would march forth. He would otherwise remain idle until the end of the Sacred Months.\" This Hadith has an authentic chain of narrators.\nHence, when the Prophet ﷺ was told that 'Uthman was killed (in Makkah) when he was camped at the area of Al-Hudaybiyyah, after he had sent 'Uthman as his emissary to the polytheists, he accepted the pledge from his Companions under the tree to fight the polytheists. They were one thousand and four hundred then. When the Prophet ﷺ was informed that 'Uthman was not killed, he abandoned the fight and reverted to peace.\nWhen the Prophet ﷺ finished fighting with (the tribes of) Hawazin during the battle of Hunayn and Hawazin took refuge in (the city of) At-Ta'if, he laid siege to that city. Then, the (sacred) month of Dhul-Qa'dah started, while At-Ta'if was still under siege. The siege went on for the rest of the forty days (rather, from the day the battle of Hunayn started until the Prophet ﷺ went back to Al-Madinah from Al-Ji'ranah, were forty days), as reported in the Two Sahihs and narrated by Anas. When the Companions suffered mounting casualties (during the siege), the Prophet ﷺ ended the siege before conquering At-Ta'if. He then went back to Makkah, performed 'Umrah from Al-Ji'ranah, where he divided the war booty of Hunayn. This 'Umrah occurred during Dhul-Qa'dah of the eighth year of Al-Hijrah.\nAllah's statement:\nفَمَنِ اعْتَدَىٰ عَلَيْكُمْ فَاعْتَدُوا عَلَيْهِ بِمِثْلِ مَا اعْتَدَىٰ عَلَيْكُمْ\n(...whoever transgresses against you, you transgress likewise against him.) ordains justice even with the polytheists. Allah also said in another Ayah:\nوَإِنْ عَاقَبْتُمْ فَعَاقِبُوا بِمِثْلِ مَا عُوقِبْتُم بِهِ\n(And if you punish, then punish them with the like of that with which you were afflicted.)(16:126)\nAllah's statement:\nوَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ مَعَ الْمُتَّقِينَ\n(And fear Allah, and know that Allah is with Al-Muttaqin (the pious))(2:194) commands that Allah be obeyed and feared out of Taqwa. The Ayah informs us that Allah is with those who have Taqwa by His aid and support in this life and the Hereafter.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=194","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:195","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:195","text":"And spend in the cause of Allah and do not throw yourselves into destruction, and do good. Truly, Allah loves Al-Muhsinin (those who do good)(195)\n\n## The Command to spend in the Cause of Allah\n\nAl-Bukhari recorded that Hudhayfah said:\nوَأَنفِقُوا فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ وَلَا تُلْقُوا بِأَيْدِيكُمْ إِلَى التَّهْلُكَةِ\n(And spend in the cause of Allah and do not throw yourselves into destruction.)\n\"It was revealed about spending.\" Ibn Abu Hatim reported him saying similarly. He then commented, \"Similar is reported from Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Sa'id bin Jubayr, 'Ata', Ad-Dahhak, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, As-Suddi and Muqatil bin Hayyan.\"\nAslam Abu 'Imran said, \"A man from among the Ansar broke enemy (Byzantine) lines in Constantinople (Istanbul). Abu Ayyub Al-Ansari was with us then. So some people said, 'He is throwing himself to destruction.' Abu Ayyub said, 'We know this Ayah (2:195) better, for it was revealed about us, the Companions of Allah's Messenger ﷺ who participated in Jihad with him and aided and supported him. When Islam became strong, we, the Ansar, met and said to each other, 'Allah has honored us by being the Companions of His Prophet ﷺ and in supporting him until Islam became victorious and its following increased. We had before ignored the needs of our families, estates and children. Warfare has ceased, so let us go back to our families and children and attend to them.' So this Ayah was revealed about us:\nوَأَنفِقُوا فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ وَلَا تُلْقُوا بِأَيْدِيكُمْ إِلَى التَّهْلُكَةِ\n(And spend in the cause of Allah and do not throw yourselves into destruction.) the destruction refers to staying with our families and estates and abandoning Jihad'.\" This was recorded by Abu Dawud, At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa'i, 'Abd bin Humayd in his Tafsir, Ibn Abu Hatim, Ibn Jarir, Ibn Marduwyah, Al-Hafiz Abu Ya'la in his Musnad, Ibn Hibban and Al-Hakim. At-Tirmidhi said; \"Hasan, Sahih, Gharib\" Al-Hakim said, \"It meets the criteria of the Two Shaykhs (Al-Bukhari and Muslim) but they did not record it.\"\nAbu Dawud's version mentions that Aslam Abu 'Imran said, \"We were at (the siege of) Constantinople. Then, 'Uqbah bin 'Amr was leading the Egyptian forces, while the Syrian forces were led by Fadalah bin 'Ubayd. Later on, a huge column of Roman (Byzantine) soldiers departed the city, and we stood in lines against them. A Muslim man raided the Roman lines until he broke through them and came back to us. The people shouted, 'All praise is due to Allah! He is sending himself to certain demise.' Abu Ayyub said, 'O people! You explain this Ayah the wrong way. It was revealed about us, the Ansar when Allah gave victory to His religion and its following increased. We said to each other, 'It would be better for us now if we return to our estates and attend to them.' Then Allah revealed this Ayah (2:195)'.\"\nAbu Bakr bin 'Aiyash reported that Abu Ishaq As-Subai'y related that a man said to Al-Bara' bin 'Azib, \"If I raided the enemy lines alone and they kill me, would I be throwing myself to certain demise?\" He said, \"No. Allah said to His Messenger ﷺ:\nفَقَاتِلْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ لَا تُكَلَّفُ إِلَّا نَفْسَكَ\n(Then fight (O Muhammad ﷺ) in the cause of Allah, you are not tasked (held responsible) except for yourself.)(4:84) That Ayah (2:195) is about (refraining from) spending.\" Ibn Marduwyah reported this Hadith, as well as Al-Hakim in his Mustadrak who said; \"It meets the criteria of the Two Shaykhs (Al-Bukhari and Muslim) but they did not record it.\" Ath-Thawri and Qays bin Ar-Rabi' related it from Al-Bara'. but added:\nلَا تُكَلَّفُ إِلَّا نَفْسَكَ\n(You are not tasked (held responsible) except for yourself.)(4:84) \"Destruction refers to the man who sins and refrains from repenting, thus throwing himself to destruction.\"\nIbn 'Abbas said:\nوَأَنفِقُوا فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ وَلَا تُلْقُوا بِأَيْدِيكُمْ إِلَى التَّهْلُكَةِ\n(And spend in the cause of Allah and do not throw yourselves into destruction)\n\"This is not about fighting. But about refraining from spending for the sake of Allah, in which case, one will be throwing his self into destruction.\"\nThe Ayah (2:195) includes the order to spend in Allah's cause, in the various areas and ways that involve obedience and drawing closer to Allah. It especially applies to spending in fighting the enemies and on what strengthens the Muslims against the enemy. Allah states that those who refrain from spending in this regard will face utter and certain demise and destruction, meaning those who acquire this habit. Allah commands that one should acquire Ihsan (excellence in the religion), as it is the highest part of the acts of obedience. Allah said:\nوَأَحْسِنُوا إِنَّ اللَّهَ يُحِبُّ الْمُحْسِنِينَ\n(and do good. Truly, Allah loves Al-Muhsinin (those who do good).)","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=195","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:196","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:196","text":"And complete Hajj and 'Umrah for Allah. But if you are prevented, then sacrifice a Hady that you can afford, and do not shave your heads until the Hady reaches the place of sacrifice. And whosoever of you is ill or has an ailment on his scalp (necessitating shaving), he must pay a Fidyah (ransom) of either fasting or giving Sadaqah or a sacrifice. Then if you are in safety and whosoever performs the 'Umrah (in the months of Hajj), before (performing) the Hajj, he must slaughter a Hady such as he can afford, but if he cannot (afford it), he should fast for three days during Hajj and seven days after his return, making ten days in all. This is for him whose family is not present at Al-Masjid Al-Haram (i.e., non-resident of Makkah). And fear Allah much and know that Allah is severe in punishment (196)\n\n## The Command to complete Hajj and 'Umrah\n\nAfter Allah mentioned the rulings for fasting and Jihad, he explained the rituals by commanding the Muslims to complete Hajj and 'Umrah, meaning, to finish the rituals of Hajj and 'Umrah after one starts them. This is why Allah said afterwards:\nفَإِنْ أُحْصِرْتُمْ\n(But if you are prevented) meaning, if your way to the House is obstructed, and you are prevented from finishing it. This is why the scholars agree that starting the acts of Hajj and 'Umrah requires one to finish them. As for Makhul, he said, \"Complete, means to start them from the Miqat (areas the Prophet ﷺ designated to assume Ihram from).\" 'Abdur-Razzaq said that Az-Zuhri said: \"We were told that 'Umar commented on:\nوَأَتِمُّوا الْحَجَّ وَالْعُمْرَةَ لِلَّهِ\n(And complete Hajj and 'Umrah for Allah.) \"Complete Hajj and 'Umrah means performing each of them separately, and to perform 'Umrah outside of the months of Hajj, for Allah the Exalted says:\nالْحَجُّ أَشْهُرٌ مَّعْلُومَاتٌ\n(The Hajj (pilgrimage) is (in) the well-known (lunar year) months.)\"\nAs-Suddi said,\nوَأَتِمُّوا الْحَجَّ وَالْعُمْرَةَ لِلَّهِ\n(And complete Hajj and 'Umrah for Allah.) means, \"Maintain the performance of Hajj and 'Umrah.\" Ibn 'Abbas was reported to have said, \"Hajj is 'Arafat, while 'Umrah is Tawaf.\" Al-A'mash related that Ibrahim said that 'Alqamah commented on Allah's statement:\nوَأَتِمُّوا الْحَجَّ وَالْعُمْرَةَ لِلَّهِ\n(And complete Hajj and 'Umrah for Allah.) \"Abdullah (Ibn Mas'ud) recited it this way: 'Complete Hajj and 'Umrah to the House, so that one does not exceed the area of the House during the 'Umrah'.\" Ibrahim then said, \"I mentioned this statement to Sa'id bin Jubayr and he said; 'Ibn 'Abbas also said that.'\" Sufyan reported that Ibrahim said that 'Alqamah said (regarding the Ayah 2:196), \"Perform the Hajj and 'Umrah to the House.\" Ath-Thawri reported that Ibrahim read (the Ayah), \"Perform the Hajj and 'Umrah to the House.\"\n\n## If One is prevented while in Route, He slaughters the Sacrifice, shaves his Head and ends Ihram\n\nAllah's statement:\nفَإِنْ أُحْصِرْتُمْ فَمَا اسْتَيْسَرَ مِنَ الْهَدْيِ\n(But if you are prevented, sacrifice a Hady (animals for sacriface) such as you can afford,) was revealed in the sixth year of Hijrah, the year of the treaty of Al-Hudaybiyyah when the polytheists prevented Allah's Messenger ﷺ from reaching the House. Allah revealed Surat Al-Fath (chapter 48 in the Qur'an) then, and allowed the Muslims to slaughter any Hady (animals for sacrifice) they had. They had seventy camels with them for that purpose. They were also permitted to shave their heads and end their Ihram. When the Prophet ﷺ commanded them to shave their heads and end the state of Ihram, they did not obey him, as they were awaiting that order to be abrogated. When they saw that the Prophet ﷺ went out after shaving his head, they imitated him. Some of them did not shave, but only shortened their hair. This is why the Prophet ﷺ said:\nرَحِمَ اللهُ الْمُحَلِّقِينَ\n(May Allah award His mercy to those who shaved.)\nThey said, \"What about those who shortened the hair?\" He said in the third time, \"And to those who shortened.\" Every seven among them shared one camel for their sacrifice. They were one thousand and four hundred Companions and were camping in the area of Al-Hudaybiyyah, outside the Sacred Area. It was also reported that they were within the boundaries of the Sacred Area. Allah knows best.\nBeing prevented from the House (Hasr) includes more than just being sick, fearing an enemy or getting lost on the way to Makkah. Imam Ahmad reported that Al-Hajjaj bin 'Amr Al-Ansari said that he heard Allah's Messenger ﷺ saying:\nمَنْ كُسِرَ أَوْ عَرِجَ فَقَدْ حَلَّ وَعَلَيْهِ حَجَّةٌ أُخْرَى\n(Whoever suffered a broken bone or a limb, will have ended his Ihram and has to perform Hajj again.)\nHe said, \"I mentioned that to Ibn 'Abbas and Abu Hurayrah and they both said, 'He (Al-Hajjaj) has said the truth'.\" This Hadith is also reported in the Four Collections. In the version of Abu Dawud and Ibn Majah, the Prophet ﷺ said, \"Whoever limped, had a broken bone or became ill...\" Ibn Abu Hatim also recorded it and said, \"It was reported that Ibn Mas'ud, Ibn Az-Zubayr, 'Alqamah, Sa'id bin Musayyib, 'Urwah bin Az-Zubayr, Mujahid, An-Nakha'i, 'Ata' and Muqatil bin Hayyan said that being prevented (Hasr) entails an enemy, an illness or a fracture.\" Ath-Thawri also said, \"Being prevented entails everything that harms the person.\"\nIt is reported in the Two Sahihs that 'A'ishah said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ went to Duba'ah bint Az-Zubayr bin 'Abdul-Muttalib who said, \"O Messenger of Allah! I intend to perform Hajj but I am ill.\" He said, \"Perform Hajj and make the condition: 'My place is where You prevent (or halt) me.\" Muslim recorded similarly from Ibn 'Abbas. So saying such a condition for Hajj is allowed is based on this Hadith.\nAllah's statement:\nفَمَا اسْتَيْسَرَ مِنَ الْهَدْيِ\n(...sacrifice a Hady such as you can afford) includes a sheep also, as Imam Malik reported that 'Ali bin Abu Talib used to say. Ibn 'Abbas said, \"The Hady includes eight types of animals: camels, cows, goats and sheep.\" 'Abdur-Razzaq reported that Ibn 'Abbas said about what Allah said:\nفَمَا اسْتَيْسَرَ مِنَ الْهَدْيِ\n(...sacrifice a Hady such as you can afford)\n\"As much as one could afford.\" Al-'Awfi said that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"If one can afford it, then camels, otherwise cows, or sheep.\" Hisham bin 'Urwah quoted his father:\nفَمَا اسْتَيْسَرَ مِنَ الْهَدْيِ\n(...sacrifice a Hady (animal, i.e., a sheep, a cow, or a camel) such as you can afford)\n'Depending on the price.'\nThe proof that sacrificing only a sheep is allowed in the case of being prevented from continuing the rites, is that Allah has required sacrificing whatever is available as a Hady, and the Hady is any type of cattle; be it camels, cows or sheep. This is the opinion of Ibn 'Abbas the cousin of Allah's Messenger ﷺ and the scholar of Tafsir. It is reported in the Two Sahihs that 'A'ishah, the Mother of the believers, said, \"The Prophet ﷺ once offered some sheep as Hady.\"\nAllah's statement:\nوَلَا تَحْلِقُوا رُءُوسَكُمْ حَتَّىٰ يَبْلُغَ الْهَدْيُ مَحِلَّهُ\n(...and do not shave your heads until the Hady reaches the place of sacrifice.) is a continuation of His statement:\nوَأَتِمُّوا الْحَجَّ وَالْعُمْرَةَ لِلَّهِ\n(And complete, the Hajj and 'Umrah for Allah.) and is not dependent upon:\nفَإِنْ أُحْصِرْتُمْ فَمَا اسْتَيْسَرَ مِنَ الْهَدْيِ\n(But if you are prevented, then sacrifice a Hady) as Ibn Jarir has erroneously claimed. When the Prophet ﷺ and his Companions were prevented from entering the Sacred House during the Al-Hudaybiyyah year by the polytheists from Quraysh, they shaved their heads and sacrificed their Hady outside the Haram (Sacred) area. In normal circumstances, and when one can safely reach the House, he is not allowed to shave his head until:\nحَتَّىٰ يَبْلُغَ الْهَدْيُ مَحِلَّهُ\n(...and do not shave your heads until the Hady reaches the place of sacrifice.) and then he ends the rituals of Hajj or 'Umrah, or both if he had assumed Ihram for both. It is recorded in the Two Sahihs that Hafsah said, \"O Allah's Messenger! What is wrong with the people, they have finished their Ihram for 'Umrah but you have not?\" The Prophet ﷺ said,\nإنِّي لَبَّدْتُ رَأْسِي وَقَلَّدْتُ هَدْيِي، فَلَا أَحِلُّ حَتَّى أَنْحَرَ\n(I matted my hair and I have garlanded my Hady (animals for sacrifice), so I will not finish my Ihram till I offer the sacrifice.)\n\n## Whoever shaved his Head during Ihram, will have to pay the Fidyah\n\nAllah said:\nفَمَن كَانَ مِنكُم مَّرِيضًا أَوْ بِهِ أَذًى مِّن رَّأْسِهِ فَفِدْيَةٌ مِّن صِيَامٍ أَوْ صَدَقَةٍ أَوْ نُسُكٍ\n(And whosoever of you is ill or has an ailment on his scalp (necessitating shaving), he must pay a Fidyah.)\nAl-Bukhari reported that 'Abdur-Rahman bin Asbahani said that he heard 'Abdullah bin Ma'qil saying that he sat with Ka'b bin 'Ujrah in the mosque of Kufah (in Iraq). He then asked him about the Fidyah of the fasting. Ka'b said, \"This was revealed concerning my case especially, but it is also for you in general. I was carried to Allah's Messenger ﷺ and the lice were falling in great numbers on my face. The Prophet ﷺ said:\nمَا كُنْتُ أُرَى أَنَّ الْجَهْدَ بلَغَ بكَ هذَا، أمَا تَجِدُ شَاةً؟\nقُلْتُ: لَا\n(I never thought that your ailment (or struggle) had reached to such an extent as I see. Can you afford a sheep (for sacrifice)?' I replied in the negative.) He then said:\nصُمْ ثَلَاثَةَ أَيَّامٍ أَوْ أَطْعِمْ سِتَّةَ مَسَاكِينَ، لِكُلِّ مِسْكِينٍ نِصْفُ صَاعٍ مِنْ طَعَامٍ، وَاحْلِقْ رَأْسَكَ\n(Fast for three days or feed six poor persons, each with half a Sa' of food (1 Sa' = 3 kilograms approx.) and shave your head.)\nSo this is a general judgement derived from a specific case.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Ka'b bin 'Ujrah said, \"Allah's Messenger ﷺ came by while I was igniting the fire under a pot and while the lice were falling down my head or my eyelids. He said:\nيُؤْذِيكَ هَوَامُّ رَأْسِكَ؟\nقُلْتُ: نَعَمْ\n(Do these lice in your head bother you?) I said, 'Yes.' He said:\nفَاحْلِقْهُ، وَصُمْ ثَلَاثَةَ أَيَّامٍ، أَوْ أَطْعِمْ سِتَّةَ مَسَاكِينَ، أَوِ انْسُكْ نَسِيكَةً\n(Shave it, then fast three days, or feed six poor people, or sacrifice an animal.)\nAyyub (one of the narrators of the Hadith) commented, \"I do not know which alternative was stated first.\" The wording of the Qur'an begins with the easiest then the more difficult options: \"Pay a Fidyah of fasting (three days), feeding (six poor persons) or sacrificing (an animal).\" Meanwhile, the Prophet ﷺ advised Ka'b with the more rewarding option first, that is, sacrificing a sheep, then feeding six poor persons, then fasting three days. Each Text is suitable in its place and context, all the thanks and praises are due to Allah.\n\n## Tamattu' during Hajj\n\nAllah said:\nفَإِذَا أَمِنتُمْ فَمَن تَمَتَّعَ بِالْعُمْرَةِ إِلَى الْحَجِّ فَمَا اسْتَيْسَرَ مِنَ الْهَدْيِ\n(Then if you are in safety and whosoever performs the 'Umrah (in the months of Hajj), before (performing) the Hajj, he must slaughter a Hady such as he can afford,)\nThat is, when you are able to complete the rites, so whoever among you connects his 'Umrah with Hajj having the same Ihram for both, or, first assuming Ihram for 'Umrah, and then assuming Ihram for Hajj when finished the 'Umrah, this is the more specific type of Tamattu' which is well-known among the discussion of the scholars whereas in general there are two types of Tamattu', as the authentic Hadiths prove, since among the narrators are those who said, \"Allah's Messenger ﷺ performed Tamattu', and others who said, \"Qarin\" but there is no difference between them over the Hady.\nSo Allah said,\nفَإِذَا أَمِنتُمْ فَمَن تَمَتَّعَ بِالْعُمْرَةِ إِلَى الْحَجِّ فَمَا اسْتَيْسَرَ مِنَ الْهَدْيِ\n(Then if you are in safety and whosoever performs the 'Umrah (in the months of Hajj), before (performing) the Hajj (i.e., Hajj At-Tamattu' and Al-Qiran), he must slaughter a Hady such as he can afford,) means let him sacrifice whatever Hady is available to him, the least of which is a sheep. One is also allowed to sacrifice a cow because the Prophet ﷺ slaughtered cows on behalf of his wives. Al-Awza'i reported that Abu Hurayrah narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ slaughtered cows on behalf of his wives when they were performing Tamattu'. This was reported by Abu Bakr bin Marduwyah.\nThis last Hadith proves that Tamattu' is legislated. It is reported in the Two Sahihs that 'Imran bin Husayn said, \"We performed Hajj At-Tamattu' in the lifetime of Allah's Messenger ﷺ and then the Qur'an was revealed (regarding Hajj At-Tamattu'). Nothing was revealed to forbid it, nor did he (the Prophet ) forbid it until he died. And somebody said what he wished (regarding Hajj At-Tamattu') according to his own opinion.\" Al-Bukhari said that 'Imran was talking about 'Umar.\nIt is reported in an authentic narration that 'Umar used to discourage the people from performing Tamattu'. He used to say, \"If we refer to Allah's Book, we should complete it,\" meaning:\nفَمَن تَمَتَّعَ بِالْعُمْرَةِ إِلَى الْحَجِّ فَمَا اسْتَيْسَرَ مِنَ الْهَدْيِ\n(...whosoever performs the 'Umrah (in the months of Hajj), before (performing) the Hajj, he must slaughter a Hady such as he can afford,)\nHowever 'Umar did not say that Tamattu' is unlawful. He only prevented them so that the people would increase their trips to the House for Hajj (during the months of Hajj) and 'Umrah (throughout the year), as he himself has stated.\n\n## Whoever performs Tamattu' should fast Ten Days if He does not have a Hady\n\nAllah said:\nفَمَن لَّمْ يَجِدْ فَصِيَامُ ثَلَاثَةِ أَيَّامٍ فِي الْحَجِّ وَسَبْعَةٍ إِذَا رَجَعْتُمْ تِلْكَ عَشَرَةٌ كَامِلَةٌ\n(...but if he cannot (afford it), he should fast three days during the Hajj and seven days after his return (to his home), making ten days in all.)\nThis Ayah means: \"Those who do not find a Hady, let them fast three days during the Hajj season.\" Al-'Awfi said that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"If one does not have a Hady, he should fast three days during Hajj, before 'Arafah day. If the day of 'Arafah was the third day, then his fast is complete. He should also fast seven days when he gets back home.\" Abu Ishaq reported from Wabarah from Ibn 'Umar who said, \"One fasts one day before the day of Tarwiyah, the day of Tarwiyah (eighth day of Dhul-Hijjah) and then 'Arafah day (the ninth day of the month of Dhul-Hijjah).\" The same statement was reported by Ja'far bin Muhammad from his father from 'Ali.\nIf one did not fast these three days or at least some of them before 'Id day (the tenth day of Dhul-Hijjah), he is allowed to fast during the Tashriq days (11-12-13th day of Dhul-Hijjah). 'A'ishah and Ibn 'Umar said, \"Fasting the days of Tashriq was only allowed for those who did not find the Hady,\" as Al-Bukhari has reported. Sufyan related that Ja'far bin Muhammad narrated that his father said that 'Ali said, \"Whoever did not fast the three days during the Hajj, should fast them during the days of Tashriq.\" This is also the position taken by 'Ubayd bin 'Umayr Al-Laythi, 'Ikrimah, Al-Hasan Al-Basri and 'Urwah bin Az-Zubayr, referring to the general meaning of Allah's statement:\nفَصِيَامُ ثَلَاثَةِ أَيَّامٍ فِي الْحَجِّ\n(...fast three days during the Hajj...)\nAs for what Muslim reported that Qutaybah Al-Hudhali said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nأَيَّامُ التَّشْرِيقِ أَيَّامُ أَكْلٍ وَشُرْبٍ، وَذِكْرِ اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ\n(The days of Tashriq are days of eating and drinking and remembering Allah the Exalted.)\nThis narration is general in meaning while what 'A'ishah and Ibn 'Umar narrated is specific.\nAllah said:\nوَسَبْعَةٍ إِذَا رَجَعْتُمْ\n(...and seven days after his return.)\nThere are two opinions regarding the meaning of this Ayah. First, it means 'when you return to the camping areas'. The second, upon going back home. 'Abdur-Razzaq reported that Salim narrated that he heard Ibn 'Umar saying:\nفَمَن لَّمْ يَجِدْ فَصِيَامُ ثَلَاثَةِ أَيَّامٍ فِي الْحَجِّ وَسَبْعَةٍ إِذَا رَجَعْتُمْ\n\"(...but if he cannot (afford it), he should fast three days during the Hajj and seven days after his return,) means when he goes back to his family. \" The same opinion was reported from Sa'id bin Jubayr, Abu Al-'Aliyah, Mujahid, 'Ata', 'Ikrimah, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Imam Az-Zuhri and Ar-Rabi' bin Anas.\nAl-Bukhari reported that Salim bin 'Abdullah narrated that Ibn 'Umar said, \"During the Farewell Hajj of Allah's Messenger ﷺ, he performed Tamattu' with 'Umrah and Hajj. He drove a Hady along with him from Dhul-Hulayfah. Allah's Messenger ﷺ started by assuming Ihram for 'Umrah, and then for Hajj. And the people, too, performed the 'Umrah and Hajj along with the Prophet ﷺ. Some of them brought the Hady and drove it along with them, while the others did not. So, when the Prophet ﷺ arrived at Makkah, he said to the people:\nمَنْ كَانَ مِنْكُم أَهْدَى فَإِنَّهُ لَا يَحِلُّ مِنْ شَيْءٍ حَرُمَ مِنْهُ حَتَّى يَقْضِيَ حَجَّهُ، وَمَنْ لَمْ يَكُنْ مِنْكُمْ أَهْدَى فَلْيَطُفْ بالْبَيْتِ وبالصَّفَا وَالْمَرْوَةِ وَلْيُقَصِّرْ وَلْيَحْلِلْ، ثُمَّ لْيُهِلَّ بِالْحَجِّ، فَمَنْ لَمْ يجَدْ هَدْيًا فَلْيَصُمْ ثَلَاثَةَ أَيَّامٍ فِي الْحَجِّ، وَسَبْعةً إِذَا رَجَعَ إِلى أَهْلِهِ\n(Whoever among you has driven the Hady, should not finish his Ihram till he completes his Hajj. And whoever among you has not (driven) the Hady with him, he should perform Tawaf of the Ka'bah and between As-Safa and Al-Marwah. Then, he should shave or cut his hair short and finish his Ihram, and should later assume Ihram for Hajj; [but he must offer a Hady (sacrifice)]. And if anyone cannot afford a Hady, he should fast for three days during the Hajj and seven days when he returns home.)\nHe then mentioned the rest of the Hadith, which is reported in the Two Sahihs.\nAllah said:\nتِلْكَ عَشَرَةٌ كَامِلَةٌ\n(...making ten days in all.) to emphasize the ruling we mentioned above. This method is common in the Arabic language, for they would say, 'I have seen with my eyes, heard with my ears and written with my hand,' to emphasize such facts. Similarly, Allah said:\nوَلَا طَائِرٍ يَطِيرُ بِجَنَاحَيْهِ\n(...nor a bird that flies with its two wings)(6:38) and:\nوَلَا تَخُطُّهُ بِيَمِينِكَ\n(...nor did you write any book (whatsoever) with your right hand)(29:48) and:\nوَوَاعَدْنَا مُوسَىٰ ثَلَاثِينَ لَيْلَةً وَأَتْمَمْنَاهَا بِعَشْرٍ فَتَمَّ مِيقَاتُ رَبِّهِ أَرْبَعِينَ لَيْلَةً\n(And We appointed for Musa thirty nights and added (to the period) ten (more), and he completed the term, appointed by his Lord, of forty nights.)(7:142)\nIt was also said that the meaning of \"ten days in all\" emphasizes the order to fast for ten days, not less than that.\n\n## The Residents of Makkah do not perform Tamattu'\n\nAllah said:\nذَٰلِكَ لِمَن لَّمْ يَكُنْ أَهْلُهُ حَاضِرِي الْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ\n(This is for him whose family is not present at Al-Masjid Al-Haram (i.e., non-resident of Makkah).) This Ayah concerns the residents of the area of the Haram, for they do not perform Tamattu'. 'Abdur-Razzaq reported that Tawus said, \"Tamattu' is for the people, those whose families are not residing in the Haram area (Makkah), not for the residents of Makkah. Hence Allah's Statement:\nذَٰلِكَ لِمَن لَّمْ يَكُنْ أَهْلُهُ حَاضِرِي الْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ\n(This is for him whose family is not present at Al-Masjid Al-Haram (i.e., non-resident of Makkah).)\nAbdur-Razzaq then said, \"I was also told that Ibn 'Abbas said similar to Tawus.\" Allah said:\nوَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ\n(...and fear Allah) meaning, in what He has commanded you and what He prohibited for you. He then said:\nوَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ شَدِيدُ الْعِقَابِ\n(...and know that Allah is severe in punishment) for those who defy His command and commit what He has prohibited.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=196","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:197","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:197","text":"The Hajj (pilgrimage) is (in) the well-known months. So whosoever intends to perform Hajj therein (by assuming Ihram), then he should not have sexual relations (with his wife), nor commit sin, nor dispute unjustly during the Hajj. And whatever good you do, Allah knows it. And take provisions for the journey, but the best provision is At-Taqwa (piety, righteousness). So fear Me, O men of understanding (197)\n\n## When does Ihram for Hajj start?\n\nAllah said:\nالْحَجُّ أَشْهُرٌ مَّعْلُومَاتٌ\n(The Hajj is (in) the well-known months.)\nThis Ayah indicates that Ihram for Hajj only occurs during the months of Hajj. This was reported from Ibn 'Abbas, Jabir, 'Ata', Tawus and Mujahid. The proof for this is Allah's statement that Hajj occurs during known, specific months, which indicates that Hajj is not allowed before that, just as the prayer has a fixed time (before which one's prayer is not accepted).\nAsh-Shafi'i recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"No person should assume Ihram for Hajj before the months of the Hajj, for Allah said:\nالْحَجُّ أَشْهُرٌ مَّعْلُومَاتٌ\n(The Hajj is (in) the well-known months.)\nIbn Khuzaymah reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"No Ihram for Hajj should be assumed, except during the months of Hajj, for among the Sunnah of Hajj is that one assume Ihram for it during the Hajj months. \" This is an authentic narration and the Companion's statement that such and such is among the Sunnah is considered as a Hadith of the Prophet ﷺ, according to the majority of the scholars. This is especially the case when it is Ibn 'Abbas who issued this statement, as he is the Tarjuman (translator, interpreter, explainer) of the Qur'an.\nThere is a Hadith about this subject too. Ibn Marduwyah related that Jabir narrated that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nلَا يَنْبَغِي لِأَحَدٍ أَنْ يُحْرِمَ بِالْحَجِّ إِلَّا فِي أَشْهُرِ الْحَجِّ\n(No one should assume Ihram for Hajj, but during the months of Hajj.)\nThe chain of narrators for this Hadith is reasonable. Ash-Shafi'i and Al-Bayhaqi recorded this Hadith from Ibn Jurayj who related that Abu Az-Zubayr said that he heard Jabir bin 'Abdullah being asked, \"Does one assume Ihram for Hajj before the months of the Hajj?\" He said, \"No.\" This narration is more reliable than the narration that we mentioned from the Prophet ﷺ. In short, this statement is the opinion of the Companion, supported by Ibn 'Abbas' statement that it is a part of the Sunnah not to assume Ihram for Hajj before the months of the Hajj. Allah knows best.\n\n## The Months of Hajj\n\nAllah said:\nأَشْهُرٌ مَّعْلُومَاتٌ\n(...the well-known months.)\nAl-Bukhari said that Ibn 'Umar said that these are Shawwal, Dhul-Qa'dah and the first ten days of Dhul-Hijjah. This narration for which Al-Bukhari did not mention the chain of narrators, was collected by a continuous chain of narrators that Ibn Jarir rendered authentic, leading to Ibn 'Umar, who said:\nالْحَجُّ أَشْهُرٌ مَّعْلُومَاتٌ\n(The Hajj (pilgrimage) is (in) the well-known (lunar year) months.) \"which are Shawwal, Dhul-Qa'dah and the (first) ten days of Dhul-Hijjah.\" Its chain is Sahih. Al-Hakim also recorded it in his Mustadrak, and he said,\"It meets the criteria of the Two Shaykhs.\"\nThis statement is also reported from 'Umar, 'Ali, Ibn Mas'ud, 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubayr, Ibn 'Abbas, 'Ata', Tawus, Mujahid, Ibrahim An-Nakha'i, Imam Ash-Sha'bi, Al-Hasan, Ibn Sirin, Makhul, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak bin Muzahim, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas and Muqatil bin Hayyan. This opinion was preferred by Ibn Jarir who said, \"It is a common practice to call two months and a part of the third month as 'months'. This is similar to the Arab's saying, 'I visited such and such person this year or this day.' He only visited him during a part of the year and a part of the day. Allah said:\nفَمَن تَعَجَّلَ فِي يَوْمَيْنِ فَلَا إِثْمَ عَلَيْهِ\n(But whosoever hastens to leave in two days, there is no sin on him.)\nIn this case, one will only be hastening for one and a half days.\"\nAllah then said:\nفَمَن فَرَضَ فِيهِنَّ الْحَجَّ\n(So whosoever intends (Farada) to perform Hajj therein (by assuming Ihram),) meaning that one's assuming the Ihram requires a Hajj, for the person is required to complete the rituals of Hajj after assuming Ihram. Ibn Jarir said that Al-'Awfi said, \"The scholars agree that (Farada) 'intends' mentioned in the Ayah means it is a requirement and an obligation.\" 'Ali bin Abu Talhah said that Ibn 'Abbas said:\nفَمَن فَرَضَ فِيهِنَّ الْحَجَّ\n\"(So whosoever intends to perform Hajj therein (by assuming Ihram),) refers to those who assume Ihram for Hajj and Umrah\". Ata said, \"'Intends', means, assumes the Ihram.\" Similar statements were attributed to Ibrahim, Ad-Dahhak and others.\n\n## Prohibition of Rafath (Sexual Intercourse) during Hajj\n\nAllah said:\nفَلَا رَفَثَ\n(He should not have Rafath)\nThis Ayah means that those who assume the Ihram for Hajj or 'Umrah are required to avoid the Rafath, meaning, sexual intercourse. Allah's statement here is similar to His statement:\nأُحِلَّ لَكُمْ لَيْلَةَ الصِّيَامِ الرَّفَثُ إِلَىٰ نِسَائِكُمْ\n(It is made lawful for you to have Rafath (sexual relations) with your wives on the night of the fast.)(2:187)\nWhatever might lead to sexual intercourse, such as embracing, kissing and talking to women about similar subjects, is not allowed. Ibn Jarir reported that Nafi' narrated that 'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, \"Rafath means sexual intercourse or mentioning this subject with the tongue, by either men or women.\" 'Ata' bin Abu Rabah said that Rafath means sexual intercourse and foul speech. This is also the opinion of 'Amr bin Dinar. 'Ata' also said that they used to even prevent talking (or hinting) about this subject. Tawus said that Rafath includes one's saying, \"When I end the Ihram I will have sex with you.\" This is also the same explanation offered by Abu Al-'Aliyah regarding Rafath. 'Ali bin Abu Talhah said that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Rafath means having sex with the wife, kissing, fondling and saying foul words to her, and similar acts.\" Ibn 'Abbas and Ibn 'Umar said that Rafath means to have sex with women. This is also the opinion of Sa'id bin Jubayr, 'Ikrimah, Mujahid, Ibrahim An-Nakha'i, Abu Al-'Aliyah who narrated it from 'Ata' and Makhul, 'Ata Al-Khurasani, 'Ata' bin Yasar, 'Atiyah, Ibrahim, Ar-Rabi', Az-Zuhri, As-Suddi, Malik bin Anas, Muqatil bin Hayyan, 'Abdul-Karim bin Malik, Al-Hasan, Qatadah and Ad-Dahhak, and others.\n\n## The Prohibition of Fusuq during Hajj\n\nAllah said:\nوَلَا فُسُوقَ\n(...nor commit sin) Miqsam and several other scholars related that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"It is disobedience.\" This is also the opinion of 'Ata,' Mujahid, Tawus, 'Ikrimah, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Muhammad bin Ka'b, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ibrahim An-Nakha'i, Az-Zuhri, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, 'Ata' bin Yasar, 'Ata' Al-Khurasani and Muqatil bin Hayyan.\nIbn Wahb reported that Nafi' narrated that 'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, \"Fusuq [or sin mentioned in the Ayah (2:197)] refers to committing what Allah has forbidden in the Sacred Area.\"\nSeveral others said that Fusuq means cursing others, they based this on the authentic Hadith:\nسِبَابُ الْمُسْلِمِ فُسُوقٌ وَقِتَالُهُ كُفْرٌ\n(Cursing the Muslim is Fusuq, while fighting him is Kufr.)\nAbdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam said Fusuq here means slaughtering animals for the idols, as Allah said:\nأَوْ فِسْقًا أُهِلَّ لِغَيْرِ اللَّهِ بِهِ\n(...or impious (Fisq) meat (of an animal) which is slaughtered as a sacrifice for others than Allah.)(6: 145)\nAd-Dahhak said that Fusuq is insulting one another with bad nicknames.\nThose who said that the Fusuq means all types of disobedience are correct. Allah has also prohibited committing injustice during the months of Hajj in specific, although injustice is prohibited throughout the year. This is why Allah said:\nمِنْهَا أَرْبَعَةٌ حُرُمٌ ذَٰلِكَ الدِّينُ الْقَيِّمُ فَلَا تَظْلِمُوا فِيهِنَّ أَنفُسَكُمْ\n(...of them four are sacred. That is the right religion, so wrong not yourselves therein.)(9:36)\nAllah said about the Sacred Area:\nوَمَن يُرِدْ فِيهِ بِإِلْحَادٍ بِظُلْمٍ نُّذِقْهُ مِنْ عَذَابٍ أَلِيمٍ\n(...and whoever inclines to evil actions therein or to do wrong, him We shall cause to taste from a painful torment.)(22:25)\nIt is recorded in the Two Sahihs that Abu Hurayrah narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nمَنْ حَجَّ هَذَا الْبَيْتَ، فَلَمْ يَرْفُثْ وَلَمْ يَفْسُقْ خَرَجَ مِنْ ذُنُوبِهِ كَيَوْمَ وَلَدَتْهُ أُمُّهُ\n(Whoever performed Hajj to this (Sacred) House and did not commit Rafath or Fusuq, will return sinless, just as the day his mother gave birth to him.)\n\n## The Prohibition of arguing during Hajj\n\nAllah said:\nوَلَا جِدَالَ فِي الْحَجِّ\n(nor should there be Jidal during Hajj) meaning, disputes and arguments. Ibn Jarir related that 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud said that what Allah said:\nوَلَا جِدَالَ فِي الْحَجِّ\n(...nor dispute unjustly during the Hajj.) means to argue with your companion (or fellow) until you make him angry. This is similar to the the opinion that Miqsam and Ad-Dahhak related to Ibn 'Abbas. This is also the same meaning reported from Abu Al-'Aliyah, 'Ata', Mujahid, Sa'id bin Jubayr, 'Ikrimah, Jabir bin Zayd, 'Ata' Al-Khurasani, Makhul, As-Suddi, Muqatil bin Hayyan, 'Amr bin Dinar, Ad-Dahhak, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, Ibrahim An-Nakha'i, 'Ata bin Yasar, Al-Hasan, Qatadah and Az-Zuhri.\n\n## The Encouragement for Righteous Deeds and to bring Provisions for Hajj\n\nAllah said:\nوَمَا تَفْعَلُوا مِنْ خَيْرٍ يَعْلَمْهُ اللَّهُ\n(And whatever good you do, Allah knows it.)\nAfter Allah prohibited evil in deed and tongue, He encouraged righteous, good deeds, stating that He is knowledgeable of the good that they do, and He will reward them with the best awards on the Day of Resurrection.\nAllah said next:\nوَتَزَوَّدُوا فَإِنَّ خَيْرَ الزَّادِ التَّقْوَىٰ\n(And take provisions (with you) for the journey, but the best provision is At-Taqwa (piety, righteousness).)\nAl-Bukhari and Abu Dawud reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"The people of Yemen used to go to Hajj without taking enough supplies with them. They used to say, 'We are those who have Tawakkul (reliance on Allah).' Allah revealed this Ayah:\nوَتَزَوَّدُوا فَإِنَّ خَيْرَ الزَّادِ التَّقْوَىٰ\n(And take provisions (with you) for the journey, but the best provision is At-Taqwa (piety, righteousness).)\nIbn Jarir and Ibn Marduwyah narrated that Ibn 'Umar said, \"When people assumed Ihram, they would throw away whatever provisions they had and would acquire other types of provisions. Allah revealed:\nوَتَزَوَّدُوا فَإِنَّ خَيْرَ الزَّادِ التَّقْوَىٰ\n(And take a provisions (with you) for the journey, but the best provision is At-Taqwa (piety, righteousness).) Allah forbade them from this practice and required them to take flour and Sawiq (a type of food usually eaten with dates) with them.\"\n\n## The Provisions of the Hereafter\n\nAllah said:\nفَإِنَّ خَيْرَ الزَّادِ التَّقْوَىٰ\n(...but the best provision is At-Taqwa (piety, righteousness).) When Allah required mankind to supply themselves with what sustains them for the journeys of this life, He directed them to the necessary provisions for the Hereafter: Taqwa. Allah said in another Ayah:\nوَرِيشًا وَلِبَاسُ التَّقْوَىٰ ذَٰلِكَ خَيْرٌ\n(...and as an adornment; and the raiment of Taqwa, that is better.)(7:26)\nAllah mentioned the material covering and then He mentioned the spiritual covering, which includes humbleness, obedience and Taqwa. He also stated that the latter provision is better and more beneficial than the former.\nوَاتَّقُونِ يَا أُولِي الْأَلْبَابِ\n(So fear Me, O men of understanding!) meaning: 'Fear My torment, punishment, and affliction for those who defy Me and do not adhere to My commands, O people of reason and understanding.'","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=197","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:198","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:198","text":"There is no sin on you if you seek the bounty of your Lord (during pilgrimage by trading). Then when you leave 'Arafat, remember Allah (by glorifying His praises, i.e., prayers and invocations) at the Mash'ar-il-Haram. And remember Him (by invoking Allah for all good) as He has guided you, and verily you were before, of those who were astray (198)\n\n## Commercial Transactions during Hajj\n\nAl-Bukhari reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Ukaz, Mijannah and Dhul-Majaz were trading posts during the time of Jahiliyyah. During that era, they did not like the idea of conducting business transactions during the Hajj season. Later, this Ayah was revealed:\nلَيْسَ عَلَيْكُمْ جُنَاحٌ أَن تَبْتَغُوا فَضْلًا مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ\n(There is no sin on you if you seek the bounty of your Lord.) during the Hajj season.\"\nAbu Dawud and others recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"They used to avoid conducting business transactions during the Hajj season, saying that these are the days of Dhikr. Allah revealed:\nلَيْسَ عَلَيْكُمْ جُنَاحٌ أَن تَبْتَغُوا فَضْلًا مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ\n(There is no sin on you if you seek the bounty of your Lord (during pilgrimage by trading).)\nThis is also the explanation of Mujahid, Sa'id bin Jubayr, 'Ikrimah, Mansur bin Al-Mu'tamir, Qatadah, Ibrahim An-Nakha'i, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas and others. Ibn Jarir reported that Abu Umaymah said that when Ibn 'Umar was asked about conducting trade during the Hajj, he recited the Ayah:\nلَيْسَ عَلَيْكُمْ جُنَاحٌ أَن تَبْتَغُوا فَضْلًا مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ\n(There is no sin on you if you seek the bounty of your Lord (during pilgrimage by trading).)\nThis Hadith is related to Ibn 'Umar with a strong chain of narrators. This Hadith is also related to the Prophet ﷺ, as Ahmad reported that Abu Umamah At-Taymi said, \"I asked Ibn 'Umar, 'We buy (and sell during the Hajj), so do we still have a valid Hajj?' He said, 'Do you not perform Tawaf around the House, stand at 'Arafat, throw the pebbles and shave your heads?' I said, 'Yes.' Ibn 'Umar said, 'A man came to the Prophet ﷺ and asked him about what you asked me, and the Prophet ﷺ did not answer him until Jibril came down with this Ayah:\nلَيْسَ عَلَيْكُمْ جُنَاحٌ أَن تَبْتَغُوا فَضْلًا مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ\n(There is no sin on you if you seek the bounty of your Lord (during pilgrimage by trading).) The Prophet ﷺ summoned the man and said: (You are pilgrims).\" Ibn Jarir narrated that Abu Salih said to 'Umar, \"O Leader of the faithful! Did you conduct trade transactions during the Hajj?\" He said, \"Was their livelihood except during Hajj?\"\n\n## Standing at 'Arafat\n\nAllah said:\nفَإِذَا أَفَضْتُم مِّنْ عَرَفَاتٍ فَاذْكُرُوا اللَّهَ عِندَ الْمَشْعَرِ الْحَرَامِ\n(Then when you leave 'Arafat, remember Allah (by glorifying His praises, i.e., prayers and invocations) at the Mash'ar-il-Haram.)\nArafat is the place where one stands during the Hajj and it is a pillar of the rituals of Hajj. Imam Ahmad and the Sunan compilers recorded that 'Abdur-Rahman bin Ya'mar Ad-Diyli said that he heard Allah's Messenger ﷺ saying:\nالْحَجُّ عَرَفَاتٌ - ثَلَاثًا - فَمَنْ أَدْرَكَ عَرَفَةَ قَبْلَ أَنْ يَطْلُعَ الْفَجْرُ فَقَدْ أَدْرَكَ، وَأَيَّامُ مِنًى ثَلَاثَــةٌ، فَمَنْ تَعَجَّلَ فِي يَوْمَيْنِ فَلَا إِثْمَ عَلَيْهِ، وَمَنْ تَأَخَّرَ فَلَا إِثْمَ عَلَيهِ\n(Hajj is 'Arafat, (thrice). Hence, those who have stood at 'Arafat before dawn will have performed (the rituals of the Hajj). The days of Mina are three, and there is no sin for those who move on after two days, or for those who stay.)\nThe time to stand on 'Arafat starts from noon on the day of 'Arafah until dawn the next day, which is the day of the Sacrifice (the tenth day of Dhul-Hijjah). The Prophet ﷺ stood at 'Arafat during the Farewell Hajj, after he had offered the Zuhr (noon) prayer, until sunset. He said, \"Learn your rituals from me.\" In this Hadith (i. e., in the previous paragraph) he said, \"Whoever stood at 'Arafat before dawn, will have performed (the rituals of Hajj).\"\nUrwah bin Mudarris bin Harithah bin Lam At-Ta'i said, \"I came to Allah's Messenger ﷺ at Al-Muzdalifah when it was time to pray. I said, 'O Messenger of Allah! I came from the two mountains of Tayy', and my animal became tired and I became tired. I have not left any mountain, but stood on it. Do I have a valid Hajj?' Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nمَنْ شَهِدَ صَلَاتَنَا هذِهِ، فَوَقَفَ مَعَنَا حَتَّى نَدْفَعَ، وَقَدْ وَقَفَ بِعَرَفَةَ قَبْلَ ذلِكَ لَيْلًا أَوْ نَهارًا فَقَدْ تَمَّ حَجُّهُ وَقَضَى تَفَثَهُ\n(Whoever performed this prayer with us, stood with us until we moved forth, and had stood at 'Arafat before that, day or night, will have performed the Hajj and completed its rituals).\"\nThis Hadith was collected by Imam Ahmad and the compilers of the Sunan, and At-Tirmidhi graded it Sahih. It was reported that the mount was called 'Arafat because, as 'Abdur-Razzaq reported that 'Ali bin Abu Talib said, \"Allah sent Jibril to Prophet Ibrahim and he performed Hajj for him (to teach him its rituals). When Ibrahim reached 'Arafat he said, 'I have 'Araftu (I know this place).' He had come to that area before. Thereafter, it was called 'Arafat.\" Ibn Al-Mubarak said that 'Ata' said, \"It was called 'Arafat because Jibril used to teach Ibrahim the rituals of Hajj. Ibrahim would say, 'I have 'Araftu, I have 'Araftu.' It was thereafter called 'Arafat.\" Similar statements were attributed to Ibn 'Abbas, Ibn 'Umar and Abu Mijlaz. Allah knows best.\nArafat is also called Al-Mash'ar Al-Haram, Al-Mash'ar Al-Aqsa and Ilal, while the mount that is in the middle of 'Arafat is called Jabal Ar-Rahmah (Mount of Mercy).\n\n## The Time to leave 'Arafat and Al-Muzdalifah\n\nIbn Abu Hatim reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"During the time of Jahiliyyah, the people used to stand at 'Arafat. When the sun would be on top of the mountains, just as the turban is on top of a man's head, they would move on. Allah's Messenger ﷺ delayed moving from 'Arafat until sunset.\" Ibn Marduwyah related this Hadith and added, \"He then stood at Al-Muzdalifah and offered the Fajr (Dawn) prayer at an early time. When the light of dawn broke, he moved on.\" This Hadith has a Hasan chain of narrators. The long Hadith that Jabir bin 'Abdullah narrated, which Muslim collected, stated, \"The Prophet ﷺ kept standing there (meaning at 'Arafat) until sunset, when the yellow light had somewhat gone and the disc of the sun had disappeared. Then, the Prophet ﷺ made Usamah sit behind him, and in order to keep her under control, pulled the nose string of Al-Qaswa' so hard, that its head touched the saddle. He gestured with his right hand and said, \"Proceed calmly people, calmly!\" Whenever he happened to pass over an elevated tract of sand, he lightly loosened the nose string of his camel till she climbed up and this is how they reached Al-Muzdalifah. There, he led the Maghrib (Evening) and 'Isha' (Night) prayers with one Adhan and two Iqamah (which announces the imminent start of the acts of the prayer) and did not glorify Allah in between them (i.e., he did not perform voluntary Rak'ah). Allah's Messenger ﷺ then laid down till dawn and offered the Fajr (Dawn) prayer with Adhan and Iqamah, when the morning light was clear. He again mounted Al-Qaswa', and when he came to Al-Mash'ar Al-Haram, he faced towards Qiblah, supplicated to Allah, glorifying Him and saying, La ilaha illallah, and he continued standing until the daylight was very clear. He then went quickly before the sun rose.\"\nIt is reported in the Two Sahihs that Usamah bin Zayd was asked, \"How was the Prophet's pace when he moved?\" He said, \"Slow, unless he found space, then he would go a little faster.\"\n\n## Al-Mash'ar Al-Haram\n\nAbdur-Razzaq reported that Ibn 'Umar said that all of Al-Muzdalifah is Al-Mash'ar Al-Haram. It was reported that Ibn 'Umar was asked about Allah's statement:\nفَاذْكُرُوا اللَّهَ عِندَ الْمَشْعَرِ الْحَرَامِ\n(...remember Allah (by glorifying His praises, i.e., prayers and invocations) at the Mash'ar-il-Haram.)\nHe said, \"It is the Mount and the surrounding area.\" It was reported that Al-Mash'ar Al-Haram is what is between the two Mounts (refer to the following Hadith), as Ibn 'Abbas, Sa'id bin Jubayr, 'Ikrimah, Mujahid, As-Suddi, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, Al-Hasan and Qatadah have stated.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Jubayr bin Mut'im narrated that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nكُلُّ عَرَفَاتٍ مَوْقِفٌ، وَارْفَعُوا عَنْ عُرَنَةَ، وَكُلُّ مُزْدَلِفَةَ مَوْقِفٌ، وَارْفَعُوا عَنْ مُحَسِّرٍ، وَكُلُّ فِجَاجِ مَكَّةَ مَنْحَرٌ، وَكُلُّ أَيَّامِ التَّشْرِيقِ ذَبْحٌ\n(All of 'Arafat is a place of standing, and keep away from 'Uranah. All of Al-Muzdalifah is a place for standing, and keep away from the bottom of Muhassir. All of the areas of Makkah are a place for sacrifice, and all of the days of Tashriq are days of sacrifice.)\nAllah then said:\nوَاذْكُرُوهُ كَمَا هَدَاكُمْ\n(And remember Him (by invoking Allah for all good) as He has guided you.)\nThis Ayah reminds Muslims of Allah's bounty on them that He has directed and taught them the rituals of Hajj according to the guidance of Prophet Ibrahim Al-Khalil. This is why Allah said:\nوَإِن كُنتُم مِّن قَبْلِهِ لَمِنَ الضَّالِّينَ\n(...and verily, you were, before, of those who were astray.)\nIt was said that this Ayah refers to the condition before the guidance or the Qur'an or the Messenger ﷺ, all of which are correct meanings.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=198","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:199","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:199","text":"Then depart from the place whence all the people depart and ask Allah for His forgiveness. Truly, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most-Mercifu (199)\n\n## The Order to stand on 'Arafat and to depart from it\n\nThis Ayah contains Allah's order to those who stand at 'Arafat to also move on to Al-Muzdalifah, so that they remember Allah at Al-Mash'ar Al-Haram. Allah commands the Muslim to stand with the rest of the pilgrims at 'Arafat, unlike Quraysh who (before Islam) used to remain in the sanctuary, near Al-Muzdalifah, saying that they are the people of Allah's Town and the servants of His House. Al-Bukhari reported that 'A'ishah said, \"Quraysh and their allies, who used to be called Al-Hums, used to stay in Al-Muzdalifah while the rest of the Arabs would stand at 'Arafat. When Islam came, Allah commanded His Prophet ﷺ to stand at 'Arafat and then proceed from there. Hence Allah's statement:\nمِنْ حَيْثُ أَفَاضَ النَّاسُ\n(...from the place whence all the people depart.)\nThis was also said by Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, 'Ata', Qatadah and As-Suddi and others. Ibn Jarir chose this opinion and said that there is Ijma' (a consensus among the scholars) for it.\nImam Ahmad reported that Jubayr bin Mut'im said, \"My camel was lost and I went out in search of it on the day of 'Arafah, and I saw the Prophet ﷺ standing in 'Arafat. I said to myself, 'By Allah he is from the Hums. What has brought him here?'\" This Hadith is also reported in the Sahihayn.\nAl-Bukhari reported that Ibn 'Abbas said that 'depart' mentioned in the Ayah refers to proceeding from Al-Muzdalifah to Mina to stone the pillars. Allah knows best.\n\n## Asking Allah for His Forgiveness\n\nAllah said:\nوَاسْتَغْفِرُوا اللَّهَ إِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ\n(...and ask Allah for His forgiveness. Truly, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most-Merciful.)\nAllah frequently orders remembrance of Him after acts of worship are finished. Muslim reported that Allah's Messenger ﷺ used to ask Allah for His forgiveness thrice after the prayer is finished. It is reported in the Two Sahihs that the Prophet ﷺ encouraged Tasbih (saying Subhan Allah, i.e., Glorified is Allah), Tahmid (saying Al-Hamdu Lillah, i.e., praise be to Allah) and Takbir (saying Allahu Akbar, i.e., Allah is the Most Great) thirty-three times each (after prayer).\nIbn Marduwyah collected the Hadith that Al-Bukhari reported from Shaddad bin Aws, who stated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nسَيِّدُ الْاِسْتِغْفَارِ أَنْ يَقُولَ الْعَبْدُ: اللَّهُمَّ أَنْتَ رَبِّي، لَا إِلٰهَ إِلَّا أَنْتَ، خَلَقْتَنِي وَأَنَا عَبْدُكَ، وَأَنَا عَلى عَهْدِكَ وَوَعْدِكَ مَا اسْتَطَعْتُ، أَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ شَرِّ مَا صَنَعْتُ، أَبُوءُ لَكَ بِنِعْمَتِكَ عَلَيَّ، وَأَبُوءُ بِذَنْبِي، فَاغْفِرْ لِي فَإِنَّهُ لَا يَغْفِرُ الذُّنُوبَ إلَّا أَنْتَ، مَنْ قَالَهَا فِي لَيْلَةٍ فَمَاتَ فِي لَيْلَتِهِ دَخَلَ الْجَنَّــةَ، وَمَنْ قَالَهَا فِي يَوْمِهِ فَمَاتَ دَخَلَ الْجَنَّــةَ\n(The master of supplication for forgiveness, is for the servant to say: 'O Allah! You are my Lord, there is no deity worthy of worship except You. You have created me and I am Your servant. I am on Your covenant, as much as I can be, and awaiting Your promise. I seek refuge with You from the evil that I have committed. I admit Your favor on me and admit my faults. So forgive me, for none except You forgives the sins.' Whoever said these words at night and died that same night will enter Paradise. Whoever said it during the day and died will enter Paradise.)\nFurthermore, it is reported in the Two Sahihs that 'Abdullah bin 'Amr said that Abu Bakr said, \"O Messenger of Allah! Teach me an invocation so that I may invoke (Allah) with it in my prayer. He told me to say:\nقُلْ: اللَّهُمَّ إِنِّي ظَلَمْتُ نَفْسِي ظُلْمًا كَثِيرًا وَلَا يَغْفِرُ الذُّنُوبَ إِلَّا أَنْتَ فَاغْفِرْ لِي مَغْفِرَةً مِنْ عِنْدِكَ، وَارْحَمْنِي إِنَّكَ أَنْتَ الْغَفُورُ الرَّحِيمُ\n(Allahumma inni zalamtu nafsi zulman kathiran, wa la yaghfirudh-dhunuba illa Anta faghfirli maghfiratan min 'indika, war-hamni innaka Antal-Ghafur-ur-Rahim (O Allah! I have done great injustice to myself and none except You forgives sins, so please forgive me and be merciful to me as You are the Forgiver, the Merciful).)\nThere are many other Hadiths on this subject.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=199","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:200","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:200–202","text":"So when you have accomplished your Manasik, remember Allah as you remember your forefathers or with far more remembrance. But of mankind there are some who say: \"Our Lord! Give us (Your bounties) in this world!\" and for such there will be no portion in the Hereafter (200)And of them there are some who say: \"Our Lord! Give us in this world that which is good and in the Hereafter that which is good, and save us from the torment of the Fire! (201)For them there will be alloted a share for what they have earned. And Allah is swift at reckoning (202)\n\n## The Order for Remembrance of Allah and seeking Good in this Life and the Hereafter upon completing the Rites of Hajj\n\nAllah commands that He be remembered after the rituals are performed.\nكَذِكْرِكُمْ آبَاءَكُمْ\n(...as you remember your forefathers)\nSa'id bin Jubayr said that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"During the time of Jahiliyyah, people used to stand during the (Hajj) season, and one of them would say, 'My father used to feed (the poor), help others (end their disputes, with his money), pay the Diyah (i.e., blood money),' and so forth. The only Dhikr that they had was that they would remember the deeds of their fathers. Allah then revealed to Muhammad ﷺ:\nفَاذْكُرُوا اللَّهَ كَذِكْرِكُمْ آبَاءَكُمْ أَوْ أَشَدَّ ذِكْرًا\n(Remember Allah as you remember your forefathers or with far more remembrance.)\nTherefore, remembering Allah the Exalted and Ever High is always encouraged. We should mention that when Allah used \"or\" in the Ayah, He meant to encourage the people to remember Him more than they remember their forefathers, not that the word entails a doubt (as to which is larger or bigger). This statement is similar to the Ayat:\nفَهِيَ كَالْحِجَارَةِ أَوْ أَشَدُّ قَسْوَةً\n(...as stones or even worse in hardness)(2:74) and,\nيَخْشَوْنَ النَّاسَ كَخَشْيَةِ اللَّهِ أَوْ أَشَدَّ خَشْيَةً\n(...fear men as they fear Allah or even more)(4:77) and,\nوَأَرْسَلْنَاهُ إِلَىٰ مِائَةِ أَلْفٍ أَوْ يَزِيدُونَ\n(And We sent him to a hundred thousand (people) or even more)(37:147) and,\nفَكَانَ قَابَ قَوْسَيْنِ أَوْ أَدْنَىٰ\n(And was at a distance of two bows' length or (even) nearer.)(53:9)\nAllah encourages calling Him in supplication after remembering Him, because this will make it more likely that the supplication will be accepted. Allah also criticizes those who only supplicate to Him about the affairs of this life, while ignoring the affairs o