ording to what He has made a pact with you. Verily, We shall guide ourselves. (49)But when We removed the torment from them, behold, they broke their covenant (50)\nMusa was sent with the Message of Tawhid to Fir'awn and His Chiefs\nHere Allah tells us about His servant and Messenger Musa, peace be upon him, and how He sent him to Fir'awn and his chiefs. That is, his governors, ministers, leaders and followers among the Egyptians and the Children of Israel. Allah sent him to call them to worship Allah alone, with no partner or associate, and to forbid them from worshipping anything other than Him. He sent him with mighty signs, such as his hand and his staff, other signs such as the flood, locusts, Qummal, frogs and blood, and the loss of their crops and lives. Yet despite all that they remained arrogant and stubbornly refused to follow him; they rejected his message and made fun of it, and laughed at the one who had brought it.\nوَمَا نُرِيهِمْ مِنْ آيَةٍ إِلَّا هِيَ أَكْبَرُ مِنْ أُخْتِهَا ۖ\n(And not an Ayah We showed them but it was greater than its fellow preceding it,) but despite that they would not give up their sin, misguidance, ignorance and confusion. Every time one of these signs came to them, they would go and implore Musa, saying,\nيَا أَيُّهَ السَّاحِرُ\n(\"O you sorcerer!...\") meaning, expert or knowledgeable one – this was the view of Ibn Jarir.\nThe scholars of that time were the sorcerers or magicians, and magic was not regarded as something reprehensible by them at that time, so this was not a slight on their part. They were in a state of need, so it would not have been appropriate for them to insult him. This was a way of honoring him, as they thought. On each occasion, they promised Musa that if the torment was lifted from them, they would believe in him and let the Children of Israel go with him, but on each occasion they went back on their word. This is like the Ayat:\nفَأَرْسَلْنَا عَلَيْهِمُ الطُّوفَانَ وَالْجَرَادَ وَالْقُمَّلَ وَالضَّفَادِعَ وَالدَّمَ آيَاتٍ مُفَصَّلَاتٍ فَاسْتَكْبَرُوا وَكَانُوا قَوْمًا مُجْرِمِينَ - وَلَمَّا وَقَعَ عَلَيْهِمُ الرِّجْزُ قَالُوا يَا مُوسَى ادْعُ لَنَا رَبَّكَ بِمَا عَهِدَ عِنْدَكَ ۖ لَئِنْ كَشَفْتَ عَنَّا الرِّجْزَ لَنُؤْمِنَنَّ لَكَ وَلَنُرْسِلَنَّ مَعَكَ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ - فَلَمَّا كَشَفْنَا عَنْهُمُ الرِّجْزَ إِلَىٰ أَجَلٍ هُمْ بَالِغُوهُ إِذَا هُمْ يَنْكُثُونَ\n(So We sent on them: the flood, the locusts, the Qummal, the frogs, and the blood; manifest signs, yet they remained arrogant, and they were of those people who were criminals. And when the punishment struck them, they said: \"O Musa! Invoke your Lord for us because of His promise to you. If you remove the punishment from us, we indeed shall believe in you, and we shall let the Children of Israel go with you.\" But when We removed the punishment from them to a fixed term, which they had to reach, behold! they broke their word!)(7:133-135)","href":"/tafsir/43?verse=46","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:43:51","title":"Ibn Kathir · 43:51–56","text":"And Fir'awn proclaimed among his people (saying): \"O my people! Is not mine the dominion of Egypt, and these rivers flowing underneath me. See you not then? (51)\"Am I not better than this one (Musa) who is despicable and can scarcely express himself clearly? (52)Why then are not golden bracelets bestowed on him, or angels sent along with him? (53)Thus he fooled his people, and they obeyed him. Verily, they were ever a people who were rebellious (54)So when they angered Us, We punished them, and drowned them all (55)And We made them a precedent, and an example to later generations (56)\nFir'awn's Address to His People and how Allah punished Him\nAllah tells us how Fir'awn stubbornly persisted in his rebellion and disbelief. He assembled his people and addressed them in a vainglorious fashion, boasting of his dominion over Egypt.\nأَلَيْسَ لِي مُلْكُ مِصْرَ وَهَٰذِهِ الْأَنْهَارُ تَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِي\n(Is not mine the dominion of Egypt, and these rivers flowing underneath me?) Qatadah said, \"They had gardens and rivers of flowing water.\"\nأَفَلَا تُبْصِرُونَ\n(See you not then?) means, 'do you not see my position of might and power?' – implying that Musa and his followers were poor and weak. This is like the Ayah:\nفَحَشَرَ فَنَادَىٰ - فَقَالَ أَنَا رَبُّكُمُ الْأَعْلَىٰ - فَأَخَذَهُ اللَّهُ نَكَالَ الْآخِرَةِ وَالْأُولَىٰ\n(Then he gathered (his people) and cried aloud, saying: \"I am your lord, most high.\" So Allah seized him with punishment for his last and first transgression.)(79:23-25)\nأَمْ أَنَا خَيْرٌ مِنْ هَٰذَا الَّذِي هُوَ مَهِينٌ\n(Am I not better than this one who is despicable) As-Suddi said, \"He was saying, 'indeed I am better than this one, who is despicable'.\" Some of the grammarians of Basrah said that Fir'awn – may the curse of Allah be upon him – was saying that he was better than Musa, peace be upon him. But this is an obvious lie, may continued curses be upon him until the Day of Resurrection. By describing Musa as despicable he meant – as Sufyan said – insignificant. Qatadah and As-Suddi said, \"He meant, weak.\" Ibn Jarir said, \"He meant, he had no power, authority or wealth.\"\nوَلَا يَكَادُ يُبِينُ\n(and can scarcely express himself clearly) means, he cannot speak clearly, he stammers and cannot speak well.\nFir'awn's description of Musa as \"despicable\" is a lie; rather it is he who was despicable and insignificant, lacking in physical, moral and religious terms, and it is Musa who was noble, truthful, righteous and upright.\nوَلَا يَكَادُ يُبِينُ\n(and can scarcely express himself clearly). This was also a lie. Although something happened to Musa's tongue when he was a child, when it was burnt by a coal. He asked Allah to loosen the knot from his tongue (i.e., to correct his speech defect) so that they could understand what he said, and Allah had answered his prayer and said:\nقَالَ قَدْ أُوتِيتَ سُؤْلَكَ يَا مُوسَىٰ\n(You are granted your request, O Musa)(20:36). It may be the case that some problem remained which he had not asked to be relieved of, as Al-Hasan Al-Basri suggested, and that he had asked only to be relieved of that which stood in the way of his conveying the Message. A person cannot be blamed for physical matters over which he has no control. Even though Fir'awn had the intelligence to understand that, he wanted to confuse and mislead his people, who were ignorant and stupid. So he said:\nفَلَوْلَا أُلْقِيَ عَلَيْهِ أَسْوِرَةٌ مِنْ ذَهَبٍ\n(Why then are not golden bracelets bestowed on him…?) meaning, adornments which are placed on the arms. This was the view of Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, Qatadah and others.\nأَوْ جَاءَ مَعَهُ الْمَلَائِكَةُ مُقْتَرِنِينَ\n(or angels sent along with him?) meaning, to serve him and to testify that he is telling the truth. He looked only at outward appearances and did not understand the true inner matters that are clearer than what he focused on, if only he had understood that. Allah says:\nفَاسْتَخَفَّ قَوْمَهُ فَأَطَاعُوهُ ۚ\n(Thus he fooled his people, and they obeyed him.) meaning, he confused them and invited them to misguidance, and they responded to him.\nۚ إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا قَوْمًا فَاسِقِينَ\n(Verily, they were ever a people who were rebellious.) Then Allah says:\nفَلَمَّا آسَفُونَا انْتَقَمْنَا مِنْهُمْ فَأَغْرَقْنَاهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ\n(So when they angered Us, We punished them, and drowned them all.)\nAli bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said it means: \"When they angered Us means, they provoked Our wrath.\" Ad-Dahhak said, it means \"They made Us angry.\" This was also the view of Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Muhammad bin Ka'b Al-Qurazi, Qatadah, As-Suddi and other scholars of Tafsir.\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that 'Uqbah bin 'Amir, may Allah be pleased with him, said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nإِذَا رَأَيْتَ اللهَ تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَىٰ يُعْطِي الْعَبْدَ مَا يَشَاءُ، وَهُوَ مُقِيمٌ عَلىٰ مَعَاصِيهِ، فَإِنَّمَا ذَلِكَ اسْتِدْرَاجٌ مِنْهُ لَهُ\n(When you see that Allah gives a person what he wants even though he is persisting in sin, that means that Allah is enticing him into destruction.) Then he recited:\nفَلَمَّا آسَفُونَا انْتَقَمْنَا مِنْهُمْ فَأَغْرَقْنَاهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ\n(So when they angered Us, We punished them, and drowned them all.) It was reported that Tariq bin Shihab said, \"I was with 'Abdullah, may Allah be pleased with him, and the issue of sudden death was mentioned. He said, 'It is a relief for the believer and a source of regret for the disbeliever.' Then he recited the Ayah:\nفَلَمَّا آسَفُونَا انْتَقَمْنَا مِنْهُمْ فَأَغْرَقْنَاهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ\n(So when they angered Us, We punished them, and drowned them all). \" 'Umar bin 'Abdul-'Aziz, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"I found that punishment comes with negligence, meaning the Ayah:\nفَلَمَّا آسَفُونَا انْتَقَمْنَا مِنْهُمْ فَأَغْرَقْنَاهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ\n(So when they angered Us, We punished them, and drowned them all).\"\nفَجَعَلْنَاهُمْ سَلَفًا وَمَثَلًا لِلْآخِرِينَ\n(And We made them a precedent, and an example to later generations.) Abu Mijlaz said, \"Precedent for others who do the same as they did.\" He and Mujahid said, \"An example, i.e., a lesson to those who come after them.\" Allah is the One Who guides to the straight path, and unto Him is the final return.","href":"/tafsir/43?verse=51","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:43:57","title":"Ibn Kathir · 43:57–65","text":"And when the son of Maryam is quoted as an example, behold, your people cry aloud thereat (57)And say: \"Are our gods better or is he?\" They quoted not the above example except for argument. Nay! But they are a quarrelsome people (58)He was not more than a servant. We granted Our favor to him, and We made him an example for the Children of Israel (59)And if it were Our will, We would have made angels to replace you on the earth (60)And he shall be a known sign for (the coming of) the Hour. Therefore have no doubt concerning it. And follow Me! This is the straight path (61)And let not Shaytan hinder you. Verily, he (Shaytan) to you is a plain enemy (62)And when 'Isa came with clear proofs, he said: \"I have come to you with Al-Hikmah, and in order to make clear to you some of that in which you differ. Therefore have Taqwa of Allah and obey me. (63)\"Verily, Allah! He is my Lord and your Lord. So worship Him. This is the straight path. (64)But the sects from among themselves differed. So woe to those who do wrong from the torment of a painful Day (65)\nThe Contempt of the Quraysh for the son of Maryam, and His true Status with Allah\nAllah tells us how the Quraysh persisted in their disbelief and stubborn arguments:\nوَلَمَّا ضُرِبَ ابْنُ مَرْيَمَ مَثَلًا إِذَا قَوْمُكَ مِنْهُ يَصِدُّونَ\n(And when the son of Maryam is quoted as an example, behold, your people cry aloud thereat.)\nSeveral others narrated that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, As-Suddi and Ad-Dahhak said, \"They laughed, i.e., they were astounded by that.\" Qatadah said, \"They were repelled by that and they laughed.\" Ibrahim An-Nakha'i said, \"They turned away.\"\nThe reason for this was mentioned by Muhammad bin Ishaq in As-Sirah. He said, \"According to what I have heard, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ sat down one day with Al-Walid bin Al-Mughirah in the Masjid, and An-Nadr bin Al-Harith came and sat down with them. There were also other men from the Quraysh in the gathering. The Messenger of Allah ﷺ spoke, then An-Nadr bin Al-Harith came up to him and the Messenger of Allah ﷺ spoke to him until he ﷺ defeated him in argument. Then he ﷺ recited to him and to them,\nإِنَّكُمْ وَمَا تَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ حَصَبُ جَهَنَّمَ أَنْتُمْ لَهَا وَارِدُونَ\n(Certainly you and that which you are worshipping now besides Allah, are (but) fuel for Hell! (Surely) you will enter it.)(21:98)\nThen the Messenger of Allah ﷺ got up and went to sit with 'Abdullah bin Al-Zab'ari At-Tamimi. Al-Walid bin Al-Mughirah said to him, 'By Allah, An-Nadr bin Al-Harith could not match the son of 'Abd Al-Muttalib in argument. Muhammad claims that we and these gods that we worship are fuel for Hell.' 'Abdullah bin Az-Zab'ari said, 'By Allah, if I meet with him I will defeat him in argument. Ask Muhammad whether everyone that is worshipped instead of Allah will be in Hell with those who worshipped him, for we worship the angels, and the Jews worship 'Uzayr, and the Christians worship the Messiah 'Isa bin Maryam.' Al-Walid and those who were sitting with him were amazed at what 'Abdullah bin Az-Zab'ari said, and they thought that he had come up with a good point. He said this to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, who said:\nكُلُّ مَنْ أَحَبَّ أَنْ يُعْبَدَ مِنْ دُونِ اللهِ فَهُوَ مَعَ مَنْ عَبَدَهُ، فَإِنَّهُمْ إِنَّمَا يَعْبُدُونَ الشَّيْطَانَ وَمَنْ أَمَرَهُمْ بِعِبَادَتِهِ\n(Everyone who likes to worship something other than Allah will be with the one whom he worshipped, for indeed they are worshipping the Shaytan and whomever told them to worship that person.)\" Then Allah revealed the words:\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ سَبَقَتْ لَهُمْ مِنَّا الْحُسْنَىٰ أُولَٰئِكَ عَنْهَا مُبْعَدُونَ\n(Verily, those for whom the good has preceded from Us, they will be removed far therefrom (Hell))(21:101), meaning that 'Isa, 'Uzayr and rabbis and monks who were also worshipped, who spent their lives in devotion towards Allah. The misguided people who came after them took them as lords instead of Allah. Concerning the notion of worshipping the angels as daughters of Allah, the following words were revealed:\nوَقَالُوا اتَّخَذَ الرَّحْمَٰنُ وَلَدًا ۗ سُبْحَانَهُ ۚ بَلْ عِبَادٌ مُكْرَمُونَ\n(And they say: \"The Most Gracious has begotten a son (or children).\" Glory to Him! They are but honored servants.)(21:26) Concerning 'Isa bin Maryam, the fact that he is worshipped instead of Allah, and to the amazement of Al-Walid and the others who were present at the argument, the following was revealed:\nوَلَمَّا ضُرِبَ ابْنُ مَرْيَمَ مَثَلًا إِذَا قَوْمُكَ مِنْهُ يَصِدُّونَ\n(And when the son of Maryam is quoted as an example, behold, your people cry aloud thereat.) meaning, they take this argument as a basis for rejecting your message. Then Allah mentions 'Isa bin Maryam and says:\nإِنْ هُوَ إِلَّا عَبْدٌ أَنْعَمْنَا عَلَيْهِ وَجَعَلْنَاهُ مَثَلًا لِبَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ - وَلَوْ نَشَاءُ لَجَعَلْنَا مِنْكُمْ مَلَائِكَةً فِي الْأَرْضِ يَخْلُفُونَ - وَإِنَّهُ لَعِلْمٌ لِلسَّاعَةِ\n(He was not more than a servant. We granted Our favor to him, and We made him an example for the Children of Israel. And if it were Our will, We would have made angels to replace you on the earth. And he ('Isa) shall be a known sign for the Hour.) meaning, the miracles and signs that happened at his hands, such as raising the dead and healing the sick, are sufficient as signs of the approach of the Hour.\nفَلَا تَمْتَرُنَّ بِهَا وَاتَّبِعُونِ ۚ هَٰذَا صِرَاطٌ مُسْتَقِيمٌ\n(Therefore have no doubt concerning it. And follow Me! This is the straight path).\" Ibn Jarir mentioned that Al-'Awfi reported that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, commented on the Ayah:\nوَلَمَّا ضُرِبَ ابْنُ مَرْيَمَ مَثَلًا إِذَا قَوْمُكَ مِنْهُ يَصِدُّونَ\n(And when the son of Maryam is quoted as an example, behold, your people cry aloud thereat.) \"This means the Quraysh, when it was said to them:\nإِنَّكُمْ وَمَا تَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ حَصَبُ جَهَنَّمَ أَنْتُمْ لَهَا وَارِدُونَ\n(Certainly you and that which you are worshipping now besides Allah, are (but) fuel for Hell! (Surely) you will enter it.)(21:98) The Quraysh said to him: 'What about 'Isa bin Maryam?' He said:\nذَاكَ عَبْدُاللهِ وَرَسُولُهُ\n(He is the servant and Messenger of Allah.) They said, 'By Allah, he means that we should take him as a lord just as the Christians took 'Isa son of Maryam as a lord.' Then Allah said:\nمَا ضَرَبُوهُ لَكَ إِلَّا جَدَلًا ۚ بَلْ هُمْ قَوْمٌ خَصِمُونَ\n(They quoted not the above example except for argument. Nay! But they are a quarrelsome people).\"\nوَقَالُوا أَآلِهَتُنَا خَيْرٌ أَمْ هُوَ ۚ\n(And say: \"Are our gods better or is he?\"). Qatadah said, \"They were saying, 'our gods are better than him'.\" Qatadah said; \"Ibn Mas'ud, may Allah be pleased with him, recited it\n(أَآلِهَتُنَا خَيْرٌ أَمْ هٰذَا)\n(Are our gods better or is this (person)?)\" they mean Muhammad ﷺ.\nمَا ضَرَبُوهُ لَكَ إِلَّا جَدَلًا ۚ\n(They quoted not the above example except for argument.) means, for the sake of stubborn argument, for they knew that he ('Isa ) was not included in the Ayah (21:98), because that would not make sense. The words,\nإِنَّكُمْ وَمَا تَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ حَصَبُ جَهَنَّمَ\n(Certainly you and that which you are worshipping now besides Allah, are (but) fuel for Hell!)(21:98) are addressed to the Quraysh, for they used to worship idols and false gods – they did not worship the Messiah so why should he be included in what the Ayah says? What they said was only for the sake of argument; they did not really believe in it.\nImam Ahmad, may Allah have mercy on him, recorded that Abu Umamah, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nمَا ضَلَّ قَوْمٌ بَعْدَ هُدًى كَانُوا عَلَيْهِ، إِلَّا أُوْرِثُوا الْجَدَلَ\ng(No people go astray after having been guided, but they resort to (futile) argument.) Then the Messenger of Allah ﷺ recited this Ayah:\nمَا ضَرَبُوهُ لَكَ إِلَّا جَدَلًا ۚ بَلْ هُمْ قَوْمٌ خَصِمُونَ\n(They quoted not the above example except for argument. Nay! But they are a quarrelsome people).\" It was also recorded by At-Tirmidhi, Ibn Majah and Ibn Jarir. At-Tirmidhi said, \"This Hadith is Hasan Sahih, we do not know it except from the Hadith of Hajjaj bin Dinar...\"\nإِنْ هُوَ إِلَّا عَبْدٌ أَنْعَمْنَا عَلَيْهِ\n(He ('Isa) was not more than a servant. We granted Our favor to him,) means, 'Isa, peace be upon him; he was no more than one of the servants of Allah whom Allah blessed with prophethood and messengership.\nوَجَعَلْنَاهُ مَثَلًا لِبَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ\n(and We made him an example for the Children of Israel.) means, 'a sign, proof and evidence of Our power to do whatever We will.'\nوَلَوْ نَشَاءُ لَجَعَلْنَا مِنْكُمْ مَلَائِكَةً فِي الْأَرْضِ يَخْلُفُونَ\n(And if it were Our will, We would have made angels to replace you on the earth.) As-Suddi said, \"They would have taken your place on (the earth). \" Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, and Qatadah said, \"They would have succeeded one another just as you succeed one another.\" This view is implied by the former veiw. Mujahid said, \"They would have populated the earth instead of you.\" Allah's saying:\nوَإِنَّهُ لَعِلْمٌ لِلسَّاعَةِ\n(And he ('Isa) shall be a known sign for (the coming of) the Hour.) The correct view concerning this phrase is that it refers to his descent before the Day of Resurrection, as Allah says:\nوَإِنْ مِنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَابِ إِلَّا لَيُؤْمِنَنَّ بِهِ قَبْلَ مَوْتِهِ ۖ\n(And there is none of the People of the Scripture but must believe in him before his death)(4:159). – meaning before the death of 'Isa, peace be upon him –\nوَيَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ يَكُونُ عَلَيْهِمْ شَهِيدًا\nAnd on the Day of Resurrection, he will be a witness against them )4:159(. This meaning has the support from an alternate recitation of the Ayat;\n(وَإِنَّهُ لَعَلَمٌ لِلسَّاعَةِ)\n(And he shall be a known sign for (the coming of) the Hour.) means, evidence that the Hour will surely come. Mujahid said:\nوَإِنَّهُ لَعِلْمٌ لِلسَّاعَةِ\n(And he shall be a sign for (the coming of) the Hour.) means, sign and \"One of the signs of the Hour will be the appearance of 'Isa son of Maryam before the Day of Resurrection. \" Something similar was also narrated from Abu Hurayrah, Ibn 'Abbas, 'Abu Al-'Aliyah, Abu Malik, 'Ikrimah, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak and others. Many Mutawatir Hadiths report that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said that 'Isa will descend before the Day of Resurrection as a just ruler and fair judge.\nفَلَا تَمْتَرُنَّ بِهَا\n(Therefore have no doubt concerning it.) means, do not doubt that it will surely come to pass.\nوَاتَّبِعُونِ\n(And follow Me.) means, 'in what I tell you about it.'\nهَٰذَا صِرَاطٌ مُسْتَقِيمٌ - وَلَا يَصُدَّنَّكُمُ الشَّيْطَانُ ۖ\n(This is the straight path. And let not Shaytan hinder you.) means, from following the truth.\nإِنَّهُ لَكُمْ عَدُوٌّ مُبِينٌ - وَلَمَّا جَاءَ عِيسَىٰ بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ قَالَ قَدْ جِئْتُكُمْ بِالْحِكْمَةِ\n(Verily, he (Satan) to you is a plain enemy. And when 'Isa came with (Our) clear proofs, he said: \"I have come to you with Al-Hikmah...\"), meaning prophethood:\nوَلِأُبَيِّنَ لَكُمْ بَعْضَ الَّذِي تَخْتَلِفُونَ فِيهِ\n(and in order to make clear to you some of the (points) in which you differ.) Ibn Jarir said, \"This means religious matters, not worldly matters.\" What he said is good.\nفَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ\n(Therefore have Taqwa of Allah) means, 'with regard to what I command you to do.'\nوَأَطِيعُونِ\n(and obey me.) means, 'in what I bring to you.'\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ هُوَ رَبِّي وَرَبُّكُمْ فَاعْبُدُوهُ ۚ هَٰذَا صِرَاطٌ مُسْتَقِيمٌ\n(Verily, Allah! He is my Lord and your Lord. So worship Him. This is the straight path.) means, 'you and I are enslaved to Him, in need of Him and we commonly share in the worship of Him Alone, associating none with Him.'\nهَٰذَا صِرَاطٌ مُسْتَقِيمٌ\n(This is the straight path) means, 'what I have brought to you is the straight path, which is the worship of the Lord, may He exalted, Alone.'\nفَاخْتَلَفَ الْأَحْزَابُ مِنْ بَيْنِهِمْ ۖ\n(But the sects from among themselves differed.) means, they differed and became parties and factions, some who stated that he ('Isa) was the servant and Messenger of Allah – which is true - while others claimed that he was the son of Allah or that he himself was Allah – glorified be Allah far above what they say. Allah says:\nفَوَيْلٌ لِلَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا مِنْ عَذَابِ يَوْمٍ أَلِيمٍ\n(So woe to those who do wrong from the torment of a painful Day)!","href":"/tafsir/43?verse=57","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:43:66","title":"Ibn Kathir · 43:66–73","text":"Do they only wait for the Hour that it shall come upon them suddenly while they perceive not (66)Friends on that Day will be foes one to another except those who have Taqwa (67)My servants! No fear shall be on you this Day, nor shall you grieve (68)(You) who believed in Our Ayat and were Muslims (69)Enter Paradise, you and your wives, in happiness (70)Trays of gold and cups will be passed round them; (there will be) therein all that their souls desire, and all that eyes could delight in and you will abide therein forever (71)This is the Paradise, which you have been made to inherit because of your deeds that you used to do (72)Therein for you will be fruits in plenty, of which you will eat (as you desire)(73)\nThe Resurrection will come suddenly, and Enmity will arise between close Friends among the Disbelievers\nAllah says, 'do these idolaters who disbelieve in the Messengers wait'\nإِلَّا السَّاعَةَ أَنْ تَأْتِيَهُمْ بَغْتَةً وَهُمْ لَا يَشْعُرُونَ\n(only for the Hour that it shall come upon them suddenly while they perceive not?) means, for it is real and will inevitably come to pass, and these negligent people are unprepared for it. When it comes, it will catch them unawares, and on that Day they will feel the utmost regret when regret will not benefit them in the slightest and will not afford them any protection.\nالْأَخِلَّاءُ يَوْمَئِذٍ بَعْضُهُمْ لِبَعْضٍ عَدُوٌّ إِلَّا الْمُتَّقِينَ\n(Friends on that Day will be foes one to another except those who have Taqwa.) means, every friendship that exists for a purpose other than for the sake of Allah will turn to enmity on the Day of Resurrection, except for that which is for the sake of Allah, which will last forever. This is like the statement of Ibrahim, peace be upon him, to his people:\nإِنَّمَا اتَّخَذْتُمْ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ أَوْثَانًا مَوَدَّةَ بَيْنِكُمْ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا ۖ ثُمَّ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ يَكْفُرُ بَعْضُكُمْ بِبَعْضٍ وَيَلْعَنُ بَعْضُكُمْ بَعْضًا وَمَأْوَاكُمُ النَّارُ وَمَا لَكُمْ مِنْ نَاصِرِينَ\n(You have taken (for worship) idols instead of Allah. The love between you is only in the life of this world, but on the Day of Resurrection, you shall disown each other, and curse each other, and your abode will be the Fire, and you shall have no helper.)(29:25)\nGood News for Those with Taqwa on the Day of Resurrection, and Their entry into Paradise\nيَا عِبَادِ لَا خَوْفٌ عَلَيْكُمُ الْيَوْمَ وَلَا أَنْتُمْ تَحْزَنُونَ\n(My servants! No fear shall be on you this Day, nor shall you grieve.) Then He will give them the glad tidings:\nالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا بِآيَاتِنَا وَكَانُوا مُسْلِمِينَ\n((You) who believed in Our Ayat and were Muslims.) means, their hearts believed and they submitted inwardly and outwardly to the Laws of Allah.\nAl-Mu'tamir bin Sulayman narrated that his father said: \"When the Day of Resurrection comes and the people are resurrected, there will be no one left who will not be filled with terror. Then a caller will cry out:\nيَا عِبَادِ لَا خَوْفٌ عَلَيْكُمُ الْيَوْمَ وَلَا أَنْتُمْ تَحْزَنُونَ\n(My servants! No fear shall be on you this Day, nor shall you grieve.) So all the people will be filled with hope, but this will be followed by the words:\nالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا بِآيَاتِنَا وَكَانُوا مُسْلِمِينَ\n((You) who believed in Our Ayat and were Muslims.) Then all of mankind will be filled with despair apart from the believers.\"\nادْخُلُوا الْجَنَّةَ\n(Enter Paradise,) means, they will be told to enter Paradise.\nأَنْتُمْ وَأَزْوَاجُكُمْ\n(you and your wives,) means, your counterparts\nتُحْبَرُونَ\n(in happiness (Tuhbarun).) means, in delight and joy.\nيُطَافُ عَلَيْهِمْ بِصِحَافٍ مِنْ ذَهَبٍ وَأَكْوَابٍ ۖ\n(Trays of gold and cups will be passed round them;) means, fine vessels of gold containing food and drink, without spouts or handles.\n(وَفِيهَا مَا تَشْتَهِي الْأَنْفُسُ)\n[(there will be) therein all that their souls could desire).] Some of them recited:\nمَا تَشْتَهِيهِ الْأَنْفُسُ\n(that their souls desire,)\nوَتَلَذُّ الْأَعْيُنُ\n(and all that eyes could delight in) means, of good food, delightful fragrances and beautiful scenes.\nوَأَنْتُمْ فِيهَا\n(and you will therein) means, in Paradise\nخَالِدُونَ\n(abide forever) means, you will never leave it or want to exchange it.\nThen it will be said to them, as a reminder of the blessing and favor of Allah:\nوَتِلْكَ الْجَنَّةُ الَّتِي أُورِثْتُمُوهَا بِمَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ\n(This is the Paradise, which you have been made to inherit because of your deeds that you used to do.) means, the righteous deeds which were the cause of your being included in the mercy of Allah. For no one will be admitted to Paradise by virtue of their deeds alone; that will be by the mercy and grace of Allah. But the varying ranks and degrees of Paradise will be attained according to one's righteous deeds.\nلَكُمْ فِيهَا فَاكِهَةٌ كَثِيرَةٌ\n(Therein for you will be fruits in plenty,) means, of all kinds.\nمِنْهَا تَأْكُلُونَ\n(of which you will eat.) means, whatever you choose and desire. When food and drink are mentioned, fruit is also mentioned to complete the picture of blessing and joy. And Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/43?verse=66","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:43:74","title":"Ibn Kathir · 43:74–80","text":"Verily, the criminals will be in the torment of Hell to abide therein forever (74)(The torment) will not be lightened for them, and they will be plunged into destruction with deep regrets, sorrows and in despair therein (75)We wronged them not, but they were the wrongdoers (76)And they will cry: \"O Malik (keeper of Hell)! Let your Lord make an end of us.\" He will say: \"Verily, you shall abide forever. (77)Indeed We have brought the truth to you, but most of you have a hatred for the truth (78)Or have they plotted some plan? Then We too are planning (79)Or do they think that We hear not their secrets and their private counsel? Yes (We do) and Our messengers are by them, to record (80)\nThe Punishment of the Doomed\nThe description of the state of the blessed is followed by a description of the state of the doomed.\nإِنَّ الْمُجْرِمِينَ فِي عَذَابِ جَهَنَّمَ خَالِدُونَ - لَا يُفَتَّرُ عَنْهُمْ\n(Verily, the criminals will be in the torment of Hell to abide therein forever. It will not be lightened for them,) meaning, not even for one moment.\nوَهُمْ فِيهِ مُبْلِسُونَ\n(and they will be plunged into destruction with deep regrets, sorrows and in despair therein,) means, they will despair of any goodness.\nوَمَا ظَلَمْنَاهُمْ وَلَٰكِنْ كَانُوا هُمُ الظَّالِمِينَ\n(We wronged them not, but they were the wrongdoers.) means, by their committing wrong actions after proof had been established against them and Messengers had been sent to them, but they rejected them and rebelled, so they are to be punished accordingly. And your Lord is not at all unjust to (His) servants.\nوَنَادَوْا يَا مَالِكُ\n(And they will cry: \"O Malik...\") who is the keeper of Hell. Al-Bukhari said, \"Hajjaj bin Minhal told us, Sufyan bin 'Uyaynah told us, from 'Amr bin 'Ata, ' from Safwan bin Ya'la that his father, may Allah be pleased with him, said, 'I heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ reciting on the Minbar:\nوَنَادَوْا يَا مَالِكُ لِيَقْضِ عَلَيْنَا رَبُّكَ ۖ\n(And they will cry: \"O Malik! Let your Lord make an end of us.\") meaning, 'let Him destroy our souls and give us some respite from our predicament.' But it will be as Allah says:\nلَا يُقْضَىٰ عَلَيْهِمْ فَيَمُوتُوا وَلَا يُخَفَّفُ عَنْهُمْ مِنْ عَذَابِهَا ۚ\n(Neither will it have a complete killing effect on them so that they die nor shall its torment be lightened for them)(35:36).\nوَيَتَجَنَّبُهَا الْأَشْقَى - الَّذِي يَصْلَى النَّارَ الْكُبْرَىٰ - ثُمَّ لَا يَمُوتُ فِيهَا وَلَا يَحْيَىٰ\n(But it will be avoided by the wretched, who will enter the great Fire. There he will neither die (to be in rest) nor live (a good living).)(87:11-13). When they ask to be allowed to die, Malik will answer them:\nقَالَ إِنَّكُمْ مَاكِثُونَ\nHe will say: Verily, you shall abide forever. meaning, you will have no way out from it and no refuge. Then the reason why they are doomed will be given, which is their stubborn resistance to the truth. Allah says:\nلَقَدْ جِئْنَاكُمْ بِالْحَقِّ\n(Indeed We have brought the truth to you,) meaning, 'We have explained it to you clearly and in detail.'\nوَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَكُمْ لِلْحَقِّ كَارِهُونَ\n(but most of you have a hatred for the truth.) means, 'but your nature could not accept it and did not seek it; on the contrary, you followed and venerated falsehood, and you stood in the way of truth and refused it, and despised its followers.' So they will blame themselves and will feel regret at the time when regret will not be of any benefit to them. Then Allah says:\nأَمْ أَبْرَمُوا أَمْرًا فَإِنَّا مُبْرِمُونَ\n(Or have they plotted some plan? Then We too are planning.) Mujahid said, \"They wanted to plot some evil, but We are also planning.\" What Mujahid said is like the Ayah:\nوَمَكَرُوا مَكْرًا وَمَكَرْنَا مَكْرًا وَهُمْ لَا يَشْعُرُونَ\n(So they plotted a plot, and We planned a plan, while they perceived not.)(27:50). The idolators were trying their utmost to find ways of refuting the truth with falsehood, but Allah planned it so that the consequences of that would backfire on them. He said in refutation:\nأَمْ يَحْسَبُونَ أَنَّا لَا نَسْمَعُ سِرَّهُمْ وَنَجْوَاهُمْ ۚ\n(Or do they think that We hear not their secrets and their private counsel?) meaning, what they say secretly and openly.\nبَلَىٰ وَرُسُلُنَا لَدَيْهِمْ يَكْتُبُونَ\n(Yes (We do) and Our messengers are by them, to record.) means, 'We know what they are doing, and the angels are also recording their deeds, major and minor.'","href":"/tafsir/43?verse=74","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:43:81","title":"Ibn Kathir · 43:81–89","text":"Say: \"If the Most Gracious had a son, then I am the first of the worshippers. (81)Glorified is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of the Throne! Exalted be He from all that they ascribe (to Him)(82)So leave them (alone) to speak nonsense and play until they meet the Day of theirs which they have been promised (83)It is He Who is the only God in the heaven and the only God on the earth. And He is the All-Wise, the All-Knower (84)And Blessed be He to Whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them, and with Whom is the knowledge of the Hour, and to Whom you (all) will be returned (85)And those whom they invoke instead of Him have no power of intercession – except for those who bear witness to the truth knowingly, and they know (86)And if you ask them who created them, they will surely say: \"Allah.\" How then are they turned away (87)And his saying: \"O my Lord! Verily, these are a people who believe not! (88)So turn away from them, and say: Salam (peace!) But they will come to know (89)\nAllah has no Offspring\nAllah says:\nقُلْ\n(Say) – 'O Muhammad' –\nإِنْ كَانَ لِلرَّحْمَٰنِ وَلَدٌ فَأَنَا أَوَّلُ الْعَابِدِينَ\n(If the Most Gracious had a son, then I am the first of the worshippers.) meaning, 'if this were so, then I would worship Him on that basis, because I am one of His servants; I obey all that He commands me and I am not too arrogant or proud to worship Him.' This conditional phrase does not mean that what is described could happen nor that is possible as Allah says:\nلَوْ أَرَادَ اللَّهُ أَنْ يَتَّخِذَ وَلَدًا لَاصْطَفَىٰ مِمَّا يَخْلُقُ مَا يَشَاءُ ۚ سُبْحَانَهُ ۖ هُوَ اللَّهُ الْوَاحِدُ الْقَهَّارُ\n(Had Allah willed to take a son, He could have chosen whom He willed out of those whom He created. But glory be to Him! He is Allah, the One, the Irresistible.)(39:4). Allah says here:\nسُبْحَانَ رَبِّ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ رَبِّ الْعَرْشِ عَمَّا يَصِفُونَ\n(Glorified is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of the Throne! Exalted be He from all that they ascribe (to Him).) meaning, exalted and sanctified and glorified be the Creator of all things far above having any offspring, for He is Unique, One and Eternally Self-Sufficient. There is none equal to Him or like Him, and He does not have any offspring.\nفَذَرْهُمْ يَخُوضُوا\n(So leave them (alone) to speak nonsense) means, in their ignorance and misguidance,\nوَيَلْعَبُوا\n(and play) in their world,\nحَتَّىٰ يُلَاقُوا يَوْمَهُمُ الَّذِي يُوعَدُونَ\n(until they meet the Day of theirs which they have been promised.) which is the Day of Resurrection, i.e., then they will come to know what their end and destination will be on that Day.\nThe Uniqueness of the Lord\nوَهُوَ الَّذِي فِي السَّمَاءِ إِلَٰهٌ وَفِي الْأَرْضِ إِلَٰهٌ ۚ\n(It is He Who is the only God in the heaven and the only God on the earth.) means, He is the God of those who are in the heavens and the God of those who are on earth; all of them worship Him and are humbled before Him.\nوَهُوَ الْحَكِيمُ الْعَلِيمُ\n(And He is the All-Wise, the All-Knower.) This Ayah is like the Ayah:\nوَهُوَ اللَّهُ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَفِي الْأَرْضِ ۖ يَعْلَمُ سِرَّكُمْ وَجَهْرَكُمْ وَيَعْلَمُ مَا تَكْسِبُونَ\n(And He is Allah in the heavens and on the earth; He knows what you conceal and what you reveal, and He knows what you earn.)(6:3) which means, He is the One who is called Allah in the heavens and on the earth.\nوَتَبَارَكَ الَّذِي لَهُ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا\n(And Blessed be He to Whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them,) means, He is their Creator and Sovereign, the One Who is controlling them with none to resist or oppose His rule. Blessed and exalted be He far above the notion of His having a child. He is eternally free of all faults and shortcomings, because He is the Lord, the Exalted, the Almighty, the Sovereign of all things, Who is in control of all affairs.\nوَعِنْدَهُ عِلْمُ السَّاعَةِ\n(and with Whom is the knowledge of the Hour,) means, no one knows when it will happen except Him.\nوَإِلَيْهِ تُرْجَعُونَ\n(and to Whom you (all) will be returned.) means, and each person will be requited for his deeds; if they are good, then he will be rewarded, and if they are bad, then he will be punished.\nThe Idols have no Power of Intercession\nوَلَا يَمْلِكُ الَّذِينَ يَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِهِ\n(And those whom they invoke instead of Him have no power) means, the idols and false gods.\nالشَّفَاعَةَ\n(of intercession) means, they are not able to intercede for them.\nإِلَّا مَنْ شَهِدَ بِالْحَقِّ وَهُمْ يَعْلَمُونَ\n(except for those who bear witness to the truth knowingly, and they know.) This means, but the one who bears witness to the truth has knowledge and insight, so his intercession with Allah will avail, by His leave.\nThe Idolators admit that Allah Alone is the Creator\nوَلَئِنْ سَأَلْتَهُمْ مَنْ خَلَقَهُمْ لَيَقُولُنَّ اللَّهُ ۖ فَأَنَّىٰ يُؤْفَكُونَ\n(And if you ask them who created them, they will surely say: \"Allah.\" How then are they turned away?) means, 'if you ask these idolators who associate others in worship with Allah,'\nمَنْ خَلَقَهُمْ لَيَقُولُنَّ اللَّهُ\n(who created them, they will surely say: \"Allah.\") means, they will admit that He Alone is the Creator of all things and He has no partner in that. Yet despite that they still worship others alongside Him who have nothing and are able to do nothing. This is the utmost foolishness and stupidity. Allah says:\nفَأَنَّىٰ يُؤْفَكُونَ\n(How then are they turned away?)\nThe Prophet's Complaint to Allah\nوَقِيلِهِ يَا رَبِّ إِنَّ هَٰؤُلَاءِ قَوْمٌ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ\n(And his saying: \"O my Lord! Verily, these are a people who believe not!\") means, Muhammad ﷺ said this; he complained to his Lord about his people who did not believe in him, and said, 'O Lord, these people do not believe.' This is like the Ayah:\nوَقَالَ الرَّسُولُ يَا رَبِّ إِنَّ قَوْمِي اتَّخَذُوا هَٰذَا الْقُرْآنَ مَهْجُورًا\n(And the Messenger will say: \"O my Lord! Verily, my people deserted this Qur'an.\")(25:30). This is the view of Ibn Mas'ud, may Allah be pleased with him, Mujahid and Qatadah, and this is how Ibn Jarir interpreted it. Al-Bukhari said: \"'Abdullah – meaning Ibn Mas'ud, may Allah be pleased with him – recited (Ayah 88 of Az-Zukhruf):\n(وَقَالَ الرَّسُولُ ياربِّ)\n(And the Messenger will say: \"O my Lord!\") Mujahid said concerning the Ayah:\nوَقِيلِهِ يَا رَبِّ إِنَّ هَٰؤُلَاءِ قَوْمٌ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ\n(And his saying: \"O my Lord! Verily, these are a people who believe not!\") \"Allah is stating what Muhammad said.\" Qatadah said, \"These are the words of your Prophet ﷺ, when he complained about his people to his Lord.\"\nفَاصْفَحْ عَنْهُمْ\n(So turn away from them,) means, from the idolators.\nوَقُلْ سَلَامٌ\n(and say Salam (peace!)) means, 'do not respond to them in the same evil manner in which they address you; but try to soften their hearts and forgive them in word and deed.'\nفَسَوْفَ يَعْلَمُونَ\n(But they will come to know.) This is a warning from Allah for them. His punishment, which cannot be warded off, struck them, and His religion and His word was supreme. Subsequently Jihad and striving were prescribed until the people entered the religion of Allah in crowds, and Islam spread throughout the east and the west.\nAnd Allah knows best. This is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Az-Zukhruf.","href":"/tafsir/43?verse=81","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:44:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 44:1–8","text":"In Musnad Al-Bazzar, it is recorded from Abu At-Tufayl 'Amir bin Wathilah from Zayd bin Harithah that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said to Ibn Sayyad:\nإِنِّي قَدْ خَبَأْتُ خَبْأً فَمَا هُوَ؟\n(I am concealing something, what is it?) And the Messenger of Allah ﷺ was concealing Surat Ad-Dukhan from him. He (Ibn Sayyad) said: \"It is Ad-Dukh.\" The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nاخْسَأْ مَا شَاءَ اللهُ (كَانَ)\n(Be off with you! Whatever Allah wills happens.)\nبِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nحم - وَالْكِتَابِ الْمُبِينِ - إِنَّا أَنْزَلْنَاهُ فِي لَيْلَةٍ مُبَارَكَةٍ ۚ إِنَّا كُنَّا مُنْذِرِينَ - فِيهَا يُفْرَقُ كُلُّ أَمْرٍ حَكِيمٍ - أَمْرًا مِنْ عِنْدِنَا ۚ إِنَّا كُنَّا مُرْسِلِينَ - رَحْمَةً مِنْ رَبِّكَ ۚ إِنَّهُ هُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ - رَبِّ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا ۖ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ مُوقِنِينَ - لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ يُحْيِي وَيُمِيتُ ۖ رَبُّكُمْ وَرَبُّ آبَائِكُمُ الْأَوَّلِينَ\n(1. Ha Mim.)(2. By the manifest Book that makes things clear.)(3. We sent it down on a blessed night. Verily, We are ever warning.)(4. Therein (that night) is decreed every matter, Hakim.)(5. As a command from Us. Verily, We are ever sending,)(6. (As) a mercy from your Lord. Verily, He is the All-Hearer, the All-Knower.)(7. The Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, if you (but) have a faith with certainty.)(8. La ilaha illa Huwa. He gives life and causes death – your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers.)\nThe Qur'an was revealed on Laylatul-Qadr\nAllah tells us that He revealed the Magnificent Qur'an on a blessed night, Laylatul-Qadr (the Night of Decree), as He says elsewhere:\nإِنَّا أَنْزَلْنَاهُ فِي لَيْلَةِ الْقَدْرِ\n(Verily, We have sent it down in the Night of Al-Qadr)(97:1). This was in the month of Ramadan, as Allah tells us:\nشَهْرُ رَمَضَانَ الَّذِي أُنْزِلَ فِيهِ الْقُرْآنُ\n(The month of Ramadan in which was revealed the Qur'an)(2:185). We have already quoted the relevant Hadiths in (the Tafsir of) Surat Al-Baqarah, and there is no need to repeat them here.\nإِنَّا كُنَّا مُنْذِرِينَ\n(Verily, We are ever warning.) means, telling them what is good for them and what is harmful for them, according to Shari'ah, so that the proof of Allah may be established against His servants.\nفِيهَا يُفْرَقُ كُلُّ أَمْرٍ حَكِيمٍ\n(Therein (that night) is decreed every matter, Hakim.) means, on Laylatul-Qadr, the decrees are transferred from Al-Lawh Al-Mahfuz to the (angelic) scribes who write down the decrees of the (coming) year including life span, provision, and what will happen until the end of the year. This was narrated from Ibn 'Umar, Mujahid, Abu Malik, Ad-Dahhak and others among the Salaf.\nحَكِيمٍ\n(Hakim) means decided or confirmed, which cannot be changed or altered. Allah says:\nأَمْرًا مِنْ عِنْدِنَا ۚ\n(As a command from Us.) meaning, everything that happens and is decreed by Allah and the revelation that He sends down – it all happens by His command, by His leave and with His knowledge.\nإِنَّا كُنَّا مُرْسِلِينَ\n(Verily, We are ever sending,) means, to mankind, sending Messenger who will recite to them the clear signs of Allah. The need for this was urgent.\nرَحْمَةً مِنْ رَبِّكَ ۚ إِنَّهُ هُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ - رَبِّ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا ۖ\n((As) a mercy from your Lord. Verily, He is the All-Hearer, the All-Knower. The Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them,) means, the One Who sent down the Qur'an is the Lord, Creator and Sovereign of the heavens and the earth and everything in between them.\nإِنْ كُنْتُمْ مُوقِنِينَ\n(if you (but) have a faith with certainty.) Then Allah says:\nلَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ يُحْيِي وَيُمِيتُ ۖ رَبُّكُمْ وَرَبُّ آبَائِكُمُ الْأَوَّلِينَ\n(La ilaha illa Huwa. He gives life and causes death – your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers.) This is like the Ayah:\nقُلْ يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنِّي رَسُولُ اللَّهِ إِلَيْكُمْ جَمِيعًا الَّذِي لَهُ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ ۖ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ يُحْيِي وَيُمِيتُ ۖ\n(Say: \"O mankind! Verily, I am sent to you all as the Messenger of Allah – to Whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth. La ilaha illa Huwa. He gives life and causes death...)(7:158)","href":"/tafsir/44?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:44:9","title":"Ibn Kathir · 44:9–16","text":"Nay! They play about in doubt (9)Then wait you for the Day when the sky will bring forth a visible smoke (10)Covering mankind, this is a painful torment (11)(They will say): \"Our Lord! Remove the torment from us, really we shall become believers! (12)How can there be for them an admonition, when a Messenger explaining things clearly has already come to them (13)Then they had turned away from him and said: \"(He is) one taught, a madman! (14)Verily, We shall remove the torment for a while. Verily, you will revert (15)On the Day when We shall strike you with the great Batshah. Verily, We will exact retribution (16)\nAlarming the Idolators with News of the Day when the Sky will bring forth a visible Smoke\nAllah says, these idolaters are playing about in doubt, i.e., the certain truth has come to them, but they doubt it and do not believe in it. Then Allah says, warning and threatening them:\nفَارْتَقِبْ يَوْمَ تَأْتِي السَّمَاءُ بِدُخَانٍ مُبِينٍ\n(Then wait you for the Day when the sky will bring forth a visible smoke.) It was narrated that Masruq said, \"We entered the Masjid – i.e., the Masjid of Kufah at the gates of Kindah – and a man was reciting to his companions,\nيَوْمَ تَأْتِي السَّمَاءُ بِدُخَانٍ مُبِينٍ\n(the Day when the sky will bring forth a visible smoke.) He asked them; 'Do you know what that is?' That is the smoke that will come on the Day of Resurrection. It will take away the hearing and sight of the hypocrites, but for the believers it will be like having a cold.'\"\nHe said, \"We came to Ibn Mas'ud, may Allah be pleased with him, and told him about that. He was lying down, and he sat up with a start and said, 'Allah said to your Prophet ﷺ\nقُلْ مَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ أَجْرٍ وَمَا أَنَا مِنَ الْمُتَكَلِّفِينَ\n(Say: \"No wage do I ask of you for this, nor am I one of the pretenders.\")(38:86). And it is part of knowledge that when a man does not know something, he should say, 'Allah knows best.' I will tell you a Hadith about that. When the Quraysh did not respond to Islam and they grew stubborn, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ invoked Allah against them that they would have years like the years (of drought and famine) of Yusuf. They became so exhausted and hungry that they ate bones and dead meat. They looked at the sky, but they saw nothing but smoke.'\"\nAccording to another report: \"A man would look at the sky and he would see nothing between him and the sky except a smoky haze, because of his exhaustion.\"\nفَارْتَقِبْ يَوْمَ تَأْتِي السَّمَاءُ بِدُخَانٍ مُبِينٍ - يَغْشَى النَّاسَ ۖ هَٰذَا عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ\n(Then wait you for the Day when the sky will bring forth a visible smoke, covering the people, this is a painful torment) A man came to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and said, \"O Messenger of Allah! Pray to Allah to send rain to Mudar, for they are dying. So the Prophet ﷺ prayed for rain for them, and they got rain. Then the Ayah was revealed:\nإِنَّا كَاشِفُو الْعَذَابِ قَلِيلًا ۚ إِنَّكُمْ عَائِدُونَ\n(Verily, We shall remove the torment for a while. Verily, you will revert.) Ibn Mas'ud said, \"Do you think that the torment will be removed for them on the Day of Resurrection? When they were granted ease, they reverted to their former state. Then Allah revealed:\nيَوْمَ نَبْطِشُ الْبَطْشَةَ الْكُبْرَىٰ إِنَّا مُنْتَقِمُونَ\n(On the Day when We shall strike you with the Great Batshah. Verily, We will exact retribution.)\" He said, \"This means the day of Badr.\"\nIbn Mas'ud said, \"Five things have come to pass: the smoke, the (defeat of the) Romans, the (splitting of the) moon, the Batshah, and the torment.\"\nThis Hadith was narrated in the Two Sahihs. It was also recorded by Imam Ahmad in his Musnad, and by At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa'i in their (Books of) Tafsir, and by Ibn Jarir and Ibn Abi Hatim with a number of chains of narration. A number of the Salaf, such as Mujahid, Abu Al-'Aliyah, Ibrahim An-Nakha'i, Ad-Dahhak and 'Atiyah Al-'Awfi concurred with Ibn Mas'ud's interpretation of this Ayah and his view that the smoke already happened. This was also the view of Ibn Jarir.\nAccording to the Hadith of Abu Sarihah, Hudhayfah bin Asid Al-Ghifari, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ looked out upon us from a room while we were discussing the Hour. He ﷺ said:\nلَا تَقُومُ السَّاعَةُ حَتّٰى تَرَوْا عَشْرَ آيَاتٍ: طُلُوعَ الشَّمْسِ مِنْ مَغْرِبِهَا، وَالدُّخَانَ، وَالدَّابَّةَ، وَخُرُوجَ يَأْجُوجَ وَمَأْجُوجَ، وَخُرُوجَ عِيْسَى ابْنِ مَرْيَمَ وَالدَّجَّالَ، وَثَلَاثَةَ خُسُوفٍ: خَسْفٌ بِالْمَشْرِقِ، وَخَسْفٌ بِالْمَغْرِبِ، وَخَسْفٌ بِجَزِيرَةِ الْعَرَبِ، وَنَارًا تَخْرُجُ مِنْ قَعْرِ عدن تَسُوقُ النَّاسَ - أَوْ تَحْشُرُ النَّاسَ - تَبِيتُ مَعَهُمْ حَيْثُ بَاتُوا، وَتَقِيلُ مَعَهُمْ حَيْثُ قَالُوا\n(The Hour will not come until you see ten signs. The rising of the sun from the west; the smoke; the beast; the emergence of Ya'juj and Ma'juj; the appearance of 'Isa bin Maryam; the Dajjal; three cases of the earth collapsing – one in the east, one in the west, and one in the Arabian Peninsula; and a fire which will emerge from the bottom of Aden and will drive the people – or gather the people – stopping with them when they stop to sleep at night or rest during the day.)\" This was recorded only by Muslim in his Sahih.\nIn the Two Sahihs it was recorded that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said to Ibn Sayyad:\nإِنِّي خَبَأْتُ لَكَ خَبْأً\n(I am concealing something for you.) He said, It is Ad-Dukh. The Prophet ﷺ said,\nاخْسَأْ فَلَنْ تَعْدُوَ قَدْرَكَ\n(Be off with you! You cannot get further than your rank.) He said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ was concealing from him the words,\nفَارْتَقِبْ يَوْمَ تَأْتِي السَّمَاءُ بِدُخَانٍ مُبِينٍ\n(Then wait you for the Day when the sky will bring forth a visible smoke.)\"This indicates that the smoke is yet to appear. Ibn Sayyad was a fortune-teller who heard things through the Jinn, whose speech is unclear, therefore he said, \"It is Ad-Dukh,\" meaning Ad-Dukhan (the smoke). When the Messenger of Allah ﷺ was sure what was happening, that the source of his information was the Shayatin, he ﷺ said:\nاخْسَأْ فَلَنْ تَعْدُوَ قَدْرَكَ\n(Be off with you! You cannot get further than your rank.) There are numerous Marfu' and Mawquf Hadiths, Sahih, Hasan and others, which indicate that the smoke is one of the awaited signs (of the Hour). This is also the apparent meaning of Ayat in the Qur'an. Allah says:\nفَارْتَقِبْ يَوْمَ تَأْتِي السَّمَاءُ بِدُخَانٍ مُبِينٍ\n(Then wait you for the Day when the sky will bring forth a visible smoke.) meaning, clearly visible, such that all people will see it. According to Ibn Mas'ud's interpretation, this was a vision which they saw because of their intense hunger and exhaustion. He also interprets the Ayah\nيَغْشَى النَّاسَ ۖ\n(Covering mankind,) meaning, it covered them and overwhelmed them. But if it was only an illusion which happened to the idolators of Makkah, Allah would not have said \"covering mankind.\"\nهَٰذَا عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ\n(this is a painful torment.) means, this will be said to them by way of rebuke. This is like the Ayah:\nيَوْمَ يُدَعُّونَ إِلَىٰ نَارِ جَهَنَّمَ دَعًّا - هَٰذِهِ النَّارُ الَّتِي كُنْتُمْ بِهَا تُكَذِّبُونَ\n(The Day when they will be pushed down by force to the fire of Hell, with a horrible, forceful pushing. This is the Fire which you used to deny.)(52:13-14). Or some of them will say that to others.\nرَبَّنَا اكْشِفْ عَنَّا الْعَذَابَ إِنَّا مُؤْمِنُونَ\n((They will say): \"Our Lord! Remove the torment from us, really we shall become believers!\") means, when the disbelievers witness the punishment of Allah, they will ask for it to be taken away from them. This is like the Ayat:\nوَلَوْ تَرَىٰ إِذْ وُقِفُوا عَلَى النَّارِ فَقَالُوا يَا لَيْتَنَا نُرَدُّ وَلَا نُكَذِّبَ بِآيَاتِ رَبِّنَا وَنَكُونَ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ\n(If you could but see when they will be held over the (Hell) Fire! They will say: \"Would that we were but sent back (to the world)! Then we would not deny the Ayat of our Lord, and we would be of the believers!\")(6:27)\nوَأَنْذِرِ النَّاسَ يَوْمَ يَأْتِيهِمُ الْعَذَابُ فَيَقُولُ الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا رَبَّنَا أَخِّرْنَا إِلَىٰ أَجَلٍ قَرِيبٍ نُجِبْ دَعْوَتَكَ وَنَتَّبِعِ الرُّسُلَ ۗ أَوَلَمْ تَكُونُوا أَقْسَمْتُمْ مِنْ قَبْلُ مَا لَكُمْ مِنْ زَوَالٍ\n(And warn mankind of the Day when the torment will come unto them; then the wrongdoers will say: \"Our Lord! Respite us for a little while, we will answer Your Call and follow the Messengers!\" (It will be said): \"Had you not sworn aforetime that you would not leave (the world for the Hereafter).)(14:44) Allah says here:\nأَنَّىٰ لَهُمُ الذِّكْرَىٰ وَقَدْ جَاءَهُمْ رَسُولٌ مُبِينٌ - ثُمَّ تَوَلَّوْا عَنْهُ وَقَالُوا مُعَلَّمٌ مَجْنُونٌ\n(How can there be for them an admonition, when a Messenger explaining things clearly has already come to them. Then they had turned away from him and said: \"(He is) one taught, a madman!\") meaning, 'what further admonition do they need when We have sent them a Messenger with a clear Message and warning? Yet despite that, they turned away from him, opposed him and rejected him, and they said: (He is) one taught (by a human being), a madman.' This is like the Ayah:\nيَوْمَئِذٍ يَتَذَكَّرُ الْإِنْسَانُ وَأَنَّىٰ لَهُ الذِّكْرَىٰ\n(On that Day will man remember, but how will that remembrance (then) avail him?)(89:23)\nوَلَوْ تَرَىٰ إِذْ فَزِعُوا فَلَا فَوْتَ وَأُخِذُوا مِنْ مَكَانٍ قَرِيبٍ - وَقَالُوا آمَنَّا بِهِ وَأَنَّىٰ لَهُمُ التَّنَاوُشُ مِنْ مَكَانٍ بَعِيدٍ\n(And if you could but see, when they will be terrified with no escape, and they will be seized from a near place. And they will say (in the Hereafter): \"We do believe (now);\" but how could they receive (faith and its acceptance by Allah) from a place so far off...)(34:51-52)\nإِنَّا كَاشِفُو الْعَذَابِ قَلِيلًا ۚ إِنَّكُمْ عَائِدُونَ\n(Verily, We shall remove the torment for a while. Verily, you will revert.) means, 'if We were to remove the torment from you for a while, and send you back to the world, you would go back to your former state of disbelief and denial.' This is like the Ayat:\nوَلَوْ رَحِمْنَاهُمْ وَكَشَفْنَا مَا بِهِمْ مِنْ ضُرٍّ لَلَجُّوا فِي طُغْيَانِهِمْ يَعْمَهُونَ\n(And though We had mercy on them and removed the distress which is on them, still they would obstinately persist in their transgression, wandering blindly.)(23:75)\nوَلَوْ رُدُّوا لَعَادُوا لِمَا نُهُوا عَنْهُ وَإِنَّهُمْ لَكَاذِبُونَ\n(But if they were returned (to the world), they would certainly revert to that which they were forbidden. And indeed they are liars)(6:28)\nThe Meaning of the \"Great Batshah\"\nيَوْمَ نَبْطِشُ الْبَطْشَةَ الْكُبْرَىٰ إِنَّا مُنْتَقِمُونَ\n(On the Day when We shall strike you with the great Batshah. Verily, We will exact retribution.)\nIbn Mas'ud interpreted this to mean the day of Badr. This is also the view of a group who agreed with Ibn Mas'ud, may Allah be pleased with him, about the meaning of the smoke, as discussed above. It was also narrated from Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, in a report related to him from Al-'Awfi and from Ubayy bin Ka'b, may Allah be pleased with him. This is possible, but the apparent meaning is that it refers to the Day of Resurrection, although the day of Badr was also a day of vengeance.\nIbn Jarir said, \"Ya'qub narrated to me; Ibn 'Ulayyah narrated to me, Khalid Al-Hadhdha' narrated to us, from 'Ikrimah who said, 'Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"Ibn Mas'ud, may Allah be pleased with him, said that \"the great Batshah\" is the day of Badr, and I say that it is the Day of Resurrection.\" This chain of narration is Sahih to him. This is also the view of Al-Hasan Al-Basri and of 'Ikrimah according to the more authentic of the two reports narrated from him. And Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/44?verse=9","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:44:17","title":"Ibn Kathir · 44:17–33","text":"And indeed We tried before them Fir'awn's people, when there came to them a noble Messenger (17)Saying: \"Deliver to me the servants of Allah. Verily, I am to you a Messenger worthy of all trust. (18)\"And exalt not yourselves against Allah. Truly, I have come to you with a manifest authority. (19)\"And truly, I seek refuge with my Lord and your Lord, lest you should stone me. (20)\"But if you believe me not, then keep away from me and leave me alone. (21)So he (Musa) called upon his Lord (saying): \"These are indeed the people who are criminals. (22)(Allah said): \"Depart you with My servants by night. Surely, you will be pursued. (23)\"And leave the sea as it is (quiet and divided). Verily, they are a host to be drowned. (24)How many of gardens and springs that they (Fir'awn's people) left behin (25)And green crops (fields) and goodly places (26)And comforts of life wherein they used to take delight (27)Thus (it was)! And We made other people inherit them (28)And the heavens and the earth wept not for them, nor were they given respite (29)And indeed We saved the Children of Israel from the humiliating torment (30)From Fir'awn; verily, he was arrogant and was of the excessive  (31)And We chose them above the nations (Al-'Alamin) with knowledge (32)And granted them signs in which there was a plain trial (33)\nThe Story of Musa and Fir'awn, and how the Children of Israel were saved\nAllah tells us, 'before these idolators, We tested the people of Fir'awn, the copts of Egypt.'\nوَجَاءَهُمْ رَسُولٌ كَرِيمٌ\n(when there came to them a noble Messenger.) means, Musa, peace be upon him, the one to whom Allah spoke.\nأَنْ أَدُّوا إِلَيَّ عِبَادَ اللَّهِ ۖ\n(Deliver to me the servants of Allah.) This is like the Ayah:\nفَأَرْسِلْ مَعَنَا بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ وَلَا تُعَذِّبْهُمْ ۖ قَدْ جِئْنَاكَ بِآيَةٍ مِنْ رَبِّكَ ۖ وَالسَّلَامُ عَلَىٰ مَنِ اتَّبَعَ الْهُدَىٰ\n(So let the Children of Israel go with us, and torment them not; indeed, we have come with a sign from your Lord! And peace will be upon him who follows the guidance!\")(20:47)\nإِنِّي لَكُمْ رَسُولٌ أَمِينٌ\n(Verily, I am to you a Messenger worthy of all trust.) means, 'what I convey to you is trustworthy.'\nوَأَنْ لَا تَعْلُوا عَلَى اللَّهِ ۖ\n(And exalt not yourselves against Allah.) means, 'and do not be too arrogant to follow His signs. Accept His proof and believe in His evidence.' This is like the Ayah:\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ عَنْ عِبَادَتِي سَيَدْخُلُونَ جَهَنَّمَ دَاخِرِينَ\n(Verily, those who scorn My worship they will surely enter Hell in humiliation!)(40:60)\nإِنِّي آتِيكُمْ بِسُلْطَانٍ مُبِينٍ\n(Truly, I have come to you with a manifest authority.) means, with clear and obvious proof. This refers to the clear signs and definitive evidence with which Allah sent him.\nوَإِنِّي عُذْتُ بِرَبِّي وَرَبِّكُمْ أَنْ تَرْجُمُونِ\n(And truly, I seek refuge with my Lord and your Lord, lest you should stone me.) Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, and Abu Salih said, \"This refers to a verbal assault, which means insults.\"\nQatadah said, \"Meaning 'stoning' in the literal sense, so that the meaning is: 'I seek refuge with Allah, Who created me and you, from your making any harmful words or actions reach me.'\"\nوَإِنْ لَمْ تُؤْمِنُوا لِي فَاعْتَزِلُونِ\n(But if you believe me not, then keep away from me and leave me alone.) means, 'then let us leave one another alone and live in peace until Allah judges between us.' After Musa, may Allah be pleased with him, had stayed among them for a long time, and the proof of Allah had been established against them, and that only increased them in disbelief and stubbornness, he prayed to his Lord against them, a prayer which was answered. Allah says:\nوَقَالَ مُوسَىٰ رَبَّنَا إِنَّكَ آتَيْتَ فِرْعَوْنَ وَمَلَأَهُ زِينَةً وَأَمْوَالًا فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا رَبَّنَا لِيُضِلُّوا عَنْ سَبِيلِكَ ۖ رَبَّنَا اطْمِسْ عَلَىٰ أَمْوَالِهِمْ وَاشْدُدْ عَلَىٰ قُلُوبِهِمْ فَلَا يُؤْمِنُوا حَتَّىٰ يَرَوُا الْعَذَابَ الْأَلِيمَ - قَالَ قَدْ أُجِيبَتْ دَعْوَتُكُمَا فَاسْتَقِيمَا\n(And Musa said: \"Our Lord! You have indeed bestowed on Fir'awn and his chiefs splendor and wealth in the life of this world, our Lord! That they may lead men astray from Your path. Our Lord! Destroy their wealth, and harden their hearts, so that they will not believe until they see the painful torment.\" Allah said: \"Verily, the invocation of you both is accepted. So you both keep to the straight way.\")(10:88-89) And Allah says here:\nفَدَعَا رَبَّهُ أَنَّ هَٰؤُلَاءِ قَوْمٌ مُجْرِمُونَ\n(So he (Musa) called upon his Lord (saying): \"These are indeed the people who are criminals.\") Whereupon Allah commanded him to bring the Children of Israel out from among them, without the command, consent or permission of Fir'awn. Allah said:\nفَأَسْرِ بِعِبَادِي لَيْلًا إِنَّكُمْ مُتَّبَعُونَ\n(Depart you with My servants by night. Surely, you will be pursued.) This is like the Ayah:\nوَلَقَدْ أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَىٰ مُوسَىٰ أَنْ أَسْرِ بِعِبَادِي فَاضْرِبْ لَهُمْ طَرِيقًا فِي الْبَحْرِ يَبَسًا لَا تَخَافُ دَرَكًا وَلَا تَخْشَىٰ\nAnd indeed We revealed to Mu0sa0 (saying): Travel by night with My servants and strike a dry path for them in the sea, fearing neither to be overtaken nor being afraid (of drowning in the sea). (20:77)\nوَاتْرُكِ الْبَحْرَ رَهْوًا ۖ إِنَّهُمْ جُنْدٌ مُغْرَقُونَ\n(And leave the sea as it is (quiet and divided). Verily, they are a host to be drowned.) When Musa and the Children of Israel has crossed the sea, Musa wanted to strike it with his staff so that it would go back as it had been, and it would form a barrier between then and Fir'awn and prevent him from reaching them. But Allah commanded him to leave it as it was, quiet and divided, and gave him the glad tidings that they were a host to be drowned, and that he should not fear either being overtaken by Fir'awn or drowning in the sea. Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said:\nوَاتْرُكِ الْبَحْرَ رَهْوًا ۖ\n(And leave the sea as it is (quiet and divided).) means, leave it as it is and keep moving. Mujahid said:\nرَهْوًا\n(as it is) means, a dry path, as it is. 'Do not command it to go back; leave it until the last of them have entered it.' This was also the view of 'Ikrimah, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, Ad-Dahhak, Qatadah, Ibn Zayd, Ka'b Al-Ahbar, Simak bin Harb and others.\nكَمْ تَرَكُوا مِنْ جَنَّاتٍ وَعُيُونٍ - وَزُرُوعٍ\n(How many of gardens and springs that they left behind. And green crops) this refers to rivers and wells.\nوَمَقَامٍ كَرِيمٍ\nand goodly places, means, fine dwellings and beautiful places. Muja0hid and Sa 0d bin Jubayr said:\nوَمَقَامٍ كَرِيمٍ\n(and goodly places,) means elevated places.\nوَنَعْمَةٍ كَانُوا فِيهَا فَاكِهِينَ\n(And comforts of life wherein they used to take delight!) means, a life which they were enjoying, where they could eat whatever they wanted and wear what they liked, with wealth and glory and power in the land. Then all of that was taken away in a single morning, they departed from this world and went to Hell, what a terrible abode!\nكَذَٰلِكَ ۖ وَأَوْرَثْنَاهَا قَوْمًا آخَرِينَ\n(Thus (it was)! And We made other people inherit them.) namely the Children of Israel.\nفَمَا بَكَتْ عَلَيْهِمُ السَّمَاءُ وَالْأَرْضُ\n(And the heavens and the earth wept not for them,) means, they had no righteous deeds which used to ascend through the gates of the heavens, which would weep for them when they died, and they had no places on earth where they used to worship Allah which would notice their loss. So they did not deserve to be given a respite, because of their disbelief, sin, transgression and stubbornness.\nIbn Jarir recorded that Sa'id bin Jubayr said, \"A man came to Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, and said to him: 'O Abu Al-'Abbas, Allah says,\nفَمَا بَكَتْ عَلَيْهِمُ السَّمَاءُ وَالْأَرْضُ وَمَا كَانُوا مُنْظَرِينَ\n(And the heavens and the earth wept not for them, nor were they given respite) – do the heavens and the earth weep for anybody' He, may Allah be pleased with him, said, 'Yes, there is no one who does not have a gate in the heavens through which his provision comes down and his good deeds ascend. When the believer dies, that gate is closed; it misses him and weeps for him, and the place of prayer on earth where he used to pray and remember Allah also weeps for him. But the people of Fir'awn left no trace of righteousness on the earth and they had no good deeds that ascended to Allah, so the heavens and the earth did not weep for them.'\" Al-'Awfi reported something similar from Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him.\nوَلَقَدْ نَجَّيْنَا بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ مِنَ الْعَذَابِ الْمُهِينِ - مِنْ فِرْعَوْنَ ۚ إِنَّهُ كَانَ عَالِيًا مِنَ الْمُسْرِفِينَ\n(And indeed We saved the Children of Israel from the humiliating torment from Fir'awn; verily, he was arrogant and was of the excessive.) Here Allah reminds them of how He saved them from their humiliation and subjugation at the hands of Fir'awn, when they were forced to do menial tasks.\nمِنْ فِرْعَوْنَ ۚ إِنَّهُ كَانَ عَالِيًا\n(From Fir'awn; verily, he was arrogant) means, he was proud and stubborn. This is like the Ayah:\nإِنَّ فِرْعَوْنَ عَلَا فِي الْأَرْضِ\n(Verily, Fir'awn exalted himself in the land)(28:4).\nفَاسْتَكْبَرُوا وَكَانُوا قَوْمًا عَالِينَ\n(but they behaved insolently and they were people self-exalting)(23:46). He was one of the excessive and held a foolish opinion of himself.\nوَلَقَدِ اخْتَرْنَاهُمْ عَلَىٰ عِلْمٍ عَلَى الْعَالَمِينَ\n(And We chose them above the nations (Al-'Alamin) with knowledge,) Mujahid said, \"This means that they were chosen above those among whom they lived.\" Qatadah said, \"They were chosen above the other people of their own time, and it was said that in every period there are people who are chosen above others.\" This is like the Ayah:\nقَالَ يَا مُوسَىٰ إِنِّي اصْطَفَيْتُكَ عَلَى النَّاسِ\n((Allah) said: \"O Musa I have chosen you above men.\")(7:144), which means, above the people of his time. This is also like the Ayah:\nوَاصْطَفَاكِ عَلَىٰ نِسَاءِ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(and (Allah has) chosen you (Maryam) above the women of the nations (Al-'Alamin).)(3:42), i.e., Maryam was chosen above the women of her time. For Khadijah, may Allah be pleased with her, is higher than her in status or is equal to her, as was Asiyah bint Muzahim, the wife of Fir'awn. And the superiority of 'A'ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, over all other women is like the superiority of Tharid over all other dishes.\nوَآتَيْنَاهُمْ مِنَ الْآيَاتِ\n(And granted them signs) means clear proofs and extraordinary evidence.\nمَا فِيهِ بَلَاءٌ مُبِينٌ\n(in which there was a plain trial.) means, an obvious test to show who would be guided by it.","href":"/tafsir/44?verse=17","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:44:34","title":"Ibn Kathir · 44:34–37","text":"Verily, these people are saying (34)\"There is nothing but our first death, and we shall not be resurrected. (35)\"Then bring back our forefathers, if you speak the truth! (36)Are they better or the people of Tubba' and those before them We destroyed them because they were indeed criminals (37)\nRefutation of Those Who deny the Resurrection\nHere Allah denounces the idolators for their denial of the Resurrection and their belief that there is nothing after this life and no life or resurrection after death, which they based on the fact that their forefathers had died and had not returned. They said, If the resurrection is true,\nفَأْتُوا بِآبَائِنَا إِنْ كُنْتُمْ صَادِقِينَ\n(Then bring back our forefathers, if you speak the truth!)\nThis is false evidence and a specious argument, for the resurrection will happen on the Day of Judgement, not in this world; it will happen when this world has ended and ceased to be. Allah will bring all creatures back, created anew. He will make the evildoers fuel for the fire of Hell, and on that Day you will be witnesses over mankind and the Messenger will be a witness over you. Then Allah threatens them and warns them of the irresistible torment other idolators like who denied the resurrection, suffered. Such as the people of Tubba', i.e., Saba'. Allah destroyed them, wreaked havoc upon their land and scattered them here and there throughout the land, as we have already seen in Surah Saba'. This was brought about because the idolators denied the Resurrection. Here too, the idolaters are compared to them. They Tubba' were Arab descendants of Qahtan, just as these people (Quraysh) were Arab descendants of 'Adnan. Among the people of Himyar – who are also known as Saba' – when a man became their king, they called him Tubba', just as the title Chosroes was given to the king of Persia, Caesar to the king of the Romans, Fir'awn to the disbelieving ruler of Egypt, Negus to the king of Ethiopia, and so on among other nations.\nBut it so happened that one of the Tubba' left Yemen and went on a journey of conquest until he reached Samarqand, expanding his kingdom and domain. He is the one who founded Al-Hirah. It is agreed that he passed through Al-Madinah during the days of Jahiliyyah. He fought its inhabitants but they resisted him; they fought him by day and supplied him with food by night, so he felt ashamed before them and refrained from harming them. He was accompanied by two Jewish rabbis who advised him and told him that he would never prevail over this city, for it would be the place to which a Prophet would migrate towards the end of time. So he retreated and took them (the two rabbis) with him to Yemen. When he passed by Makkah, he wanted to destroy the Ka'bah, but they told him not to do that either. They told him about the significance of this House, that it had been built by Ibrahim Al-Khalil, peace be upon him, and that it would become of great importance through that Prophet who would be sent towards the end of time. So he respected it, performed Tawaf around it, and covered it with a fine cloth. Then he returned to Yemen and invited its people to follow the religion of guidance along with him. At that time, the religion of Musa, peace be upon him, was the religion followed by those who were guided, before the coming of the Messiah, peace be upon him. So the people of Yemen accepted the religion of guidance along with him.\nAbdur-Razzaq recorded that Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nمَا أَدْرِي تُبَّعٌ نَبِيًّا كَانَ، أَمْ غَيْرَ نَبِيٍّ\n(I do not know whether Tubba' was a Prophet or not.) It was narrated that Tamim bin 'Abdur-Rahman said: \"'Ata' bin Abi Rabah said, 'Do not revile Tubba', for the Messenger of Allah ﷺ forbade reviling him.'\" And Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/44?verse=34","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:44:38","title":"Ibn Kathir · 44:38–42","text":"## This World was created for a Wisdom\n\nHere Allah tells us of His justice, and that He is far above mere play, folly and falsehood. This is like the Ayah:\nوَمَا خَلَقْنَا السَّمَآءَ وَالاٌّرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا بَـطِلاً ذَلِكَ ظَنُّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ فَوَيْلٌ لِّلَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ مِنَ النَّارِ\n(And We created not the heaven and the earth and all that is between them without purpose! That is the consideration of those who disbelieve! Then woe to those who disbelieve from the Fire!) (38:27)\nأَفَحَسِبْتُمْ أَنَّمَا خَلَقْنَـكُمْ عَبَثاً وَأَنَّكُمْ إِلَيْنَا لاَ تُرْجَعُونَ - فَتَعَـلَى اللَّهُ الْمَلِكُ الْحَقُّ لاَ إِلَـهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ رَبُّ الْعَرْشِ الْكَرِيمِ\n(Did you think that We had created you in play, and that you would not be brought back to Us So Exalted be Allah, the True King: La ilaha illa Huwa, the Lord of the Supreme Throne!) (23:115-116) Then Allah says:\nإِنَّ يَوْمَ الْفَصْلِ مِيقَـتُهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ\n(Verily, the Day of Judgement is the time appointed for all of them) This is the Day of Resurrection, when Allah will judge between all creatures, and He will punish the disbelievers and reward the believers.\nمِيقَـتُهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ\n(is the time appointed for all of them) means, He will gather all of them, the first and the last of them.\nيَوْمَ لاَ يُغْنِى مَوْلًى عَن مَّوْلًى شَيْئاً\n(The Day when a near relative cannot avail a near relative in aught,) means, no relative will be able to help another relative. This is like the Ayah:\nفَإِذَا نُفِخَ فِى الصُّورِ فَلاَ أَنسَـبَ بَيْنَهُمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ وَلاَ يَتَسَآءَلُونَ\n(Then, when the Trumpet is blown, there will be no kinship among them that Day, nor will they ask of one another.) (23:101)\nوَلاَ يَسْـَلُ حَمِيمٌ حَمِيماً يُبَصَّرُونَهُمْ\n(And no friend will ask a friend (about his condition). Though they shall be made to see one another) (70:10-11) which means, he will not ask his brother about how he is, even though he can see him with his own eyes.\nوَلاَ هُمْ يُنصَرُونَ\n(and no help can they receive,) means, no relative will help another, and no help will come to him from outside.\nإِلاَّ مَن رَّحِمَ اللَّهُ\n(Except him on whom Allah has mercy.) means, and nothing will be of any avail that Day except the mercy of Allah towards His creation.\nإِنَّهُ هُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ\n(Verily, He is the All-Mighty, the Most Merciful.) means, he is the Almighty, with immense mercy.","href":"/tafsir/44?verse=38","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:44:43","title":"Ibn Kathir · 44:43–50","text":"Verily, the tree of Zaqqu (43)Will be the food of the sinners (44)Like boiling oil, it will boil in the bellies (45)Like the boiling of scalding water (46)(It will be said:) \"Seize him and drag him into the midst of blazing Fire, (47)\"Then pour over his head the torment of boiling water. (48)\"Taste you (this)! Verily, you were (pretending to be) the mighty, the generous. (49)\"Verily, this is that whereof you used to doubt! (50)\nThe Condition of the Idolators and Their Punishment on the Day of Resurrection\n\nAllah tells us how He will punish the disbelievers who deny the meeting with Him:\n\nإِنَّ شَجَرَتَ الزَّقُّومِ - طَعَامُ الْأَثِيمِ\n\n(Verily, the tree of Zaqqum will be the food of the sinners.) Those who sinned by their words and in deeds. These are the disbelievers. More than one commentator stated that this referred to Abu Jahl; undoubtedly he is included among those referred to in this Ayah, but it is not specifically about him. Ibn Jarir recorded that Abu Ad-Darda' was reciting to a man:\n\nإِنَّ شَجَرَتَ الزَّقُّومِ - طَعَامُ الْأَثِيمِ\n\n(Verily, the tree of Zaqqum will be the food of the sinners.) The man said, \"The food of the orphan.\" Abu Ad-Darda', may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"Say, the tree of Zaqqum is the food of the evildoer.\" i.e., he will not have any other food apart from that. Mujahid said, \"If a drop of it were to fall on the earth, it would corrupt the living of all the people of earth.\" A similar Marfu' report has been narrated earlier.\n\nكَالْمُهْلِ\n\n(Like boiling oil,) means, like the dregs of oil.\n\nيَغْلِي فِي الْبُطُونِ - كَغَلْيِ الْحَمِيمِ\n\n(it will boil in the bellies, like the boiling of scalding water.) means, because of its heat and rancidity.\n\nخُذُوهُ\n\n(Seize him) means the disbeliever. It was reported that when Allah says to the keepers of Hell, \"Seize him,\" seventy thousand of them will rush to seize him.\n\nفَاعْتِلُوهُ\n\n(and drag him) means, drag him by pulling him and pushing him on his back. Mujahid said:\n\nخُذُوهُ فَاعْتِلُوهُ\n\n(Seize him and drag him) means, take him and push him.\n\nإِلَىٰ سَوَاءِ الْجَحِيمِ\n\n(into the midst of blazing Fire.) means, into the middle of it.\n\nثُمَّ صُبُّوا فَوْقَ رَأْسِهِ مِنْ عَذَابِ الْحَمِيمِ\n\n(Then pour over his head the torment of boiling water.) This is like the Ayah:\n\nيُصَبُّ مِنْ فَوْقِ رُءُوسِهِمُ الْحَمِيمُ - يُصْهَرُ بِهِ مَا فِي بُطُونِهِمْ وَالْجُلُودُ\n\n(boiling water will be poured down over their heads. With it will melt what is within their bellies, as well as (their) skins.)(22:19-20). The angel will strike him with a hooked rod of iron and split his head open, then he will pour boiling water over his head. It will go down through his body, melting through his stomach and intestines, until it goes through his heels; may Allah protect us from that.\n\nذُقْ إِنَّكَ أَنْتَ الْعَزِيزُ الْكَرِيمُ\n\n(Taste you (this)! Verily, you were (pretending to be) the mighty, the generous.) means, they (the keepers of Hell) will say that to him by way of ridicule and rebuke. Ad-Dahhak reported that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said: \"This means, you are neither mighty nor generous.\" And Allah's saying:\n\nإِنَّ هَٰذَا مَا كُنْتُمْ بِهِ تَمْتَرُونَ\n\n(Verily, this is that whereof you used to doubt!) is like His saying:\n\nيَوْمَ يُدَعُّونَ إِلَىٰ نَارِ جَهَنَّمَ دَعًّا - هَٰذِهِ النَّارُ الَّتِي كُنْتُمْ بِهَا تُكَذِّبُونَ - أَفَسِحْرٌ هَٰذَا أَمْ أَنْتُمْ لَا تُبْصِرُونَ\n\n(The Day when they will be pushed down by force to the fire of Hell, with a horrible, forceful pushing. This is the Fire which you used to deny. Is this magic, or do you not see?)(52: 13-15) Similarly Allah said:\n\nإِنَّ هَٰذَا مَا كُنْتُمْ بِهِ تَمْتَرُونَ\n\n(Verily, this is that where of you used to doubt!)","href":"/tafsir/44?verse=43","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:44:51","title":"Ibn Kathir · 44:51–59","text":"Verily, those who have Taqwa, will be in place of security (51)Among Gardens and Springs (52)Dressed in Sundus and Istabraq, facing each other (53)So (it will be). And We shall marry them to Hur (fair females) with wide lovely eyes (54)They will call therein for every kind of fruit in peace and security (55)They will never taste death therein except the first death, and He will save them from the torment of the blazing Fire (56)As a bounty from your Lord! That will be the supreme success (57)Certainly, We have made this easy in your tongue, in order that they may remember (58)Wait then; verily, they (too) are waiting (59)\nThe State of Those Who have Taqwa and the Delights.They will enjoy in Paradise\nWhen Allah describes the state of the doomed, He follows that with a description of the life of the blessed. For this reason the Qur'an is called Al-Mathani (i.e., oft-repeated).\nإِنَّ الْمُتَّقِينَ\n(Verily, those who have Taqwa,) i.e., those who fear Allah and are dutiful towards Him in this world,\nفِي مَقَامٍ أَمِينٍ\n(will be in place of security.) means, in the Hereafter, i.e., in Paradise, where they will be safe from death and the fear of leaving it, and from every kind of worry, grief, terror and exhaustion, and from the Shaytan and his wiles, and from all other troubles and disasters.\nفِي جَنَّاتٍ وَعُيُونٍ\n(Among Gardens and Springs). This is in direct contrast to the state of the doomed, who will have the tree of Zaqqum and boiling water.\nيَلْبَسُونَ مِنْ سُنْدُسٍ\n(Dressed in Sundus) means, the finest of silk, such as shirts and the like.\nوَإِسْتَبْرَقٍ\n(and Istabraq) means, silk which is woven with shiny threads, like a splendid garment which is worn over regular clothes.\nمُتَقَابِلِينَ\n(facing each other,) means, sitting on thrones where none of them will sit with his back to anyone else.\nكَذَٰلِكَ وَزَوَّجْنَاهُمْ بِحُورٍ عِينٍ\n(So (it will be). And We shall marry them to Hur (fair females) with wide lovely eyes,) This will be a gift in addition to the beautiful wives given to them.\nلَمْ يَطْمِثْهُنَّ إِنْسٌ قَبْلَهُمْ وَلَا جَانٌّ\n(with whom no man or Jinn has had Tamth (sexual intercourse) before them.)(55:56)\nكَأَنَّهُنَّ الْيَاقُوتُ وَالْمَرْجَانُ\n((In beauty) they are like rubies and Marjan.)(55:58)\nهَلْ جَزَاءُ الْإِحْسَانِ إِلَّا الْإِحْسَانُ\n(Is there any reward for good other than good?)(55:60)\nيَدْعُونَ فِيهَا بِكُلِّ فَاكِهَةٍ آمِنِينَ\n(They will call therein for every kind of fruit in peace and security;) means, whatever kinds of fruit they ask for will be brought to them, and they will have the security of knowing that this supply will never come to an end or be withheld; these fruits will be brought to them whenever they want.\nلَا يَذُوقُونَ فِيهَا الْمَوْتَ إِلَّا الْمَوْتَةَ الْأُولَىٰ ۖ\n(They will never taste death therein except the first death,) This is an exception which reinforces the negation. The meaning is that they will never taste death there. It was reported in the Two Sahihs that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nيُؤْتَىٰ بِالْمَوْتِ فِي صُورَةِ كَبْشٍ أَمْلَحَ فَيُوقَفُ بَيْنَ الْجَنَّةِ وَالنَّارِ، ثُمَّ يُذْبَحُ، ثُمَّ يُقَالُ: يَا أَهْلَ الْجَنَّةِ خُلُودٌ فَلَا مَوْتَ، وَيَا أَهْلَ النَّارِ خُلُودٌ فَلَا مَوْتَ\n(Death will be brought forth in the image of a fine ram. It will be made to stand between Paradise and Hell, then it will be slaughtered. It will be said, \"O people of Paradise, it is eternal, no more death; and O people of Hell, it is eternal, no more death.\") This Hadith was already quoted in our discussion of Surah Maryam. 'Abdur-Razzaq recorded that Abu Sa'id and Abu Hurayrah said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nيُقَالُ لِأَهْلِ الْجَنَّةِ: إِنَّ لَكُمْ أَنْ تَصِحُّوا فَلَا تَسْقَمُوا أَبَدًا، وَإِنَّ لَكُمْ أَنْ تَعِيشُوا فَلَا تَمُوتُوا أَبَدًا، وَإِنَّ لَكُمْ أَنْ تَنْعَمُوا فَلَا تَبْأَسُوا أَبَدًا، وَإِنَّ لَكُمْ أَنْ تَشِبُّوا فَلَا تَهْرَمُوا أَبَدًا\n(It will be said to the people of Paradise, \"It is granted to you that you will be healthy and will never fall ill, you will live and never die, you will enjoy a life of luxury and will never be miserable, you will be youthful and will never grow old.\")\" This was recorded by Muslim.\nIt was reported that Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nمَنِ اتَّقَى اللهَ دَخَلَ الْجَنَّةَ، يَنْعَمُ فِيهَا وَلَا يَبْأَسُ، وَيَحْيَا فِيهَا فَلَا يَمُوتُ، لَا تَبْلَىٰ ثِيَابُهُ، وَلَا يَفْنَىٰ شَبَابُهُ\n(Whoever has Taqwa of Allah, he will enter Paradise and enjoy a life of luxury and he will never be miserable. He will live therein and never die, his clothes will never wear out and his youth will never fade.)\"\nوَوَقَاهُمْ عَذَابَ الْجَحِيمِ\n(and He will save them from the torment of the blazing Fire,) means, along with this great and eternal blessing, He will also have saved them from the agonizing torment in the depths of Hell, so they will have achieved their desired aim and avoided the thing they feared. Allah says,\nفَضْلًا مِنْ رَبِّكَ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ هُوَ الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ\n(As a bounty from your Lord! That will be the supreme success!) meaning, that will be from His bounty and kindness towards them. It was reported in the Two Sahihs that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said:\nاعْمَلُوا وَسَدِّدُوا وَقَارِبُوا، وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّ أَحَدًا لَنْ يُدْخِلَهُ عَمَلُهُ الْجَنَّةَ\n(Work and strive hard, and know that no one will enter Paradise by virtue of his deeds.) They said, \"Not even you, O Messenger of Allah?\" He ﷺ said,\nوَلَا أَنَا، إِلَّا أَنْ يَتَغَمَّدَنِيَ اللهُ بِرَحْمَةٍ مِنْهُ وَفَضْلٍ\n(Not even me, unless Allah showers me with His mercy and grace.)\nفَإِنَّمَا يَسَّرْنَاهُ بِلِسَانِكَ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَذَكَّرُونَ\n(Certainly, We have made this easy in your tongue, in order that they may remember.) means, 'We have made this Qur'an, which We have sent down, easy, plain and clear, in your language which is the most eloquent, clear and beautiful of all languages.'\nلَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَذَكَّرُونَ\n(in order that they may remember.) means, in order that they may understand and know.\nDespite the fact that it is so plain and clear, there are still people who disbelieve, who stubbornly go against it. Allah says to His Messenger ﷺ, consoling him and promising him victory, and warning those who reject him that they will be destroyed.\nفَارْتَقِبْ إِنَّهُمْ مُرْتَقِبُونَ\n(Wait then; verily, they (too) are waiting.) meaning, 'they will come to know who will be victorious and whose word will prevail in this world and in the Hereafter. For victory will be for you, O Muhammad, and for your brothers among the Prophets and Messengers, and for the believers who followed you,' as Allah says:\nكَتَبَ اللَّهُ لَأَغْلِبَنَّ أَنَا وَرُسُلِي ۚ\n(Allah has decreed: \"Verily, it is I and My Messengers who shall be the victorious.\")(58:21)\nإِنَّا لَنَنْصُرُ رُسُلَنَا وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَيَوْمَ يَقُومُ الْأَشْهَادُ - يَوْمَ لَا يَنْفَعُ الظَّالِمِينَ مَعْذِرَتُهُمْ ۖ وَلَهُمُ اللَّعْنَةُ وَلَهُمْ سُوءُ الدَّارِ\n(Verily, We will indeed make victorious Our Messengers and those who believe in this world's life and on the Day when the witnesses will stand forth, – the Day when their excuses will be of no profit to wrongdoers. Theirs will be the curse, and theirs will be the evil abode.)(40:51-52)\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Ad-Dukhan. All praise and thanks are due to Allah and in Him is all strength and protection.","href":"/tafsir/44?verse=51","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:45:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 45:1–5","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nحم - تَنْزِيلُ الْكِتَابِ مِنَ اللَّهِ الْعَزِيزِ الْحَكِيمِ - إِنَّ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ لَآيَاتٍ لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ - وَفِي خَلْقِكُمْ وَمَا يَبُثُّ مِنْ دَابَّةٍ آيَاتٌ لِقَوْمٍ يُوقِنُونَ - وَاخْتِلَافِ اللَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ وَمَا أَنْزَلَ اللَّهُ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مِنْ رِزْقٍ فَأَحْيَا بِهِ الْأَرْضَ بَعْدَ مَوْتِهَا وَتَصْرِيفِ الرِّيَاحِ آيَاتٌ لِقَوْمٍ يَعْقِلُونَ\n(1. Ha Mim.)(2. The revelation of the Book is from Allah, the Almighty, the All-Wise.)(3. Verily, in the heavens and the earth are signs for the believers.)(4. And in your creation, and what He spread (through the earth) of moving creatures are signs for people who have faith with certainty.)(5. And in the alternation of night and day, and the provision that Allah sends down from the sky, and revives therewith the earth after its death, and in the turning about of the winds, are signs for a people who understand.)\nA Directive to contemplate over Allah's Ayat\nAllah directs His servants to contemplate His favors and gifts, as well as His great power that is demonstrated by His creating the heavens and the earth and the various types and categories of creatures in them.\nThere are the angels, Jinns, humans, animals, birds, beasts, carnivores, insects and various kinds of sea creatures. The night and day alternate, each follows the other in succession, never ceasing to come, as decreed. One brings darkness and one brings light. Allah the Exalted also sends down the rain from the clouds when it is most needed. He is calling the rain, 'provision', because it is the resource that produces various provisions,\nفَأَحْيَا بِهِ الْأَرْضَ بَعْدَ مَوْتِهَا\n(and revives therewith the earth after its death,) after it was dry and had no vegetation or life of any kind. Allah said next,\nوَتَصْرِيفِ الرِّيَاحِ\n(and in the turning about of the winds,) sometimes towards the south and sometimes towards the north. Some are easterly winds and some are westerly winds, some bringing sea breezes and some blow from the land, some coming at night and some by day. Some winds bring rain, some cause pollination and some winds just revive the soul, while some others bear no benefit. Allah said first.\nلَآيَاتٍ لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ\n(are signs for the believers), then\nيُوقِنُونَ\n(who have faith with certainty), then\nيَعْقِلُونَ\n(who understand), thus ascending from one honorable stage to what is more honorable and higher in grade. These Ayat are similar to an Ayah in Surat Al-Baqarah\nإِنَّ فِي خَلْقِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَاخْتِلَافِ اللَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ وَالْفُلْكِ الَّتِي تَجْرِي فِي الْبَحْرِ بِمَا يَنْفَعُ النَّاسَ وَمَا أَنْزَلَ اللَّهُ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مِنْ مَاءٍ فَأَحْيَا بِهِ الْأَرْضَ بَعْدَ مَوْتِهَا وَبَثَّ فِيهَا مِنْ كُلِّ دَابَّةٍ وَتَصْرِيفِ الرِّيَاحِ وَالسَّحَابِ الْمُسَخَّرِ بَيْنَ السَّمَاءِ وَالْأَرْضِ لَآيَاتٍ لِقَوْمٍ يَعْقِلُونَ\n(Verily, in the creation of the heavens and the earth, and in the alternation of night and day, and the ships which sail through the sea with that which is of use to mankind, and the water which Allah sends down from the sky and makes the earth alive therewith after its death, and the moving creatures of all kinds that He has spread therein, and in the veering of winds and clouds which are held between the sky and the earth, are indeed signs for people of understanding.)(2:164)","href":"/tafsir/45?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:45:6","title":"Ibn Kathir · 45:6–11","text":"These are the Ayat of Allah, which We recite to you with truth. Then in which speech after Allah and His Ayat will they believe (6)Woe to every sinful liar (7)Who hears the Ayat of Allah Tutla (recited) to him, yet persists with pride as if he heard them not. So announce to him a painful torment (8)And when he learns something of Our Ayat, he makes them a jest. For such there will be a humiliating torment (9)In front of them there is Hell. And that which they have earned will be of no profit to them, nor those whom they have taken as protective friends besides Allah. And theirs will be a great torment (10)This is guidance. And those who disbelieve in the Ayat of their Lord, for them there is a painful torment of Rijz (11)\nThe Description of the Sinful Liar and His Requital\nAllah the Exalted says,\nتِلْكَ آيَاتُ اللَّهِ\n(These are the Ayat of Allah) – in reference to the Qur'an with the proofs and evidences that it contains,\nنَتْلُوهَا عَلَيْكَ بِالْحَقِّ\n(which We recite to you with truth.) for they contain the truth from the Truth (i.e., Allah). Therefore, if they do not believe in Allah's Ayat nor abide by them, what speech after Allah and His Ayat will they then believe in? Allah said next,\nوَيْلٌ لِكُلِّ أَفَّاكٍ أَثِيمٍ\n(Woe to every sinful liar.) who lies in his speech, often swears, who is worthless, commits and utters sinful acts and statements, and disbelieves in Allah's Ayat,\nيَسْمَعُ آيَاتِ اللَّهِ تُتْلَىٰ عَلَيْهِ\n(Who hears the Ayat of Allah Tutla (recited) to him,) meaning, being recited to him,\nثُمَّ يُصِرُّ\n(yet persists) in his disbelief, denial, pride and rebellion,\nكَأَنْ لَمْ يَسْمَعْهَا\n(as if he heard them not.) as if he did not hear them being recited to him,\nفَبَشِّرْهُ بِعَذَابٍ أَلِيمٍ\n(So announce to him a painful torment!) convey the news to him that on the Day of Resurrection, he will have a painful, severe torment from Allah. Allah said,\nوَإِذَا عَلِمَ مِنْ آيَاتِنَا شَيْئًا اتَّخَذَهَا هُزُوًا ۚ\n(And when he learns something of Our Ayat, he makes them a jest.) if he learns anything from the Qur'an, he disbelieves in it and takes it as the subject of jest and ridicule,\nأُولَٰئِكَ لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ مُهِينٌ\n(For such there will be a humiliating torment.) as recompense for ridiculing the Qur'an and jesting about it. In the Sahih, Muslim recorded from 'Abdullah bin 'Umar that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ prohibited traveling with the Qur'an to enemy lands for fear that the Qur'an might be desecrated by the enemy.\nAllah explained the type of torment that these people earn on the Day of Return;\nمِنْ وَرَائِهِمْ جَهَنَّمُ ۖ\n(In front of them there is Hell.) meaning, all those who have these evil characteristics will end up in Hellfire on the Day of Resurrection,\nوَلَا يُغْنِي عَنْهُمْ مَا كَسَبُوا شَيْئًا\n(And that which they have earned will be of no profit to them,) their wealth and children will not avail them,\nوَلَا مَا اتَّخَذُوا مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ أَوْلِيَاءَ ۖ\n(nor those whom they have taken as protecting friends besides Allah.) nor will the false gods that they worshipped besides Allah benefit them in the least,\nوَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ\n(And theirs will be a great torment.) Allah the Exalted said,\nهَٰذَا هُدًى ۖ\n(This is Huda (guidance).) in reference to the Qur'an,\nوَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِآيَاتِ رَبِّهِمْ لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ مِنْ رِجْزٍ أَلِيمٌ\n(And those who disbelieve in the Ayat of their Lord, for them there is a painful torment of Rijz.) that is agonizing and severe. Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/45?verse=6","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:45:12","title":"Ibn Kathir · 45:12–15","text":"Allah, it is He Who has subjected to you the sea, that ships may sail through it by His command, and that you may seek of His bounty, and that you may be thankful (12)And has subjected to you all that is in the heavens and all that is on the earth; it is all (as a favor and kindness) from Him. Verily, in it are signs for a people who think deeply (13)Say to the believers to forgive those who hope not for the Days of Allah, that He may recompense people, according to what they have earned (14)Whosoever does a good deed, it is for himself, and whosoever does evil, it is against (himself). Then to your Lord you will be made to return (15)\nThe Subjugation of the Sea, etc., is among Allah's Signs\nAllah the Exalted mentions some of the favors He gave to His servants, such as subjecting the sea for their service,\nلِتَجْرِيَ الْفُلْكُ فِيهِ بِأَمْرِهِ\n(that ships may sail through the sea by His command,) i.e., of Allah the Exalted, Who ordered the sea to carry ships,\nوَلِتَبْتَغُوا مِنْ فَضْلِهِ\n(and that you may seek of His bounty,) in commercial and business transactions,\nوَلَعَلَّكُمْ تَشْكُرُونَ\n(and that you may be thankful.) for earning various provisions brought to you from far away provinces and distant areas through the sea. Allah the Exalted said,\nوَسَخَّرَ لَكُمْ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ\n(And has subjected to you all that is in the heavens and all that is on the earth;) the stars, the mountains, the seas, the rivers and all that you use for your benefit; these are all from His favor, kindness and bounty. Allah's statement next,\nجَمِيعًا مِنْهُ\n(it is all from Him.) Alone without partners in giving any of it. Allah the Exalted said in another Ayah,\nوَمَا بِكُمْ مِنْ نِعْمَةٍ فَمِنَ اللَّهِ ۖ ثُمَّ إِذَا مَسَّكُمُ الضُّرُّ فَإِلَيْهِ تَجْأَرُونَ\n(And whatever of blessings you have, it is from Allah. Then, when harm touches you unto Him you cry aloud for help.)(16:53) Ibn Jarir recorded that Al-'Awfi reported that Ibn 'Abbas said about Allah's statement,\nوَسَخَّرَ لَكُمْ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ جَمِيعًا مِنْهُ ۚ\n(And has subjected to you all that is in the heavens and all that is on the earth; it is all from Him.) \"Everything is from Allah, and that is a Name from His Names. So it all comes from Him without rivals to dispute His authority; surely, this fact is completely certain.\" Allah said.\nإِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِقَوْمٍ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ\n(Verily, in it are signs for a people who think deeply.)\nThe Command to be Patient with the Harm of Idolators\nAllah's saying;\nقُلْ لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا يَغْفِرُوا لِلَّذِينَ لَا يَرْجُونَ أَيَّامَ اللَّهِ\n(Say to the believers to forgive those who hope not for the Days of Allah,) means, let the believers forgive the disbelievers and endure the harm that they direct against them.\nIn the beginning of Islam, Muslims were ordered to observe patience in the face of the oppression of the idolators and the People of the Scriptures so that their hearts may incline towards Islam. However, when the disbelievers persisted in stubbornness, Allah legislated for the believers to fight in Jihad. Statements of this meaning were collected from 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas and Qatadah. Mujahid said about Allah's statement,\nلَا يَرْجُونَ أَيَّامَ اللَّهِ\n(those who hope not for the Days of Allah,) \"They do not appreciate Allah's favors.\" Allah said,\nلِيَجْزِيَ قَوْمًا بِمَا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ\n(that He may recompense people, according to what they have earned.) meaning, if the believers forgive the disbelievers in this life, Allah will still punish the disbelievers for their evil in the Hereafter. Allah's statement next,\nمَنْ عَمِلَ صَالِحًا فَلِنَفْسِهِ ۖ وَمَنْ أَسَاءَ فَعَلَيْهَا ۖ ثُمَّ إِلَىٰ رَبِّكُمْ تُرْجَعُونَ\n(Whosoever does a good deed, it is for himself, and whosoever does evil, it is against (himself). Then to your Lord you will be made to return.) meaning, you will all return to Allah on the Day of Resurrection, when you and your actions will be displayed before Him. Then, He will recompense you for your deeds, good for good and evil for evil.","href":"/tafsir/45?verse=12","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:45:16","title":"Ibn Kathir · 45:16–20","text":"And indeed We gave the Children of Israel the Scripture, and the understanding of the Scripture and its laws, and the prophethood; and provided them with good things, and preferred them above the nations (16)And gave them clear proofs in matters. And they differed not until after the knowledge came to them, through envy among themselves. Verily, your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection about that wherein they used to differ (17)Then We have put you on a (legal) way of commandment. So follow you that, and follow not the desires of those who know not (18)Verily, they can avail you nothing against Allah. Verily, the wrongdoers are protecting friends of one another, but Allah is the Protector of those who have Taqwa (19)This is a clear insight and evidence for mankind, and a guidance and a mercy for people who have faith with certainty (20)\nPreference of Allah to the Children of Israel and their dispute thereafter\nAllah the Exalted mentions the favors He granted the Children of Israel, such as revealing the Divine Books to them, sending the Messengers to them and granting them kingship. Allah said,\nوَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَا بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ الْكِتَابَ وَالْحُكْمَ وَالنُّبُوَّةَ وَرَزَقْنَاهُمْ مِنَ الطَّيِّبَاتِ\n(And indeed We gave the Children of Israel the Scripture, and the understanding of the Scripture and its laws, and the prophethood; and provided them with good things,) such as foods and drinks,\nوَفَضَّلْنَاهُمْ عَلَى الْعَالَمِينَ\n(and preferred them above the nations.) of their time,\nوَآتَيْنَاهُمْ بَيِّنَاتٍ مِنَ الْأَمْرِ ۖ\n(And gave them clear proofs in matters.) 'We gave them evidences, proofs and unequivocal signs.' Therefore, the proof has been established against them, yet they differed among themselves after the proof came to them, out of transgression against each other,\nإِنَّ رَبَّكَ\n(Verily, your Lord) 'O Muhammad',\nيَقْضِي بَيْنَهُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ فِيمَا كَانُوا فِيهِ يَخْتَلِفُونَ\n(will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection about that wherein they used to differ.) He will judge between them by His just judgement.\nWarning to this Ummah against following the Ways of the Children of Israel\nThis Ayah contains a warning to the Muslim Ummah as well. It warns them not to take the path the Jews took nor adopt their ways. This is why Allah said,\nثُمَّ جَعَلْنَاكَ عَلَىٰ شَرِيعَةٍ مِنَ الْأَمْرِ فَاتَّبِعْهَا\n(Then We have put you on a (legal) way of commandment. So follow you that.) 'follow what was revealed to you from your Lord, O Muhammad, there is no true deity except Him, and turn away from the idolators.' Allah said,\nوَلَا تَتَّبِعْ أَهْوَاءَ الَّذِينَ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ - إِنَّهُمْ لَنْ يُغْنُوا عَنْكَ مِنَ اللَّهِ شَيْئًا ۚ وَإِنَّ الظَّالِمِينَ بَعْضُهُمْ أَوْلِيَاءُ بَعْضٍ ۖ\n(and follow not the desires of those who know not. Verily, they can avail you nothing against Allah. Verily, the wrongdoers are protecting friends of one another,) Allah says, 'what will the loyalty that the idolators give each other avail them?' Indeed, all they will earn from their protecting friends is more loss, destruction and demise,\nوَاللَّهُ وَلِيُّ الْمُتَّقِينَ\n(but Allah is the Protector of those who have Taqwa.) and He will deliver them from the darkness to the light. In contrast, all the false deities are the protecting friends of those who disbelieve, taking them out of the light to the darkness. Allah said,\nهَٰذَا بَصَائِرُ لِلنَّاسِ\n(This is a clear insight and evidence for mankind,) in reference to the Qur'an,\nوَهُدًى وَرَحْمَةٌ لِقَوْمٍ يُوقِنُونَ\n(and a guidance and a mercy for people who have faith with certainty.)","href":"/tafsir/45?verse=16","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:45:21","title":"Ibn Kathir · 45:21–23","text":"Or do those who earn evil deeds think that We shall hold them equal with those who believe and do righteous good deeds, in their present life and after their death? Worst is the judgement that they make (21)And Allah has created the heavens and the earth with truth, in order that each person may be recompensed what he has earned, and they will not be wronged (22)Have you seen him who takes his own lust as his god? And Allah, left him astray with knowledge, and sealed his hearing and his heart, and put a cover on his sight. Who then will guide him after Allah? Will you not then remember (23)\nThe Life and the Death of the Believers and the Disbelievers are not Equal\nAllah the Exalted states here that the believers and the disbelievers are never equal. Allah said in another Ayah,\nلَا يَسْتَوِي أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ وَأَصْحَابُ الْجَنَّةِ ۚ أَصْحَابُ الْجَنَّةِ هُمُ الْفَائِزُونَ\n(Not equal are the dwellers of the Fire and the dwellers of the Paradise. It is the dwellers of Paradise that will be successful.)(59:20) Allah said here,\nأَمْ حَسِبَ الَّذِينَ اجْتَرَحُوا السَّيِّئَاتِ\n(Or do those who earn evil deeds think) those who commit and practice evil,\nأَنْ نَجْعَلَهُمْ كَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ سَوَاءً مَحْيَاهُمْ وَمَمَاتُهُمْ\n(that We shall hold them equal with those who believe and do righteous good deeds, in their life and their death?) treat them equally in the present life of the world and in the Hereafter?\nسَاءَ مَا يَحْكُمُونَ\n(Worst is the judgement that they make.) 'worst is the thought that they have about Us and about Our justice, thinking that We will ever make the pious and the wicked equal in the Hereafter or this life.'\nAt–Tabarani recorded that Shu'bah said that 'Amr bin Murrah narrated that Abu Ad-Duha said that Masruq said that Tamim Ad-Dari once stood in voluntary prayer through the night until the morning only reciting this Ayah,\nأَمْ حَسِبَ الَّذِينَ اجْتَرَحُوا السَّيِّئَاتِ أَنْ نَجْعَلَهُمْ كَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ\n(Or do those who earn evil deeds think that We shall hold them equal with those who believe and do righteous good deeds?) Allah said in reply:\nسَاءَ مَا يَحْكُمُونَ\n(Worst is the judgement that they make.) Allah said,\nوَخَلَقَ اللَّهُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ بِالْحَقِّ\n(And Allah has created the heavens and the earth with truth,) meaning, in justice,\nوَلِتُجْزَىٰ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ بِمَا كَسَبَتْ وَهُمْ لَا يُظْلَمُونَ\n(in order that each person may be recompensed what he has earned, and they will not be wronged.) Allah the Exalted said,\nأَفَرَأَيْتَ مَنِ اتَّخَذَ إِلَٰهَهُ هَوَاهُ\n(Have you seen him who takes his own lust as his god?), who abides by his lust, and whatever his lust portrays as good he implements it, and whatever his lust portrays as evil, he abandons it! Allah's statement,\nوَأَضَلَّهُ اللَّهُ عَلَىٰ عِلْمٍ\n(And Allah left him astray with knowledge,) has two meanings. One of them is that Allah knew that this person deserves to be misguided, so He left him astray. The second meaning is that Allah led this person astray after knowledge reached him and the proof was established before him. The second meaning includes the first meaning, but not the opposite. Allah said,\nوَخَتَمَ عَلَىٰ سَمْعِهِ وَقَلْبِهِ وَجَعَلَ عَلَىٰ بَصَرِهِ غِشَاوَةً\n(and sealed his hearing and his heart, and put a cover on his sight.) so he does not hear what benefits him, understands not what would lead him to the guidance and sees not the evidence with which he can be enlightened. This is why Allah said,\nفَمَنْ يَهْدِيهِ مِنْ بَعْدِ اللَّهِ ۚ أَفَلَا تَذَكَّرُونَ\n(Who then will guide him after Allah? Will you not then remember?) Allah said in a similar Ayah,\nمَنْ يُضْلِلِ اللَّهُ فَلَا هَادِيَ لَهُ ۚ وَيَذَرُهُمْ فِي طُغْيَانِهِمْ يَعْمَهُونَ\n(Whomsoever Allah sends astray, none can guide him; and He lets them wander blindly in their transgressions.)(7:186).","href":"/tafsir/45?verse=21","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:45:24","title":"Ibn Kathir · 45:24–26","text":"And they say: \"There is nothing but our life of this world, we die and we live and nothing destroys us except Ad-Dahr (time). And they have no knowledge of it, they only presume (24)And when Our Clear Ayat are recited to them, their argument is no other than that they say: \"Bring back our (dead) fathers, if you are truthful! (25)Say (to them): \"Allah gives you life, then causes you to die, then He will assemble you on the Day of Resurrection about which there is no doubt. But most of mankind know not. (26)\nThe Conviction of the Disbelievers, Their Argument and the Refutation of it\nAllah mentions here the creed of Ad-Dahriyyah and the Arab idolators who embraced their creed, denying Resurrection,\nوَقَالُوا مَا هِيَ إِلَّا حَيَاتُنَا الدُّنْيَا نَمُوتُ وَنَحْيَا\n(And they say: \"There is nothing but our life of this world, we die and we live....\") They say that there is only this life, some people die while others are born to life, without Resurrection or Judgement. This was the creed of Arab idolators who used to deny Resurrection, in addition to, the creed of the atheist philosophers among them who denied the creation and Resurrection. This was also the statement of atheist philosophers who deny the Creator and think that the world will return to its original form once every thirty–six thousand years, when everything will restart its life–cycle again! They claim that this cycle was repeated for infinity, thus contradicting the sound reason and the divine revelation. They said,\nوَمَا يُهْلِكُنَا إِلَّا الدَّهْرُ\n(and nothing destroys us except Ad-Dahr (time).) Allah the Exalted said in reply,\nوَمَا لَهُمْ بِذَٰلِكَ مِنْ عِلْمٍ ۖ إِنْ هُمْ إِلَّا يَظُنُّونَ\n(And they have no knowledge of it, they only presume.) they speculate and guess!\nAs for the Hadith recorded by the two collectors of the Sahih, and Abu Dawud and An-Nasa'i, from Abu Hurayrah that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nيَقُولُ تَعَالَىٰ: يُؤْذِينِي ابْنُ آدَمَ، يَسُبُّ الدَّهْرَ وَأَنَا الدَّهْرُ، بِيَدِيَ الْأَمْرُ، أُقَلِّبُ لَيْلَهُ وَنَهَارَهُ\n(Allah the Exalted says, \"The Son of 'Adam annoys Me when he curses Ad-Dahr (time), while I am Ad-Dahr. In My Hand are all matters; I cause the alternation of his days and nights.\") In another narration;\nلَا تَسُبُّوا الدَّهْرَ فَإِنَّ اللهَ تَعَالَى هُوَ الدَّهْرُ\n(Do not curse Ad-Dahr (time), for Allah is Ad-Dahr.) Ash-Shafi'i, Abu 'Ubaydah and several other Imams of Tafsir explained the meaning of the Prophet's statement,\nلَا تَسُبُّوا الدَّهْرَ فَإِنَّ اللهَ هُوَ الدَّهْرُ\n(Do not abuse Ad-Dahr (time), for Allah is Ad-Dahr.) They said, \"During the time of Jahiliyyah, when an affliction, a calamity or a disaster struck them, the Arabs used to say, 'Woe to Ad-Dahr (time)!' So they used to blame such incidents on Ad-Dahr, cursing Ad-Dahr in the process. Surely, it is Allah the Exalted and Most Honored Who causes these (and all) things to happen. This is why when they cursed Ad-Dahr, it was as if they were cursing Allah Himself, since truthfully, He causes all incidents to happen. Therefore, abusing Ad-Dahr was prohibited due to this consideration, for it was Allah Whom they meant by abusing Ad-Dahr, which – as we said– they accused of causing (distressful) incidents.\"\nThis is the best explanation for this subject, and it is the desired meaning. Allah knows best. We should mention that Ibn Hazm and those of the Zahiriyyah like him made an error when they used this Hadith to include Ad-Dahr among Allah's most beautiful Names. Allah's statement,\nوَإِذَا تُتْلَىٰ عَلَيْهِمْ آيَاتُنَا بَيِّنَاتٍ\n(And when Our Clear Ayat are recited to them,) means, when the truth is made plain to them and used as evidence against them, asserting that Allah is able to resurrect the bodies after they have perished and disintegrated,\nمَا كَانَ حُجَّتَهُمْ إِلَّا أَنْ قَالُوا ائْتُوا بِآبَائِنَا إِنْ كُنْتُمْ صَادِقِينَ\n(their argument is no other than that they say: \"Bring back our fathers, if you are truthful!\") 'bring them back to life, if what you say is true.' Allah the Exalted said,\nقُلِ اللَّهُ يُحْيِيكُمْ ثُمَّ يُمِيتُكُمْ\n(Say (to them): \"Allah gives you life and then causes you to die...\") 'for you are witnesses that He brings you (or new life) to existence after non–existence,'\nكَيْفَ تَكْفُرُونَ بِاللَّهِ وَكُنْتُمْ أَمْوَاتًا فَأَحْيَاكُمْ ۖ ثُمَّ يُمِيتُكُمْ ثُمَّ يُحْيِيكُمْ\n(How can you disbelieve in Allah? Seeing that you were dead and He gave you life. Then He will give you death, then again will bring you to life.)(2:28) Therefore, He Who is able to initiate creation, is able to restart it, as well and more obviously,\nوَهُوَ الَّذِي يَبْدَأُ الْخَلْقَ ثُمَّ يُعِيدُهُ وَهُوَ أَهْوَنُ عَلَيْهِ ۚ\n(And He it is Who originates the creation, then He will repeat it; and this is easier for Him.)(30:27) Allah said next,\nثُمَّ يَجْمَعُكُمْ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ لَا رَيْبَ فِيهِ\n(then He will assemble you on the Day of Resurrection about which there is no doubt.) 'when He resurrects you, it will be on and for the Day of Resurrection, not in this life. Therefore, your statement is groundless,'\nائْتُوا بِآبَائِنَا إِنْ كُنْتُمْ صَادِقِينَ\nBring back our (dead) fathers, if you are truthful! Allah said,\nيَوْمَ يَجْمَعُكُمْ لِيَوْمِ الْجَمْعِ ۖ\nThe Day when He will gather you (all) on the Day of Gathering. (64:9).\nلِأَيِّ يَوْمٍ أُجِّلَتْ - لِيَوْمِ الْفَصْلِ\n(For what Day are these signs postponed? For the Day of sorting out.)(77:12-13), and,\nوَمَا نُؤَخِّرُهُ إِلَّا لِأَجَلٍ مَعْدُودٍ\n(And We delay it only for a term (already) fixed.)(11:104) Allah said here,\nثُمَّ يَجْمَعُكُمْ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ لَا رَيْبَ فِيهِ\n(then He will assemble you on the Day of Resurrection about which there is no doubt.) there is no doubt that it will come,\nوَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ\n(But most of mankind know not.) and this is why they deny Resurrection and discount the fact that the bodies will be brought back to life. Allah the Exalted said,\nإِنَّهُمْ يَرَوْنَهُ بَعِيدًا - وَنَرَاهُ قَرِيبًا\n(Verily, they see it afar off. But We see it (quite) near.)(70:6-7), they discount the possibility that Resurrection will ever come, while the believers believe that its occurrence is easy and imminent.","href":"/tafsir/45?verse=24","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:45:27","title":"Ibn Kathir · 45:27–29","text":"And to Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. And on the Day that the Hour will be established – on that Day the followers of falsehood shall lose (27)And you will see each nation humbled to their knees (Jathiyah), each nation will be called to its Record (of deeds). This Day you shall be recompensed for what you used to do (28)This Our Record speaks about you with truth. Verily, We were recording what you used to do (29)\nSome of the Conditions of the Day of Resurrection and its Horrors\nAllah mentions that He is the King and Owner of the heavens and earth, and the Only Ruler over them in this life and the Hereafter. Allah's statement,\nوَيَوْمَ تَقُومُ السَّاعَةُ\n(And on the Day that the Hour will be established) on the Day of Resurrection,\nيَخْسَرُ الْمُبْطِلُونَ\n(the followers of falsehood shall lose.) those who disbelieve in Allah and reject the clear proofs and unequivocal evidences that He has sent down to His Messengers. Allah said,\nوَتَرَىٰ كُلَّ أُمَّةٍ جَاثِيَةً ۚ\n(And you will see each nation humbled to their knees (Jathiyah),) kneeling, fearful of the tremendous calamity and events. It was said that this will occur when Hellfire will be brought forth, for she will exhale once, and everyone will fall to their knees, including Ibrahim, the Khalil. He will proclaim, \"Myself, myself, myself! Today, I will not ask You (O Allah) but about myself.\" And even 'Isa, will proclaim, \"Today, I will only argue before You on my own behalf, I will not ask You about Maryam, who gave birth to me.\" Allah said next,\nكُلُّ أُمَّةٍ تُدْعَىٰ إِلَىٰ كِتَابِهَا\n(each nation will be called to its Record.) meaning, Record of deeds. Allah said in a similar Ayah,\nوَوُضِعَ الْكِتَابُ وَجِيءَ بِالنَّبِيِّينَ وَالشُّهَدَاءِ\n(And the Book will be presented; and the Prophets and the witnesses will be brought forward)(39:69). This is why Allah said here,\nالْيَوْمَ تُجْزَوْنَ مَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ\n(This Day you shall be recompensed for what you used to do.) 'you will be judged according to your deeds, good and evil.' Allah said in similar Ayat;\nيُنَبَّأُ الْإِنْسَانُ يَوْمَئِذٍ بِمَا قَدَّمَ وَأَخَّرَ - بَلِ الْإِنْسَانُ عَلَىٰ نَفْسِهِ بَصِيرَةٌ - وَلَوْ أَلْقَىٰ مَعَاذِيرَهُ\n(On that Day man will be informed of what he sent forward, and what he left behind. Nay! Man will be a witness against himself, though he may put forth his excuses.)(75:13-15) Allah said,\nهَٰذَا كِتَابُنَا يَنْطِقُ عَلَيْكُمْ بِالْحَقِّ ۚ\n(This, Our Record speaks about you with truth.) It contains the record of all your actions, without addition or deletion. Allah also said:\nوَوُضِعَ الْكِتَابُ فَتَرَى الْمُجْرِمِينَ مُشْفِقِينَ مِمَّا فِيهِ وَيَقُولُونَ يَا وَيْلَتَنَا مَالِ هَٰذَا الْكِتَابِ لَا يُغَادِرُ صَغِيرَةً وَلَا كَبِيرَةً إِلَّا أَحْصَاهَا ۚ وَوَجَدُوا مَا عَمِلُوا حَاضِرًا ۗ وَلَا يَظْلِمُ رَبُّكَ أَحَدًا\n(And the Book will be presented, and you will see the criminals, fearful of that which is therein. They will say: \"Woe to us! What sort of Book is this that leaves neither a small thing nor a big thing, but has recorded it with numbers!\" And they will find all that they did, placed before them, and your Lord treats no one with injustice.)(18:49) Allah's statement,\nإِنَّا كُنَّا نَسْتَنْسِخُ مَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ\n(Verily, We were recording what you used to do.) means, 'We ordered Our scribe angels to record your deeds.' Ibn 'Abbas and others commented, \"The angels record the deeds of the servants and then ascend to heaven with them. There, they meet the angels entrusted with the Records of deeds sent down from Al-Lawh Al-Mahfuz on each Night of Al-Qadr, containing what Allah has written will occur from the servants, long before He created them. They will compare their records and find out that not a single letter was added or deleted.\" He then recited this Ayah,\nإِنَّا كُنَّا نَسْتَنْسِخُ مَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ\n(Verily, We were recording what you used to do.)","href":"/tafsir/45?verse=27","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:45:30","title":"Ibn Kathir · 45:30–37","text":"Then, as for those who believed and did good deeds, their Lord will admit them to His mercy. That will be the evident success (30)But as for those who disbelieved (it will be said to them): \"Were not Our Ayat recited to you? But you were proud, and you were a people who were criminals. (31)And when it was said: \"Verily, Allah's promise is the truth, and there is no doubt about the coming of the Hour,\" you said: \"We know not what is the Hour: we do not think it but conjecture, and we have no firm convincing belief (therein). (32)And the evil of what they did will appear to them, and that which they used to mock at will completely encircle them (33)And it will be said: \"This Day We will forget you as you forgot the meeting of this Day of yours. And your abode is the Fire, and there is none to help you. (34)This, because you took the revelations of Allah in mockery, and the life of the world deceived you. So this Day, they shall not be taken out from there (Hell), nor shall they be returned to the worldly life (35)So all praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the heavens and the Lord of the earth, and the Lord of all that exists (36)And His is the majesty in the heavens and the earth, and He is Al-'Aziz, Al-Hakim (37)\nAllah states to us His judgement in His creation on the Day of Resurrection,\nفَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ\n(Then, as for those who believed and did good deeds,) Those whose hearts believed and their limbs performed good deeds, in sincerity to Allah and conforming with Islamic legislation;\nفَيُدْخِلُهُمْ رَبُّهُمْ فِي رَحْمَتِهِ\n(their Lord will admit them to His mercy.) and that is Paradise. In the Sahih, Allah said to Paradise;\nأَنْتِ رَحْمَتِي، أَرْحَمُ بِكِ مَنْ أَشَاءُ\n(\"You are My mercy, with which I grant mercy to whom I will,\") Allah said;\nذَٰلِكَ هُوَ الْفَوْزُ الْمُبِينُ\n(That will be the evident success.) clear and apparent. Allah said,\nوَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا أَفَلَمْ تَكُنْ آيَاتِي تُتْلَىٰ عَلَيْكُمْ فَاسْتَكْبَرْتُمْ\n(But as for those who disbelieved (it will be said to them): \"Were not Our Ayat recited to you? But you were proud...\") They will be admonished and criticized with this statement, that means, 'have not the Ayat of Ar-Rahman been recited to you? But you did not follow them out of pride and turned away upon hearing them,'\nوَكُنْتُمْ قَوْمًا مُجْرِمِينَ\n(and you were a people who were criminals.), 'by your actions, as well as, the denial that your hearts contained.'\nوَإِذَا قِيلَ إِنَّ وَعْدَ اللَّهِ حَقٌّ وَالسَّاعَةُ لَا رَيْبَ فِيهَا\n(And when it was said: \"Verily, Allah's promise is the truth, and there is no doubt about the coming of the Hour,\") 'when the believers said these words to you;'\nقُلْتُمْ مَا نَدْرِي مَا السَّاعَةُ\n(you said: \"We know not what is the Hour...\") 'we do not recognize what you are talking about,'\nإِنْ نَظُنُّ إِلَّا ظَنًّا\n(we do not think it but conjecture,) 'we only remotely think that it might come,'\nوَمَا نَحْنُ بِمُسْتَيْقِنِينَ\n(and we have no firm convincing belief (therein).) 'we are not sure of it.' Allah said,\nوَبَدَا لَهُمْ سَيِّئَاتُ مَا عَمِلُوا\n(And the evil of what they did will appear to them,) the repercussion of their evil deeds will become apparent to them,\nوَحَاقَ بِهِمْ\n(and will completely encircle them.) from all directions,\nمَا كَانُوا بِهِ يَسْتَهْزِئُونَ\n(that which they used to mock at) of the coming torment and punishment,\nوَقِيلَ الْيَوْمَ نَنْسَاكُمْ\n(And it will be said: \"This Day We will forget you...\") 'We will treat you as if We have forgotten you, casting you in the fire of Jahannam,'\nكَمَا نَسِيتُمْ لِقَاءَ يَوْمِكُمْ هَٰذَا\n(as you forgot the meeting of this Day of yours.) 'and did not work for it because you did not believe in its coming,'\nوَمَأْوَاكُمُ النَّارُ وَمَا لَكُمْ مِنْ نَاصِرِينَ\n(And your abode is the Fire, and there is none to help you.) In the Sahih, it is reported that Allah the Exalted will ask some of His servants on the Day of Resurrection,\nأَلَمْ أُزَوِّجْكَ؟ أَلَمْ أُكْرِمْكَ؟ أَلَمْ أُسَخِّرْ لَكَ الْخَيْلَ وَالْإِبِلَ، وَأَذَرْكَ تَرْأَسُ وَتَرْبَعُ؟ فَيَقُولُ: بَلَىٰ يَارَبِّ. فَيَقُولُ: أَفَظَنَنْتَ أَنَّكَ مُلَاقِيَّ؟ فَيَقُولُ: لَا. فَيَقُولُ اللهُ تَعَالَىٰ: فَالْيَوْمَ أَنْسَاكَ كَمَا نَسِيتَنِي\n(\"Have I not given you a spouse, honored you and subjected the camels and horses to you? Have I not allowed you to be a chief and a master?\" The servant will say in answer, \"Yes, O Lord!\" Allah will say, \"Did you think that you would ever meet Me?\" He will say, \"No.\" Allah the Exalted will say, \"then this Day, I will forget you as you forgot Me.\") Allah the Exalted said,\nذَٰلِكُمْ بِأَنَّكُمُ اتَّخَذْتُمْ آيَاتِ اللَّهِ هُزُوًا\n(This, because you took the revelations of Allah in mockery.) 'We gave you this punishment as retribution because you mocked Allah's proofs that He sent to you, and made them the subject of jokes and jest,'\nوَغَرَّتْكُمُ الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا\n(and the life of the world deceived you.) 'this life fooled you and you were seduced by to it, thus becoming among the ultimate losers,'\nفَالْيَوْمَ لَا يُخْرَجُونَ مِنْهَا\n(So this Day, they shall not be taken out from there), from Hellfire,\nوَلَا هُمْ يُسْتَعْتَبُونَ\n(nor shall they be returned to the worldly life.) no apologies shall be sought from them, but they will be punished without limit or delay, just as a group of the believers will enter Paradise without limit or delay.\nAfter Allah mentioned His judgement for the believers and the disbelievers, He said,\nفَلِلَّهِ الْحَمْدُ رَبِّ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَرَبِّ الْأَرْضِ\n(So all praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the heavens and the Lord of the earth,) He is their Owner and the Owner of all that is in and on them, and surely,\nرَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ\n(and the Lord of all that exists.) Allah said next,\nوَلَهُ الْكِبْرِيَاءُ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ ۖ\n(And His is the majesty in the heavens and the earth,) meaning, the kingship, according to Mujahid. This Ayah means, Allah is the Almighty, Worthy of all praise; everything and everyone is subservient and in complete need of and dependent upon Him. In an authentic Hadith, the Prophet ﷺ said,\nيَقُولُ اللهُ تَعَالَىٰ: الْعَظَمَةُ إِزَارِي، وَالْكِبْرِيَاءُ رِدَائِي، فَمَنْ نَازَعَنِي وَاحِدًا مِنْهُمَا أَسْكَنْتُهُ نَارِي\n(Allah the Exalted said, \"Glory is My robe and pride is My garment; whoever rivals Me for either of them, I will make him reside in My Fire!\") Muslim collected a similar Hadith. Allah said,\nوَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ\n(and He is the Al-'Aziz,) Who is never resisted or rivaled,\nالْحَكِيمُ\n(Al-Hakim) all wise in His statements, actions, legislation and the decree that He appoints; all glory and praise are due to Him, none has the right to be worshipped but He, Alone.\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Al-Jathiyah. All praise and thanks are due to Allah alone.","href":"/tafsir/45?verse=30","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:46:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 46:1–6","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nحم - تَنْزِيلُ الْكِتَابِ مِنَ اللَّهِ الْعَزِيزِ الْحَكِيمِ - مَا خَلَقْنَا السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا إِلَّا بِالْحَقِّ وَأَجَلٍ مُسَمًّى ۚ وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا عَمَّا أُنْذِرُوا مُعْرِضُونَ - قُلْ أَرَأَيْتُمْ مَا تَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ أَرُونِي مَاذَا خَلَقُوا مِنَ الْأَرْضِ أَمْ لَهُمْ شِرْكٌ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ ۖ ائْتُونِي بِكِتَابٍ مِنْ قَبْلِ هَٰذَا أَوْ أَثَارَةٍ مِنْ عِلْمٍ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ صَادِقِينَ - وَمَنْ أَضَلُّ مِمَّنْ يَدْعُو مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ مَنْ لَا يَسْتَجِيبُ لَهُ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ وَهُمْ عَنْ دُعَائِهِمْ غَافِلُونَ - وَإِذَا حُشِرَ النَّاسُ كَانُوا لَهُمْ أَعْدَاءً وَكَانُوا بِعِبَادَتِهِمْ كَافِرِينَ\n(1. Ha Mim.)(2. The revelation of the Book is from Allah, the Almighty, the All-Wise.)(3. We created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with truth, and for a specified term. But those who disbelieve, turn away from that whereof they are warned.)(4. Say: \"Think you about all that you invoke besides Allah? Show me what have they created of the earth? Or have they a share in (the creation of) the heavens? Bring me a scripture prior to this or some trace of knowledge, if you are truthful!\")(5. And who is more astray than those who invoke besides Allah others who will not answer them until the Day of Resurrection, and who are unaware of their invocations to them?)(6. And when mankind are gathered, they (false deities) will become their enemies and will deny their worship.)\nThe Qur'an is a Revelation from Allah and the Universe is His True Creation\nAllah informs that He has revealed the Book to His servant and Messenger Muhammad – may Allah's blessings be upon him until the Day of Judgement. Allah then describes Himself as being of unimaginable glory, possessing ultimate wisdom in His statements and actions. Allah then says,\nمَا خَلَقْنَا السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا إِلَّا بِالْحَقِّ\n(We created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except in truth,) meaning, not in idle play and falsehood.\nوَأَجَلٍ مُسَمًّى\n(and for a specified term.) meaning, for a fixed and specified duration that will not increase or decrease. Allah continues,\nوَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا عَمَّا أُنْذِرُوا مُعْرِضُونَ\n(But those who disbelieve, turn away from that of which they are warned.) Meaning, the disbelievers are distracted from what is intended for them. Allah has indeed revealed to them a Book and sent to them a Messenger. Yet, they obstinately turn away from all of that. Therefore, they will soon realize the consequence of their behavior.\nRefuting the Idolators\nAllah then says,\nقُلْ\n(Say) meaning, to these idolators who worship others besides Allah.\nأَرَأَيْتُمْ مَا تَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ أَرُونِي مَاذَا خَلَقُوا مِنَ الْأَرْضِ\n(Think you about all that you invoke besides Allah? Show me what they have created of the earth?)(46:4) meaning, 'show me the place that they have independently created from the earth.'\nأَمْ لَهُمْ شِرْكٌ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ\n(Or have they a share in the heavens?) which means that they are not partners in anything in the heavens, nor on earth. They do not own even the thin membrane covering a date's pit. The dominion and control only belong to Allah, Exalted is He. 'How then would you worship others or join them as partners with Him? Who guided you to that? Who called you to that? Did He command you to do it, or is it something that you suggested yourselves?' Thus, He says,\nائْتُونِي بِكِتَابٍ مِنْ قَبْلِ هَٰذَا\n(Bring me a scripture prior to this) meaning, 'bring a book from among the Books of Allah that have been revealed to the Prophets, that commands you to worship these idols.'\nأَوْ أَثَارَةٍ مِنْ عِلْمٍ\n(or some trace of knowledge,) meaning, 'some clear evidence justifying this way you have chosen.'\nإِنْ كُنْتُمْ صَادِقِينَ\n(if you are truthful!) meaning, 'you have absolutely no evidence for that – neither textual (from revelation) nor rational.' For this reason, some recited it;\nأَوْ أَثَرَةٍ مِنْ عِلْمٍ\n\"or something inherited from knowledge\" meaning, 'or true knowledge that you have inherited from anyone before you.' This is similar to Mujahid's statement when he said,\nأَوْ أَثَارَةٍ مِنْ عِلْمٍ\n(or some trace of knowledge.) \"Or anyone who has inherited any knowledge.\" Allah then says,\nوَمَنْ أَضَلُّ مِمَّنْ يَدْعُو مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ مَنْ لَا يَسْتَجِيبُ لَهُ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ وَهُمْ عَنْ دُعَائِهِمْ غَافِلُونَ\n(And who is more astray than those who invokes besides Allah others who will not answer them until the Day of Resurrection, and who are unaware of their invocations to them?) meaning, no one is more misguided than those who invoke idols instead of Allah, asking them for things that they cannot give – until the Day of Judgment. They (the idols) are unaware of what he asks, they can neither hear, see, or act. This is because they are inanimate, senseless stones. Allah then says,\nوَإِذَا حُشِرَ النَّاسُ كَانُوا لَهُمْ أَعْدَاءً وَكَانُوا بِعِبَادَتِهِمْ كَافِرِينَ\n(And when mankind are gathered, they will become their enemies and will deny their worship.) This is similar to Allah's saying:\nوَاتَّخَذُوا مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ آلِهَةً لِيَكُونُوا لَهُمْ عِزًّا - كَلَّا ۚ سَيَكْفُرُونَ بِعِبَادَتِهِمْ وَيَكُونُونَ عَلَيْهِمْ ضِدًّا\n(They have taken gods beside Allah, that they might give them dignity. No! They will deny their worship of them, and will be opponents to them.)(19:81-82) meaning, they will betray them when they need them the most. (Ibrahim) Al-Khalil, peace be upon him, said:\nإِنَّمَا اتَّخَذْتُمْ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ أَوْثَانًا مَوَدَّةَ بَيْنِكُمْ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا ۖ ثُمَّ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ يَكْفُرُ بَعْضُكُمْ بِبَعْضٍ وَيَلْعَنُ بَعْضُكُمْ بَعْضًا وَمَأْوَاكُمُ النَّارُ وَمَا لَكُمْ مِنْ نَاصِرِينَ\n(You have taken only idols besides Allah! The love between you is only in the life of this world. On the Day of Resurrection, you shall disown each other and curse each other, and your abode will be the Fire, and you shall have no helpers.)(29:25)","href":"/tafsir/46?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:46:7","title":"Ibn Kathir · 46:7–9","text":"And when Our Clear Ayat are recited to them, the disbelievers say of the truth when it reaches them: \"This is plain magic! (7)Or say they: \"He has fabricated it.\" Say: \"If I have fabricated it, still you have no power to support me against Allah. He knows best of what you say among yourselves concerning it! Sufficient is He as a witness between me and you! And He is the Oft–Forgiving, the Most Merciful. (8)Say: \"I am not a new thing among the Messengers, nor do I know what will be done with me or you. I only follow that which is revealed to me, and I am but a plain warner. (9)\nRefuting Claims of the Idolators about the Qur'an and the Messenger ﷺ\nConcerning the disbelief and rebellion of the idolators, Allah says that when the clear Ayat of Allah are recited to them they say:\nهَٰذَا سِحْرٌ مُّبِينٌ\n(\"This is plain magic!\" ) meaning, simple magic.In this statement of theirs, they have lied, invented a falsehood, went astray and disbelieved.\nأَمْ يَقُولُونَ افْتَرَاهُ ۖ\n(Or they say: \"He has fabricated it.\" ) They are referring to Muhammad ﷺ. Allah responds saying,\nقُلْ إِنِ افْتَرَيْتُهُ فَلَا تَمْلِكُونَ لِي مِنَ اللَّهِ شَيْئًا ۖ\n(Say: \"If I have fabricated it, you have no power to support me against Allah...\") which means, 'if I lie against Allah and falsely claim that He sent me when He actually had not, then He would punish me with a severe punishment. No one on the earth – you or anyone else – would then be able to protect me from Him.' It is similar to Allah's saying,\nقُلْ إِنِّي لَنْ يُجِيرَنِي مِنَ اللَّهِ أَحَدٌ وَلَنْ أَجِدَ مِنْ دُونِهِ مُلْتَحَدًا - إِلَّا بَلَاغًا مِنَ اللَّهِ وَرِسَالَاتِهِ ۚ\n(Say: \"None can protect me from Allah, nor would I find a refuge except in Him. (My duty) is only to convey from Allah and (deliver) His Messages.\")(72:22-23) Allah says,\nوَلَوْ تَقَوَّلَ عَلَيْنَا بَعْضَ الْأَقَاوِيلِ - لَأَخَذْنَا مِنْهُ بِالْيَمِينِ - ثُمَّ لَقَطَعْنَا مِنْهُ الْوَتِينَ - فَمَا مِنْكُمْ مِنْ أَحَدٍ عَنْهُ حَاجِزِينَ\n(And if he made up a false saying concerning Us, We surely would have seized him by the right hand. Then we would have cut off his life artery. And none of you could withhold Us from (punishing) him.)(69:44-47) Thus, Allah says here,\nقُلْ إِنِ افْتَرَيْتُهُ فَلَا تَمْلِكُونَ لِي مِنَ اللَّهِ شَيْئًا ۖ هُوَ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا تُفِيضُونَ فِيهِ ۖ كَفَىٰ بِهِ شَهِيدًا بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَكُمْ ۖ\n(Say: \"If I have fabricated it, still you have no power to support me against Allah. He knows best of what you say among yourselves concerning it (i.e. this Qur'an)! Sufficient is He as a witness between me and you!...\") This is a severe threat, intimidation and warning for them. Allah then says,\nوَهُوَ الْغَفُورُ الرَّحِيمُ\n(And He is the Oft-Forgiving, the Most Merciful.) This is an encouragement for them to repent and turn to Allah. It means, 'despite all of this, if you turn back and repent, Allah will accept your repentance, pardon you, forgive you, and have mercy upon on.' This is similar to Allah's saying in Surat Al-Furqan,\nوَقَالُوا أَسَاطِيرُ الْأَوَّلِينَ اكْتَتَبَهَا فَهِيَ تُمْلَىٰ عَلَيْهِ بُكْرَةً وَأَصِيلًا - قُلْ أَنْزَلَهُ الَّذِي يَعْلَمُ السِّرَّ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ ۚ إِنَّهُ كَانَ غَفُورًا رَحِيمًا\n(And they say: \"(This Book is) legends of the ancients that he has written down, and they are dictated to him morning and afternoon.\" Say: \"It has been sent down by the One Who knows every secret within the heavens and the earth. Truly, He is ever Forgiving and Merciful.\")(25:5-6) Allah then says,\nقُلْ مَا كُنْتُ بِدْعًا مِنَ الرُّسُلِ\n(Say: \"I am not a new thing among the Messengers...\") which means, 'I am not the first Messenger who ever came to the world. Rather, Messengers came before me. Therefore, I am not an unprecedented incident that should cause you all to reject me and doubt my being sent to you. Indeed, Allah has sent before me all of the Prophets to various nations.' Allah then says,\nوَمَا أَدْرِي مَا يُفْعَلُ بِي وَلَا بِكُمْ\n(nor do I know what will be done with me or with you.) 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported from Ibn 'Abbas that he said, \"It (this Ayah) was followed in revelation by,\nلِيَغْفِرَ لَكَ اللَّهُ مَا تَقَدَّمَ مِنْ ذَنْبِكَ وَمَا تَأَخَّرَ\n(That Allah may forgive for you your sins of the past and future). Similarly, 'Ikrimah, Al-Hasan, and Qatadah all said that this Ayah was abrogated by the Ayah;\nلِيَغْفِرَ لَكَ اللَّهُ مَا تَقَدَّمَ مِنْ ذَنْبِكَ وَمَا تَأَخَّرَ\n(That Allah may forgive for you your sins of the past and future). They said that when the latter Ayah was revealed, one of the Muslims said to Allah's Messenger ﷺ, \"Allah has declared what He will do for you. But what will He do for us?\" Then Allah revealed;\nلِيُدْخِلَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتِ جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ\n(That He may admit the believing men and the believing women to Gardens under which rivers flow).\nThis is what they said. That which has been confirmed in the Sahih is that the believers said, \"May you enjoy that, O Allah's Messenger! But what do we get?\" So Allah revealed this Ayah.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Kharijah bin Zayd bin Thabit, reported that Umm Al-'Ala' – a woman from the Ansar who had given her pledge of loyalty to Allah's Messenger ﷺ – said, \"When the Ansar drew lots regarding taking in the Muhajirun to dwell with them, our lot was to have 'Uthman bin Maz'un. Later, 'Uthman fell sick in our house, so we nursed him until he died, and we wrapped him in his garments (for burial). Allah's Messenger ﷺ then came in, and I said, 'O Abu As-Sa'ib! May Allah have mercy on you. I bear witness that Allah has indeed honored you.' Allah's Messenger ﷺ asked,\nوَمَا يُدْرِيكِ أَنَّ اللهَ تَعَالَىٰ أَكْرَمَهُ\n(How do you know that Allah has honored him?) I said, 'I do not know – may my father and mother both be ransoms for you!' Allah's Messenger ﷺ then said,\nأَمَّا هُوَ فَقَدْ جَاءَهُ الْيَقِينُ مِنْ رَبِّهِ،وَإِنِّي لَأَرْجُو لَهُ الْخَيْرَ. وَاللهِ مَا أَدْرِي وَأَنَا رَسُولُ اللهِ مَا يُفْعَلُ بِي\n(As for him, certainty (death) has reached him from his Lord, and I surely wish well for him. But by Allah, even though I am Allah's Messenger, I do not know what will happen to me (after death).) I then said, 'Never will I claim a person to be pious after this.' This incident caused me some distress, and I went to sleep thereafter. I saw in my dream that 'Uthman owned a running water spring. I went to Allah's Messenger ﷺ and told him about that. Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nذَاكِ عَمَلُهُ\n(That was his (good) deeds.)\" Al-Bukhari recorded this Hadith but Muslim did not. In one of the narrations, Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nمَا أَدْرِي وَأَنَا رَسُولُ اللهِ مَا يُفْعَلُ بِهِ\n(Even though I am Allah's Messenger, I do not know what will happen to him.) This and similar texts indicate that it is not allowed to declare that a specific person will enter Jannah except for those who were distinctly indicated by Allah or his Messenger ﷺ. Examples of those are the Ten, Ibn Sallam, Al-Ghumaysa', Bilal, Suraqah, 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Haram (Jabir's father), the Seventy Recitors (of Qur'an) who were assassinated near the Well of Ma'unah, Zayd bin Harithah, Ja'far, Ibn Rawahah, and other similar individuals, may Allah be pleased with them. Allah then says,\nإِنْ أَتَّبِعُ إِلَّا مَا يُوحَىٰ إِلَيَّ\n(I only follow that which is revealed to me,) which means, 'I only follow what Allah has revealed to me of the revelation.'\nوَمَا أَنَا إِلَّا نَذِيرٌ مُبِينٌ\n(and I am but a plain warner.) meaning, 'my warnings are obvious to every person with sound intellect and reason.' And Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/46?verse=7","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:46:10","title":"Ibn Kathir · 46:10–14","text":"Say: \"Tell me! If it was from Allah and you disbelieved it, (at the same time), a witness from among the Children of Israel has testified to something similar and believed while you rejected (the truth)!\" Verily, Allah does not guide the wrongdoing people (10)And those who disbelieve say of those who believe: \"Had it been a good thing, they (the poor believers) would not have preceded us to it!\" And when they have not been guided by it, they say: \"This is ancient falsehood! (11)And before this was the Scripture of Musa as a guide and a mercy. And this is a Book confirming in the Arabic tongue, to warn those who do wrong, and as glad tidings for the doers of good (12)Verily, those who say: \"Our Lord is (only) Allah,\" and thereafter stand firm, on them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve (13)Such shall be the dwellers of Paradise, abiding therein (forever) – a reward for what they used to do (14)\nThe Qur'an is Allah's True Speech and the Position of the Disbelievers and the Muslims towards it\nAllah says,\nقُلْ\n(Say) meaning, 'O Muhammad to these idolators who disbelieve in the Qur'an.'\nأَرَأَيْتُمْ إِنْ كَانَ\n(Tell me! If it was) meaning, this Qur'an.\nمِنْ عِنْدِ اللَّهِ وَكَفَرْتُمْ بِهِ\n(from Allah, and you disbelieved in it?) meaning, 'what do you think that Allah will do to you if this Book that I have come to you with is actually revealed to me from Him in order that I convey it to you, and yet you disbelieve in it and deny it?'\nوَشَهِدَ شَاهِدٌ مِنْ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ عَلَىٰ مِثْلِهِ\n((at the same time), a witness from among the Children of Israel has testified to something similar) meaning, 'the previous Scriptures that were revealed to the Prophets before me all testify to its truthfulness and authenticity. They have prophecied, well in advance, about things similar to that which this Qur'an informs of.' Concerning Allah's statement,\nفَآمَنَ\n(and believed) 'this person who testified to its truthfulness from the Children of Israel, due to his realization that it was the truth.'\nوَاسْتَكْبَرْتُمْ\n(while you rejected (the truth)!) 'whereas you have arrogantly refused to follow it.' Masruq said: \"That witness believed in his Prophet and Book, while you disbelieved in your Prophet and Book.\"\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ الظَّالِمِينَ\n(Verily, Allah does not guide the wrongdoing people.) The witness here refers to any witness in general. It includes 'Abdullah bin Salam and other from them as well. For indeed, this Ayah was revealed in Makkah before 'Abdullah bin Salam had accepted Islam. This is similar to the statement of Allah,\nوَإِذَا يُتْلَىٰ عَلَيْهِمْ قَالُوا آمَنَّا بِهِ إِنَّهُ الْحَقُّ مِنْ رَبِّنَا إِنَّا كُنَّا مِنْ قَبْلِهِ مُسْلِمِينَ\n(And when it is recited to them, they say: \"We believe in it. Verily, it is the truth from our Lord. Indeed, even before it we have been Muslims.\")(28:53) It is also similar to Allah's saying,\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْعِلْمَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِ إِذَا يُتْلَىٰ عَلَيْهِمْ يَخِرُّونَ لِلْأَذْقَانِ سُجَّدًا - وَيَقُولُونَ سُبْحَانَ رَبِّنَا إِنْ كَانَ وَعْدُ رَبِّنَا لَمَفْعُولًا\n(Verily! Those who were given knowledge before it – when it is recited to them, they fall upon their faces in prostration, and they say: \"Exalted is our Lord! Truly, the promise of our Lord has been fulfilled.\")(17:107-108)\nIt has been narrated from Sa'd, may Allah be pleased with him, that he said, \"I have not heard Allah's Messenger ﷺ say about anyone walking on the surface of the earth that he is of the people of Jannah – except for 'Abdullah bin Salam. Concerning him the following Ayah was revealed,\nوَشَهِدَ شَاهِدٌ مِنْ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ عَلَىٰ مِثْلِهِ\n((at the same time), a witness from among the Children of Israel has testified to something similar)\"\nThis has been recorded in the Two Sahihs and An-Nasa'i. Similarly, Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, Mujahid, Ad-Dahhak, Qatadah, 'Ikrimah, Yusuf bin 'Abdullah bin Salam, Hilal bin Yasaf, As-Suddi, Ath-Thawri, Malik bin Anas and Ibn Zayd all said that this refers to 'Abdullah bin Salam. Allah then says,\nوَقَالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَوْ كَانَ خَيْرًا مَا سَبَقُونَا إِلَيْهِ ۚ\n(And those who disbelieve say of those who believe: \"Had it been good, they (the weak and poor) would not have preceded us to it!\") which means that those who disbelieve say of those who believe in the Qur'an: \"Had it (the Qur'an) been any good, they (the weak and poor) would not have preceded us to it!\" By that, they meant Bilal, 'Ammar, Suhayb, Khabbab, may Allah be pleased with them, and others like them of the weak, the male servants, and female servants. The pagans said this only because they thought that they held a high status with Allah, and that He took special care of them. By that, they made a great and obvious error, as Allah says:\nوَكَذَٰلِكَ فَتَنَّا بَعْضَهُمْ بِبَعْضٍ لِيَقُولُوا أَهَٰؤُلَاءِ مَنَّ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِمْ مِنْ بَيْنِنَا ۗ\n(Thus have We tried some of them with others, that they might say: \"Is it these whom Allah has favored from among us?\")(6:53) meaning, they wonder how could those weaklings be the ones who were guided from among them. Thus, Allah says,\nلَوْ كَانَ خَيْرًا مَا سَبَقُونَا إِلَيْهِ\n(Had it been good, they (the weak and poor) would not have preceded us to it!) Contrary to this is the position of Ahl us-Sunnah wal-Jama'ah: They say about any act or saying that has not been reported from the Companions: \"It is an innovation. If there was any good in it, they would have preceded us in doing it, because they have not left off any of the good characteristics except that they hurried to perform them.\" Allah continues,\nوَإِذْ لَمْ يَهْتَدُوا بِهِ\n(And when they have not been guided by it,) meaning, the Qur'an.\nفَسَيَقُولُونَ هَٰذَا إِفْكٌ قَدِيمٌ\n(they say: \"This is an ancient falsehood!\") meaning, an old lie. They mean by this that the Qur'an has been quoted and taken from the ancient people, thereby belittling the Qur'an and its followers. This is clear arrogance, as Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nبَطَرُ الْحَقِّ وَغَمْطُ النَّاسِ\n((Arrogance is) rejecting the truth and belittling the people.) Allah then says,\nوَمِنْ قَبْلِهِ كِتَابُ مُوسَىٰ\n(And before this was the Scripture of Musa) and it was the Tawrah.\nإِمَامًا وَرَحْمَةً ۚ وَهَٰذَا كِتَابٌ\n(as a guide and mercy. And this is a Book) meaning, the Qur'an.\nمُصَدِّقٌ\n(confirming) meaning, that which came before it of the previous Books.\nلِسَانًا عَرَبِيًّا\n(in the Arabic tongue,) means that it is eloquent and clear.\nلِيُنْذِرَ الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا وَبُشْرَىٰ لِلْمُحْسِنِينَ\n(to warn those who do wrong, and as glad tidings for the doers of good.) meaning, it contains a warning to the disbelievers and glad tidings for the believers. Allah then says:\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ قَالُوا رَبُّنَا اللَّهُ ثُمَّ اسْتَقَامُوا\n(Verily, those who say: \"Our Lord is (only) Allah,\" and thereafter stand firm,) The explanation of this has been discussed earlier in Surat As-Sajdah. [See 41:30] Allah then says,\nفَلَا خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ\n(on them shall be no fear,) meaning, concening their future.\nوَلَا هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ\n(nor shall they grieve.) meaning, over what they have left behind. Allah continues,\nأُولَٰئِكَ أَصْحَابُ الْجَنَّةِ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا جَزَاءً بِمَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ\n(Such shall be the dwellers of Paradise, abiding therein (forever) – a reward for what they used to do.) meaning, the deeds are a cause for their attaining the mercy and their being engulfed by it – and Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/46?verse=10","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:46:15","title":"Ibn Kathir · 46:15–16","text":"And We have enjoined on man to be dutiful and kind to his parents. His mother bears him with hardship. And she delivers him with hardship. And (the period of) his gestation and the weaning of him is thirty months, till when he attains full strength and reaches forty years, he says: \"My Lord! Grant me the power and ability that I may be grateful for Your favor which You have bestowed upon me and upon my parents, and that I may do righteous good deeds, such as please You, and make my offspring good. Truly, I have turned to You in repentance, and truly, I am one of the Muslims. (15)They are those from whom We shall accept the best of their deeds and overlook their evil deeds. (They shall be) among the dwellers of Paradise. That is a promise of truth that they had been promised (16)\nAllah's Advice about the Parents\nAfter mentioning that one must confess His Oneness, worship Him with sincerity, and remain upright in obeying Him, Allah follows that by giving instructions regarding the parents. These appear together in many places of the Qur'an, such as Allah's saying,\nوَقَضَىٰ رَبُّكَ أَلَّا تَعْبُدُوا إِلَّا إِيَّاهُ وَبِالْوَالِدَيْنِ إِحْسَانًا ۚ\n(Your Lord has decreed that you worship none but Him, and that you be dutiful to your parents.)(17:23) Allah says,\nأَنِ اشْكُرْ لِي وَلِوَالِدَيْكَ إِلَيَّ الْمَصِيرُ\n(Be grateful to Me and to your parents. Unto Me is the final destination.)(31:14) There are many other Ayat like this as well. Here Allah says,\nوَوَصَّيْنَا الْإِنْسَانَ بِوَالِدَيْهِ إِحْسَانًا ۖ\n(And We have enjoined on man to be dutiful and kind to his parents.)(46:15) meaning, 'We have commanded him to treat them well and show compassion towards them. Abu Dawud At-Tayalisi recorded from Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas, may Allah be pleased with him, that his mother said to him: \"Hasn't Allah commanded that you obey your parents? Then I will not eat any food or drink any drink until you disbelieve in Allah.\" Thus she stubbornly abstained from eating and drinking, until they had to open her mouth with a stick. Then this Ayah was revealed,\nوَوَصَّيْنَا الْإِنْسَانَ بِوَالِدَيْهِ إِحْسَانًا ۖ\n(And We have enjoined on man to be dutiful and kind to his parents.) This was also recorded by Muslim and the Sunan compilers, except for Ibn Majah. Allah continues,\nحَمَلَتْهُ أُمُّهُ كُرْهًا\n(His mother bears him with hardship.) which means that the mother suffers hardship because of her child, such as fatigue, sickness, vomiting, heaviness, distress, and other forms of hardship that the pregnant women suffer.\nوَوَضَعَتْهُ كُرْهًا\n(And she delivers him with hardship.) meaning, she also delivers him with hardship, suffering the pains of labor and their severity.\nوَحَمْلُهُ وَفِصَالُهُ ثَلَاثُونَ شَهْرًا\n(And (the period of) his gestation and weaning is thirty months,) 'Ali, may Allah be pleased with him, used this Ayah along with the following two Ayat to prove that the minimum period of pregnancy (gestation) is six months:\nوَفِصَالُهُ فِي عَامَيْنِ\n(And his weaning is in two years.)(31:14) and\nوَالْوَالِدَاتُ يُرْضِعْنَ أَوْلَادَهُنَّ حَوْلَيْنِ كَامِلَيْنِ ۖ لِمَنْ أَرَادَ أَنْ يُتِمَّ الرَّضَاعَةَ ۚ\n(The mothers suckle their children two complete years – for those who desire to complete the term of suckling.)(2:233)\nThis is a strong and valid conclusion, and it was approved by 'Uthman and a number of the Companions. Muhammad bin Ishaq bin Yasar narrated from Ba'jah bin 'Abdullah Al-Juhani that a man from his tribe (Juhaynah) married a woman from Juhaynah. She delivered a baby after six months. So her husband went to 'Uthman, may Allah be pleased with him, and told him about that. Thus, 'Uthman summoned her. When she was getting dressed, her sister started crying. She asked her: \"Why do you cry? By Allah, no one has ever approached me (for sexual relations) of Allah's creation except him (my husband). So let Allah decree (for me) as He wills.\" When she was brought before 'Uthman, he commanded that she be stoned to death (for adultery). 'Ali heard of this, came to 'Uthman, and said: \"What are you doing?\" He ('Uthman) said: \"She delivered after six months! Can this ever happen?\" 'Ali, may Allah be pleased with him, said: \"Don't you read the Qur'an?\" He said: \"Yes, of course!\" He ('Ali) then said: 'Haven't you heard Allah's saying,\nوَحَمْلُهُ وَفِصَالُهُ ثَلَاثُونَ شَهْرًا\n(and his gestation and weaning is thirty months), and;\nحَوْلَيْنِ كَامِلَيْنِ\n(two complete years)(2:233)\n(Subtracting the two numbers) we are only left with six months.\" 'Uthman, may Allah be pleased with him, said: \"By Allah, I did not see that! Bring the woman back.\" But they found that she had already been killed. Ba'jah continued: \"By Allah, no two crows and no two eggs are more similar than that child turned out to be to his father! When his father saw that he said, 'By Allah! This is my son without any doubt.' Later on, Allah afflicted him with a skin abscess in his face (because of his false accusation to his wife). It kept eating him up until he died.\"\nIbn Abi Hatim related from his father that Farwah bin Abi Al-Maghra' told them that 'Ali bin Mushir narrated to them from Dawud bin Abi Hind, who narrated from 'Ikrimah that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"When a woman delivers after nine months, the baby will only need twenty-one months of suckling. When she delivers after seven months, the baby will need twenty-three months of suckling. When she delivers after six months, the baby will need two full years of suckling, because Allah says,\nوَحَمْلُهُ وَفِصَالُهُ ثَلَاثُونَ شَهْرًا ۚ حَتَّىٰ إِذَا بَلَغَ أَشُدَّهُ\n(and his gestation and weaning is thirty months, till when he attains full strength).\" meaning, he becomes strong, youthful, and attains full ability.\nوَبَلَغَ أَرْبَعِينَ سَنَةً\n(and reaches forty years,) meaning, his complete intellect, understanding, and patience reach the level of maturity. It has also been said that usually one will not change his ways once he reaches the age of forty.\nقَالَ رَبِّ أَوْزِعْنِي\n(he says: \"My Lord! Grant me the power and ability) meaning, 'inspire me.'\nأَنْ أَشْكُرَ نِعْمَتَكَ الَّتِي أَنْعَمْتَ عَلَيَّ وَعَلَىٰ وَالِدَيَّ وَأَنْ أَعْمَلَ صَالِحًا تَرْضَاهُ\n(that I may be grateful for Your favor which You have bestowed upon me and upon my parents, and that I may do righteous good deeds, such as please You,) meaning, in the future.\nوَأَصْلِحْ لِي فِي ذُرِّيَّتِي\n(and make my offspring good.) meaning, my offspring and descendants.\nإِنِّي تُبْتُ إِلَيْكَ وَإِنِّي مِنَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ\n(Truly, I have turned to You in repentance, and truly, I am one of the Muslims.) This contains an instruction for anyone who reaches forty years of age to renew his repentance and turn to Allah with strong resolution. Allah then says,\nأُولَٰئِكَ الَّذِينَ نَتَقَبَّلُ عَنْهُمْ أَحْسَنَ مَا عَمِلُوا وَنَتَجَاوَزُ عَنْ سَيِّئَاتِهِمْ فِي أَصْحَابِ الْجَنَّةِ ۖ\n(Those are the ones from whom We shall accept the best of what they did and overlook their evil deeds. (They shall be) among the dwellers of Paradise.) meaning, those to whom applies the above description – those who repent to Allah, turn back to Him, and rectify their shortcomings through repentance and seeking forgiveness – those are the ones from whom We will accept the best of what they did and overlook their evil deeds. Many of their errors will be forgiven and Allah will accept from them a modest amount of deeds.\nفِي أَصْحَابِ الْجَنَّةِ\n(among the dwellers of Paradise.) which means that they will be among the dwellers of Paradise. That is Allah's ruling concerning them, as He has promised for those who repent and turn to Him. Thus, He says,\nوَعْدَ الصِّدْقِ الَّذِي كَانُوا يُوعَدُونَ\n(That is the promise of truth that they had been promised.)","href":"/tafsir/46?verse=15","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:46:17","title":"Ibn Kathir · 46:17–20","text":"But he who says to his parents: \"Uff to you! Do you promise me that I will be raised up when generations before me have passed?\" While they invoke Allah for help: \"Woe to you! Believe! Verily, the promise of Allah is true.\" But he says: \"This is nothing but the legends of the ancient. (17)They are those against whom the Word (of torment) has justified among the previous generations of Jinn and mankind that have passed away. Verily, they are ever the losers (18)And for all, there will be degrees according to that which they did, so that He might fully recompense for their deeds. And they will not be wronged (19)On the Day when those who disbelieve will be exposed to the Fire (it will be said): \"You received your good things in the life of the world, and you took your pleasure therein. Today, you will be recompensed with the torment of extreme humiliation, because you were arrogant upon the earth without a right, and because you used to rebel against Allah's command (20)\nMention of the Undutiful Children and Their End\nIn the previous Ayat, Allah mentions the dutiful offspring who supplicate for their parents and treat them with kindness. He describes the success and salvation He has prepared for them. Here He connects to that discussion the situation of the wretched offspring who are undutiful toward their parents. Allah says,\nوَالَّذِي قَالَ لِوَالِدَيْهِ أُفٍّ لَكُمَا\n(But he who says to his parents: \"Uff to you! ...\") As for the saying \"Uff\" in this Ayah, it is a general description applying to anyone who says it to his parents. Some people claim that it was revealed about 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abi Bakr. But this claim is weak and rejected, because 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abi Bakr embraced Islam after this was revealed. His adherence to Islam was excellent, and he was among the best of his contemporaries.\nAl-Bukhari recorded from Yusuf bin Mahak that Marwan (bin Al-Hakam) was governor of Hijaz (Western Arabia), appointed by Mu'awiyah bin Abi Sufyan. He (Marwan) delivered a speech in which he mentioned Yazid bin Mu'awiyah and urged the people to give a pledge of allegiance after his father. 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abi Bakr said something to him in response to that, upon which Marwan commanded his men: \"Arrest him!\" But he entered 'Aishah's house, and they were not able to capture him. Marwan then said: \"This is the one about whom Allah revealed:\nوَالَّذِي قَالَ لِوَالِدَيْهِ أُفٍّ لَكُمَا أَتَعِدَانِنِي أَنْ أُخْرَجَ وَقَدْ خَلَتِ الْقُرُونُ مِنْ قَبْلِي\n(But he who says to his parents: \"Uff to you! Do you promise me that I will be raised – when generations before me have passed?\")\"\nFrom behind the curtain, 'Aishah responded: \"Allah did not reveal any Qur'an in our regard (i.e. the children of Abu Bakr), except for the declaration of my innocence.\"\nIn another report recorded by An-Nasa'i, Muhammad bin Ziyad reported that when Mu'awiyah was soliciting people to pledge allegiance to his son, and Marwan declared: \"This follows the tradition of Abu Bakr and 'Umar.\" On hearing this, 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abi Bakr said: \"Rather, this is the tradition of Heraclius and Caesar.\" Marwan responded: \"This is the one about whom Allah revealed,\nوَالَّذِي قَالَ لِوَالِدَيْهِ أُفٍّ لَكُمَا\n(But he who says to his parents: \"Uff to you!\")\" When that was conveyed to 'A'ishah, she said: \"Marwan is lying! By Allah, that was not revealed about him. If I wish to name the person meant by it, I could. On the other hand, Allah's Messenger ﷺ placed a curse on Marwan's father (Al-Hakam bin Abi Al-'As when Marwan was still in his loins, so Marwan (bin Al-Hakam) is an outcome of Allah's curse.\" As for Allah's statement:\nأَتَعِدَانِنِي أَنْ أُخْرَجَ\n(Do you promise me that I will be raised) meaning, resurrected.\nوَقَدْ خَلَتِ الْقُرُونُ مِنْ قَبْلِي\n(when generations before me have passed) meaning, generations of people have already passed away, and none of them has ever returned to tell (what happened to them)?\nوَهُمَا يَسْتَغِيثَانِ اللَّهَ\n(While they invoke Allah for help) meaning, they ask Allah to guide him, and they say to their son,\nوَيْلَكَ آمِنْ إِنَّ وَعْدَ اللَّهِ حَقٌّ فَيَقُولُ مَا هَٰذَا إِلَّا أَسَاطِيرُ الْأَوَّلِينَ\n(\"Woe to you! Believe! Verily, the promise of Allah is true.\" But he says: \"This is nothing but the legends of the ancient.\") Allah then says,\nأُولَٰئِكَ الَّذِينَ حَقَّ عَلَيْهِمُ الْقَوْلُ فِي أُمَمٍ قَدْ خَلَتْ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ مِنَ الْجِنِّ وَالْإِنْسِ ۖ إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا خَاسِرِينَ\n(They are those against whom the Word (of torment) has justified among the previous generations of Jinn and mankind that have passed away.Verily, they are ever the losers.) This indicates that all such people will be among their likes and their peers among the disbelievers, who will lose themselves and their families on the Day of Resurrection. Allah's saying,\nأُولَٰئِكَ\n(Those are) after He said,\nوَالَّذِي قَالَ\n(But he who says ) confirms what we have mentioned above that the latter is a general description of a type of people including all those who fall under that description. Al-Hasan and Qatadah both said, \"This applies to the disbelieving, sinful person who is undutiful to his parents and who denies resurrection.\" Allah then says,\nوَلِكُلٍّ دَرَجَاتٌ مِمَّا عَمِلُوا ۖ\n(And for all, there will be degrees according to that which they did,) meaning that there will be degrees of punishment for each of them according to what they did.\nوَلِيُوَفِّيَهُمْ أَعْمَالَهُمْ وَهُمْ لَا يُظْلَمُونَ\n(so that He might fully recompense them for their deeds, and they will not be wronged.) which means Allah will not be unjust to them even in the amount of a speck of dust or less. 'Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam said: \"The levels of the Fire descend, and those of Paradise ascend.\" Allah then says,\nوَيَوْمَ يُعْرَضُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا عَلَى النَّارِ أَذْهَبْتُمْ طَيِّبَاتِكُمْ فِي حَيَاتِكُمُ الدُّنْيَا وَاسْتَمْتَعْتُمْ بِهَا\n(On the Day when those who disbelieve will be exposed to the Fire (it will be said): \"You received your good things in the life of the world, and you took your pleasure therein...\") which means that this will be said to them by way of blame and reprimand. The Commander of the faithful, 'Umar bin Al-Khattab, may Allah be pleased with him, gave up many of the joys of food and drink and refrained from them while saying, \"I am afraid of being like those whom Allah has reproached and condemned by saying,\nأَذْهَبْتُمْ طَيِّبَاتِكُمْ فِي حَيَاتِكُمُ الدُّنْيَا وَاسْتَمْتَعْتُمْ بِهَا\n(You received your good things in the life of the world, and you took your pleasure therein).\" Abu Mijlaz said: \"Some people will lose good deeds that they had in the worldly life, and they will be told,\nأَذْهَبْتُمْ طَيِّبَاتِكُمْ فِي حَيَاتِكُمُ الدُّنْيَا\n(You received your good things in the life of the world).\" Then Allah says,\nفَالْيَوْمَ تُجْزَوْنَ عَذَابَ الْهُونِ بِمَا كُنْتُمْ تَسْتَكْبِرُونَ فِي الْأَرْضِ بِغَيْرِ الْحَقِّ وَبِمَا كُنْتُمْ تَفْسُقُونَ\n(Today, you will be recompensed with the torment of extreme humiliation, because you were arrogant upon the earth without a right, and because you used to rebel against Allah's command.) which indicates that their punishment will be of a type comparable to their deeds. They enjoyed themselves, were arrogant in their denial of the truth, and were involved in sinning and disobedience. Thus, Allah punishes them with extreme humiliation, disgrace, severe pains, continued sorrow, and positions in the terrible depths of Hell – may Allah protect us from all of that.","href":"/tafsir/46?verse=17","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:46:21","title":"Ibn Kathir · 46:21–25","text":"And remember the brother of 'Ad, when he warned his people in Al-Ahqaf. And surely, warners had already passed on before him and after him (saying): \"Worship none but Allah; truly, I fear for you the torment of a mighty Day. (21)They said: \"Have you come to delude us from our gods? Then bring us that with which you threaten us, if you are one of the truthful! (22)He said: \"The knowledge (of that) is only with Allah. And I convey to you that wherewith I have been sent, but I see that you are a people given to ignorance! (23)Then, when they saw it as a dense cloud approaching their valleys, they said: \"This is a cloud bringing us rain!\" Nay, but it is that which you were asking to be hastened – a wind wherein is a painful torment (24)Destroying everything by the command of its Lord! So they became such that nothing could be seen except their dwellings! Thus do We recompense the criminal people (25)\nThe Story of 'Ad\nAllah says, consoling His Prophet ﷺ in regard to the rejection of those who opposed him among his people,\nوَاذْكُرْ أَخَا عَادٍ\n(And remember the brother of 'Ad,) This refers to Hud, peace be upon in him. Allah sent him to the first people of 'Ad who inhabited Al-Ahqaf. Ahqaf is plural of Haqf. According to Ibn Zayd, it means a sand dune; and according to 'Ikrimah, it means a mountain or a cave. Qatadah said: \"We were informed that 'Ad was a tribe in Yemen. They dwelt among sand (hills), and overlooked the sea in a land called Ash-Shihr.\"\nUnder the chapter, \"He Who supplicates should first mention Himself,\" Ibn Majah recorded that Ibn 'Abbas narrated that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nيَرْحَمُنَا اللهُ وَأَخَا عَادٍ\n(May Allah have mercy on us and the Brother of 'Ad.) Allah then says,\nوَقَدْ خَلَتِ النُّذُرُ مِنْ بَيْنِ يَدَيْهِ وَمِنْ خَلْفِهِ\n(And surely, warners had already passed on before him and after him.) meaning, Allah had sent Messengers and warners to the towns surrounding the land of 'Ad. This is similar to Allah's saying,\nفَجَعَلْنَاهَا نَكَالًا لِمَا بَيْنَ يَدَيْهَا وَمَا خَلْفَهَا\n(And We made it a deterrent punishment for those who were present and those who succeeded them.)(2:66) And it is also similar to Allah's saying,\nفَإِنْ أَعْرَضُوا فَقُلْ أَنْذَرْتُكُمْ صَاعِقَةً مِثْلَ صَاعِقَةِ عَادٍ وَثَمُودَ - إِذْ جَاءَتْهُمُ الرُّسُلُ مِنْ بَيْنِ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَمِنْ خَلْفِهِمْ أَلَّا تَعْبُدُوا إِلَّا اللَّهَ ۖ\n(But if they turn away, then say: \"I have warned you of a thunderbolt like the thunderbolt that struck 'Ad and Thamud. (That occurred) when the Messengers had come to them from before them and after them (saying): \"Worship none but Allah.\")(41:13-14) Allah then says,\nإِنِّي أَخَافُ عَلَيْكُمْ عَذَابَ يَوْمٍ عَظِيمٍ\n(truly, I fear for you the torment of a mighty Day.) meaning, Hud said this to them (his people), and they responded to him saying,\nأَجِئْتَنَا لِتَأْفِكَنَا عَنْ آلِهَتِنَا\n(Have you come to delude us from our gods) meaning, to prevent us.\nعَنْ ءَالِهَتِنَا\n(from our gods?)\nفَأْتِنَا بِمَا تَعِدُنَا إِنْ كُنْتَ مِنَ الصَّادِقِينَ\n(Then bring us that with which you threaten us, if you are one of the truthful!) They sought to hasten Allah's torment and punishment, believing that it will not happen. This is similar to Allah's saying,\nيَسْتَعْجِلُ بِهَا الَّذِينَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِهَا ۖ\n(Those who do not believe in it (the Last Hour) seek to hasten it)(42:18). Hud's response was,\nقَالَ إِنَّمَا الْعِلْمُ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ\n(He said: \"The knowledge (of that) is only with Allah.\") which means, 'Allah knows best about you. If you deserve the punishment to be hastened, He will do that to you. As for me, my duty is to deliver my message to you.'\nوَلَٰكِنِّي أَرَاكُمْ قَوْمًا تَجْهَلُونَ\n(But I see that you are a people given to ignorance!) which means, 'you have no comprehension or understanding.' Allah then says,\nفَلَمَّا رَأَوْهُ عَارِضًا مُسْتَقْبِلَ أَوْدِيَتِهِمْ\n(Then, when they saw it as a dense cloud approaching their valleys,) meaning, when they saw the punishment coming towards them, they thought it to be clouds full of rain. That made them happy and joyful, because they had a drought and needed rain. Allah then said,\nبَلْ هُوَ مَا اسْتَعْجَلْتُمْ بِهِ ۖ رِيحٌ فِيهَا عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ\n(Nay, but it is that which you were asking to be hastened – a wind wherein is a painful torment!) meaning, this is the torment that you called for saying, \"Bring to us what you promise us if you should be of the truthful.\"\nتُدَمِّرُ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ\n(Destroying every thing) meaning, destroying every part of their land that could normally be destroyed.\nبِأَمْرِ رَبِّهَا\n(by the command of its Lord!) meaning, it had Allah's permission to do that. This is similar to Allah's saying,\nمَا تَذَرُ مِنْ شَيْءٍ أَتَتْ عَلَيْهِ إِلَّا جَعَلَتْهُ كَالرَّمِيمِ\n(It spared nothing that it reached, but blew it into broken spreads of rotten ruins.)(51:42) meaning, like something dilapidated (or decrepit). Because of this, Allah says,\nفَأَصْبَحُوا لَا يُرَىٰ إِلَّا مَسَاكِنُهُمْ\n(So they became such that nothing could be seen except their dwellings!) means, all of them were destroyed, and none of them were spared. Allah then says:\nكَذَٰلِكَ نَجْزِي الْقَوْمَ الْمُجْرِمِينَ\n(Thus do We recompense the criminal people!) which means that this is Our judgement regarding those who reject Our Messengers and disobey Our commands.\nImam Ahmad recorded from 'A'ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, that she said, \"I never saw Allah's Messenger ﷺ fully laughing so that I would see his uvula. He would only smile.\" She added that when Allah's Messenger ﷺ saw clouds or wind, that would reflect on his face (as discomfort). She asked him: \"O Allah's Messenger! When the people see clouds, they become happy, hoping that they bring them rain. But I notice that when you see them, displeasure appears on your face.\" Allah's Messenger ﷺ replied,\nيَا عَائِشَةُ، مَا يُؤْمِنُنِي أَنْ يَكُونَ فِيهِ عَذَابٌ، قَدْ عُذِّبَ قَوْمٌ بِالرِّيحِ، وَقَدْ رَأَىٰ قَوْمٌ الْعَذَابَ وَقَالُوا: هٰذَا عَارِضٌ مُمْطِرُنَا\n(O 'A'ishah! What would guarantee to me that they do not bring punishment Some nations had been punished with wind. On seeing the punishment approaching them, a nation once said: \"This is a cloud bringing us rain.\") This is also recorded by Al-Bukhari and Muslim.\nImam Ahmad recorded that 'A'ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, said that when Allah's Messenger ﷺ saw clouds on any of the horizons, he would leave whatever he was doing – even if he was in prayer – and say:\nاللّٰهُمَّ إِنِّي أَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ شَرِّ مَا فِيهِ\n(O Allah! I seek refuge with you from any harm that it (the cloud) contains.) If Allah removed those clouds, the Prophet would praise Allah, and if rain fell, he would say:\nاللّٰهُمَّ صَيِّبًا نَافِعًا\n(O Allah! Make it pouring and beneficent.) Muslim also recorded in his Sahih from 'A'ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, that when the wind blew, Allah's Messenger ﷺ would say,\nاللّٰهُمَّ إِنِّي أَسْأَلُكَ خَيْرَهَا وَخَيْرَ مَا فِيهَا وَخَيْرَ مَا أُرْسِلَتْ بِهِ،وَأَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ شَرِّهَا، وَشَرِّ مَا فِيهَا، وَشَرِّ مَا أُرْسِلَتْ بِهِ\n(O Allah! I ask You of its good, the good that it contains, and the good with which it has been sent. And I seek refuge in You from its evil, the evil that it contains, and the evil with which it has been sent.)\nShe added that if the sky became cloudy, his color would change; he would exit, enter, come, and go. When it rained, his anxiety would be relieved. When 'A'ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, noticed that, she asked him about it and he said:\nلَعَلَّهُ يَا عَائِشَةُ كَمَا قَالَ قَوْمُ عَادٍ: فَلَمَّا رَأَوْهُ عَارِضًا مُسْتَقْبِلَ أَوْدِيَتِهِمْ قَالُوا هَٰذَا عَارِضٌ مُمْطِرُنَا ۚ\n(O 'A'ishah! It could be like what the people of 'Ad said, (Then, when they saw it as a dense cloud approaching their valleys, they said: \"This is a cloud bringing us rain!\"))\nWe have previously mentioned the story of the destruction of the people of 'Ad in both Surat Al-A'raf and Surah Hud. Thus, there is no need to repeat it here; and verily Allah is worthy of all praise and gratitude.","href":"/tafsir/46?verse=21","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:46:26","title":"Ibn Kathir · 46:26–28","text":"And indeed We had firmly established them with that wherewith We have not established you! We also gave them hearing, vision, and hearts. But their hearing, vision, and hearts availed them nothing since they used to deny the Ayat of Allah, and they were completely encircled by that which they used to ridicule (26)And indeed We have destroyed towns round about you, and We have shown (them) the signs in various ways so that they might return (27)As for those whom they had taken for gods besides Allah, as the means of approach to Him, why then did they not aid them Nay, but they vanished completely from them. And that was their falsehood, and what they were fabricating (28)\nAllah says, 'We have granted the earlier nations wealth and offspring in the worldly life. That which We granted them, we did not give you anything similar or close to it.' Furthermore,\nوَجَعَلْنَا لَهُمْ سَمْعًا وَأَبْصَارًا وَأَفْئِدَةً فَمَا أَغْنَىٰ عَنْهُمْ سَمْعُهُمْ وَلَا أَبْصَارُهُمْ وَلَا أَفْئِدَتُهُمْ مِنْ شَيْءٍ إِذْ كَانُوا يَجْحَدُونَ بِآيَاتِ اللَّهِ وَحَاقَ بِهِمْ مَا كَانُوا بِهِ يَسْتَهْزِئُونَ\n(We also gave them hearing, vision, and hearts. But their hearing, vision, and hearts availed them nothing when they used to deny Allah's signs, and they were completely encircled by that which they used to ridicule!) meaning, they were encircled by the torment and exemplary punishment that they denied and whose occurrence they doubted. This means, you listeners must beware of being like them lest a punishment similar to theirs strikes you in this life and the Hereafter. Allah then says,\nوَلَقَدْ أَهْلَكْنَا مَا حَوْلَكُمْ مِنَ الْقُرَىٰ\n(And indeed We have destroyed towns round about you,) This is addressed to the people of Makkah. Allah destroyed the nations who disbelieved in the Messengers who lived around Makkah, such as 'Ad who were at Al-Ahqaf in Hadramawt near Yemen, Thamud whose dwellings were between Makkah and Ash-Sham (Greater Syria), Saba' who were in Yemen, the people of Madyan who were on the route and passage to Ghazzah (Western Palestine), and the people of Lut who dwelt by the lake (the Dead Sea) which they used to pass by (on the way to Jordan) as well. Allah then says,\nوَصَرَّفْنَا الْآيَاتِ\n(and We have shown (them) the signs in various ways) meaning, 'We explained and clarified them.'\nلَعَلَّهُمْ يَرْجِعُونَ - فَلَوْلَا نَصَرَهُمُ الَّذِينَ اتَّخَذُوا مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ قُرْبَانًا آلِهَةً ۖ\n(so that perhaps they might return. As for those whom they had taken for gods besides Allah, as the means of approach to Him, why then did they not aid them?) meaning, did they help them when they were in the greatest need for them?\nبَلْ ضَلُّوا عَنْهُمْ\n(but they vanished completely from them.) Rather, they completely left them alone when they needed them the most.\nوَذَٰلِكَ إِفْكُهُمْ\n(And that was their falsehood,) meaning, their lie.\nوَمَا كَانُوا يَفْتَرُونَ\n(and what they were fabricating.) which means that they fabricated lies by taking them as gods, and they lost and failed in their worship of them and their reliance upon them – and Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/46?verse=26","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:46:29","title":"Ibn Kathir · 46:29–32","text":"And (remember) when We sent toward you a group of the Jinn, to listen to the Qur'an. When they attended it, they said: \"Listen quietly!\" And when it was concluded, they returned to their people, as warners (29)They said: \"O our people! Verily, we have heard a Book sent down after Musa, confirming what came before it, it guides to the truth and to the straight path. (30)\"O our people! Respond to Allah's Caller, and believe in him. He (Allah) will forgive you some of your sins, and protect you from a painful torment. (31)\"And whosoever does not respond to Allah's Caller, he cannot escape on earth, and he will not have besides Allah any protectors. Those are in manifest error. (32)\nThe Story of the Jinns listening to the Qur'an\nImam Ahmad recorded from Az-Zubayr that he commented on the Ayah;\nوَإِذْ صَرَفْنَا إِلَيْكَ نَفَرًا مِنَ الْجِنِّ يَسْتَمِعُونَ الْقُرْآنَ\n(And (remember) when We sent towards you a group of the Jinn, to listen to the Qur'an.)\n\"They were at a place called Nakhlah while Allah's Messenger was performing the 'Isha' prayer, and\nكَادُوا يَكُونُونَ عَلَيْهِ لِبَدًا\n(they crowded on top of each other to hear him.)(72:19)\" Sufyan said, \"They stood on top of each other like piled wool.\" Ahmad was alone in recording this. Imam Ahmad and the famous Imam, Al-Hafiz Abu Bakr Al-Bayhaqi in his book Dala'il An-Nubuwwah, both recorded that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"Allah's Messenger ﷺ never recited Qur'an to the Jinns, nor did he see them. Allah's Messenger ﷺ was heading with a group of his Companions towards the 'Ukaz market. At that time, the devils had been prevented from eavesdropping on the news of the heavens, and they were being attacked by burning flames (whenever they tried to listen). When the devils went back to their people, they asked them what happened to them, and they answered, 'We have been prevented from eavesdropping on the news of the heavens, and burning flames now attack us.' Their people told them, 'You have only been prevented from eavesdropping on the information of the heavens because of something (major) that has happened. So go all over the earth, east and west, and see what is it that has obstructed you from eavesdropping on the news of the heavens.' Thus they traveled all over the earth, east and west, seeking that which had obstructed them from eavesdropping on the news of the heavens. A group of them went towards Tihamah, and found Allah's Messenger ﷺ while he was at a place called Nakhlah along the way to the 'Ukaz market. He was leading his Companions in the Fajr prayer. When the Jinns heard the recitation of the Qur'an, they stopped to listen to it, and then they said: 'By Allah! This is what has prevented you from eavesdropping on the news of the heavens.' Then they returned to their people and told them: 'Our people! We certainly have heard an amazing recitation (the Qur'an), it guides to the right path. So we have believed in it, and we will join none in worship with our Lord.' So Allah revealed to His Prophet ﷺ,\nقُلْ أُوحِيَ إِلَيَّ أَنَّهُ اسْتَمَعَ نَفَرٌ مِنَ الْجِنِّ\n(Say: It has been revealed to me that a group of Jinns have listened (to the Qur'an).)(72:1) Thus, what was revealed to him was only the saying of the Jinns.\" Al-Bukhari recorded a similar narration, and Muslim recorded it (as it is here). At-Tirmidhi also recorded it, as did An-Nasa'i in his Tafsir.\nAbdullah bin Mas'ud reported that the Jinns came down upon the Prophet ﷺ while he was reciting the Qur'an at a place called Nakhlah. When they heard him,\nقَالُوا أَنْصِتُوا\n(They said: \"Listen quietly.\") meaning, hush! They were nine in number, and one of them was called Zawba'ah. So Allah revealed,\nوَإِذْ صَرَفْنَا إِلَيْكَ نَفَرًا مِنَ الْجِنِّ يَسْتَمِعُونَ الْقُرْآنَ فَلَمَّا حَضَرُوهُ قَالُوا أَنْصِتُوا ۖ فَلَمَّا قُضِيَ وَلَّوْا إِلَىٰ قَوْمِهِمْ مُنْذِرِينَ\n(And when We sent toward you a group of Jinns, to listen to the Qur'an. When they attended it, they said: \"Listen quietly!\" And when it was concluded, they returned to their people as warners.) until His saying:\nضَلَالٍ مُبِينٍ\n(manifest error.) Thus, this report along with the above one by Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, indicate that Allah's Messenger ﷺ was not aware of the presence of the Jinns at that time. They only listened to his recitation and went back to their people. Later on, they came to him in groups, one party after another, and one group after another. As for Allah's saying,\nوَلَّوْا إِلَىٰ قَوْمِهِمْ مُنْذِرِينَ\n(they returned to their people as warners.) It means that they went back to their people and warned them about what they heard from Allah's Messenger ﷺ. This is similar to Allah's saying,\nلِيَتَفَقَّهُوا فِي الدِّينِ وَلِيُنْذِرُوا قَوْمَهُمْ إِذَا رَجَعُوا إِلَيْهِمْ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَحْذَرُونَ\n(...that they may obtain understanding in religion and warn their people when they return to them, so that they might be cautious (of evil).)(9:122)\nThis Ayah has been used as evidence that the Jinns have warners from among themselves, but no Messengers. There is no doubt that Allah did not send Messengers from among the Jinns, because He says,\nوَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ قَبْلِكَ إِلَّا رِجَالًا نُوحِي إِلَيْهِمْ مِنْ أَهْلِ الْقُرَىٰ ۗ\n(And We did not send before you as Messengers any but men, to whom We revealed from among the people of cities.)(12:109) And Allah says,\nوَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا قَبْلَكَ مِنَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ إِلَّا إِنَّهُمْ لَيَأْكُلُونَ الطَّعَامَ وَيَمْشُونَ فِي الْأَسْوَاقِ ۗ\n(And We never sent before you any of the Messengers but verily they ate food and walked in the markets.)(25:20) And He says about Ibrahim Al-Khalil, upon him be peace,\nوَجَعَلْنَا فِي ذُرِّيَّتِهِ النُّبُوَّةَ وَالْكِتَابَ\n(...And We placed in his descendants prophethood and Scripture.)(29:27) Thus, every Prophet whom Allah sent after Ibrahim was from his offspring and progeny. As for Allah's saying in Surat Al-An'am,\nيَا مَعْشَرَ الْجِنِّ وَالْإِنْسِ أَلَمْ يَأْتِكُمْ رُسُلٌ مِنْكُمْ\n(O company of Jinns and human beings! Did there not come to you Messengers from among you)(6:130) It only applies to the two kinds collectively, but specifically pertains to just one of them, which is the human. This is like Allah's saying,\nيَخْرُجُ مِنْهُمَا اللُّؤْلُؤُ وَالْمَرْجَانُ\n(From both of them (salty and fresh waters) emerge pearl and Marjan.)(55:22) Although He said \"both of them\" this applies to only one of the two types of water (the salty water). Allah then explains how the Jinns warned their people. He says,\nقَالُوا يَا قَوْمَنَا إِنَّا سَمِعْنَا كِتَابًا أُنْزِلَ مِنْ بَعْدِ مُوسَىٰ\n(They said: \"O our people! Verily, we have heard a Book sent down after Musa...\") They did not mention 'Isa, peace be upon him, because the Injil that was revealed to him contained admonitions and exhortations, but very few permissions or prohibitions. Thus, it was in reality like a complement to the legislation of the Tawrah, the Tawrah being the reference. That is why they said, \"Sent down after Musa.\" This is also the way that Waraqah bin Nawfal spoke when the Prophet ﷺ told him about his first meeting with Jibril, An-Namus, peace be upon him. He said: \"Very good, very good! This is (the angel) that used to come to Musa. I wish that I was still a young man (to support you).\"\nمُصَدِّقًا لِمَا بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ\n(confirming what came before it,) meaning, the Scriptures that were revealed before it to the previous Prophets. They then said,\nيَهْدِي إِلَى الْحَقِّ\n(it guides to the truth) means in belief and information.\nوَإِلَىٰ طَرِيقٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ\n(and to the straight path.) which means, in deeds. For verily, the Qur'an contains two things: information and commandments. Its information is true, and its commandments are all just, as Allah says,\nوَتَمَّتْ كَلِمَتُ رَبِّكَ صِدْقًا وَعَدْلًا ۚ\n(And the Word of Your Lord has been fulfilled in truth and in justice.)(6:115) Allah says,\nهُوَ الَّذِي أَرْسَلَ رَسُولَهُ بِالْهُدَىٰ وَدِينِ الْحَقِّ\n(It is He Who has sent His Messenger with the guidance and the religion of truth.)(48:28) The guidance is the beneficent knowledge, and the religion of truth means the righteous good deeds. Thus, the Jinns said,\nيَهْدِي إِلَى الْحَقِّ\n(it guides to the truth) in matters of belief,\nوَإِلَىٰ طَرِيقٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ\n(and to the straight path.) meaning, in regard to actions.\nيَا قَوْمَنَا أَجِيبُوا دَاعِيَ اللَّهِ\n(O our people! Respond to Allah's Caller,) This is proof that Muhammad ﷺ has been sent to both the human beings and the Jinns. Thus, Allah says,\nأَجِيبُوا دَاعِيَ اللَّهِ وَآمِنُوا بِهِ\n(Respond to Allah's Caller and believe in him.) Then Allah says,\nيَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ مِنْ ذُنُوبِكُمْ\n(He will then forgive you some of your sins,) Some scholars say that \"some\" here is auxiliary, but this is questionable since it is rarely used to strengthen an affirmative meaning. Others say that it means partial forgiveness.\nوَيُجِرْكُمْ مِنْ عَذَابٍ أَلِيمٍ\n(and protect you from a painful torment.) meaning, He will protect you from His painful punishment. Then Allah informs that they said,\nوَمَنْ لَا يُجِبْ دَاعِيَ اللَّهِ فَلَيْسَ بِمُعْجِزٍ فِي الْأَرْضِ\n(And whosoever does not respond to Allah's Caller, he cannot escape on earth,) meaning, Allah's power encompasses him and surrounds him.\nوَلَيْسَ لَهُ مِنْ دُونِهِ أَوْلِيَاءُ\n(and he will not have besides Allah any protectors.) meaning, no one can protect him against Allah.\nأُولَٰئِكَ فِي ضَلَالٍ مُبِينٍ\n(Those are in manifest error.) This is a threat and warning. Thus, those Jinns called their people with encouragement and warning. Because of this, many of the Jinns took heed and came to Allah's Messenger ﷺ in successive delegations; and verily, Allah is worthy of all praise and gratitude, and Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/46?verse=29","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:46:33","title":"Ibn Kathir · 46:33–35","text":"Do they not see that Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth, and was not wearied by their creation, is Able to give life to the dead Yes, He surely is Able to do all things (33)And on the Day when those who disbelieve will be exposed to the Fire (it will be said to them): \"Is this not the truth?\" They will say: \"Yes, by our Lord!\" He will say: \"Then taste the torment, because you used to disbelieve! (34)Therefore be patient as did those of determination among the Messengers and be in no hurry for them. On the Day when they will see what they are promised, it will be as though they had not remained (in the world) except an hour in a day. (This is) a clear Message. But will any be destroyed except the defiantly rebellious people (35)\nEvidence for Life after Death\nAllah says, those who deny resurrection on Judgment Day, and doubt that the bodies will be raised on that Last Day – Do they not see,\nأَنَّ اللَّهَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ وَلَمْ يَعْيَ بِخَلْقِهِنَّ\n(that Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth, and was not wearied by their creation,) meaning, the creation of the heavens and earth did not exhaust Him.' Rather, He commanded them: \"Be,\" and they were, without any refusal or delay. They obeyed and responded to Him with submission and fear. Is He not then able to revive the dead? This is similar to what Allah said elsewhere,\nلَخَلْقُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ أَكْبَرُ مِنْ خَلْقِ النَّاسِ وَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ\n(Verily, the creation of the heavens and earth is greater than the creation of the people. But most people do not know.)(40:57) Allah responds to the above question by saying,\nبَلَىٰ إِنَّهُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ\n(Yes, He surely is Able to do all things.) Then Allah says, as a threat and a warning to whoever disbelieves in Him,\nوَيَوْمَ يُعْرَضُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا عَلَى النَّارِ أَلَيْسَ هَٰذَا بِالْحَقِّ ۖ\n(And on the Day when those who disbelieve will be exposed to the Fire (it will be said to them): \"Is this not the truth?\") meaning, it will be said to them, \"Isn't this the truth Is this magic, or do you not see?\"\nقَالُوا بَلَىٰ وَرَبِّنَا\n(They will say: \"Yes, by our Lord!\") meaning, they will have no choice but to confess.\nقَالَ فَذُوقُوا الْعَذَابَ بِمَا كُنْتُمْ تَكْفُرُونَ\n(He will say: \"Then taste the torment, because you used to disbelieve!\")\nCommanding the Prophet ﷺ to persevere\nAllah then commands His Messenger ﷺ to observe patience with those who rejected him among his people. He says,\nفَاصْبِرْ كَمَا صَبَرَ أُولُو الْعَزْمِ مِنَ الرُّسُلِ\n(Therefore be patient as did those of determination among the Messengers.) meaning, as they were patient with their people's rejection of them. \"Those of determination\" among the Messengers are Nuh, Ibrahim, Musa, 'Isa and the last of all of the Prophets, Muhammad ﷺ. Allah has specifically mentioned their names in two Ayat: Surat Al-Ahzab (33:7) and Surat Ash-Shura (42:13).\nوَلَا تَسْتَعْجِلْ لَهُمْ\n(and be in no hurry for them.) which means, 'do not rush the punishment for them.' This is similar to Allah's saying:\nوَذَرْنِي وَالْمُكَذِّبِينَ أُولِي النَّعْمَةِ وَمَهِّلْهُمْ قَلِيلًا\n(And leave Me alone to deal with the rejectors, those who are in possession of good things of life. And give them respite for a little while.)(73:11)\nفَمَهِّلِ الْكَافِرِينَ أَمْهِلْهُمْ رُوَيْدًا\n(So allow time for the disbelievers, and leave them for a while.)(86:17) Then Allah says:\nكَأَنَّهُمْ يَوْمَ يَرَوْنَ مَا يُوعَدُونَ لَمْ يَلْبَثُوا إِلَّا سَاعَةً مِنْ نَهَارٍ ۚ\n(On the Day when they will see that which they are promised, it will be as though they had not remained (in the world) except an hour in a day.) Which is similar to Allah's saying,\nكَأَنَّهُمْ يَوْمَ يَرَوْنَهَا لَمْ يَلْبَثُوا إِلَّا عَشِيَّةً أَوْ ضُحَاهَا\n(On the Day they see it (the Hour), it will be as though they had not remained (in the world) except for a day's afternoon or its morning.)(79:46) and as He says,\nوَيَوْمَ يَحْشُرُهُمْ كَأَنْ لَمْ يَلْبَثُوا إِلَّا سَاعَةً مِنَ النَّهَارِ يَتَعَارَفُونَ بَيْنَهُمْ ۚ\n(And on the Day when He shall gather them together, (it will be) as if they had not stayed but an hour of a day. They will recognize each other.)(10:45) Then Allah says,\nبَلَاغٌ ۚ\n(A clear message.) meaning, this Qur'an provides a clear concept.\nفَهَلْ يُهْلَكُ إِلَّا الْقَوْمُ الْفَاسِقُونَ\n(But will any be destroyed except the defiantly rebellious people?)\nWhich means that Allah does not destroy anyone except those who choose the way of destruction. It is part of Allah's justice that He does not punish anyone except those who deserve the punishment – and Allah knows best.\nThis concludes the explanation of Surat Al-Ahqaf. And all praise and blessings are due to Allah. Both success and protection from faults are by His help.","href":"/tafsir/46?verse=33","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:47:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 47:1–3","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَصَدُّوا عَنْ سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ أَضَلَّ أَعْمَالَهُمْ - وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ وَآمَنُوا بِمَا نُزِّلَ عَلَىٰ مُحَمَّدٍ وَهُوَ الْحَقُّ مِنْ رَبِّهِمْ ۙ كَفَّرَ عَنْهُمْ سَيِّئَاتِهِمْ وَأَصْلَحَ بَالَهُمْ - ذَٰلِكَ بِأَنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا اتَّبَعُوا الْبَاطِلَ وَأَنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اتَّبَعُوا الْحَقَّ مِنْ رَبِّهِمْ ۚ كَذَٰلِكَ يَضْرِبُ اللَّهُ لِلنَّاسِ أَمْثَالَهُمْ\n(1. Those who disbelieve and hinder (men) from the path of Allah, He will render their deeds vain.)(2. But those who believe and do righteous good deeds, and believe in that which is sent down to Muhammad – for it is the truth from their Lord – He expiates from them their sins and amends their Bal.)(3. That is because those who disbelieve follow falsehood, while those who believe follow the truth from their Lord. Thus does Allah set forth for mankind their parables.)\nThe Reward of the Disbelievers and the Believers\nAllah says,\nالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا\n(Those who disbelieve) meaning, in the Ayat of Allah.\nوَصَدُّوا\n(and hinder (men)) Others.\nعَنْ سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ أَضَلَّ أَعْمَالَهُمْ\n(from the path of Allah, He will render their deeds vain.) meaning, He renders their deeds vain and futile, and He denies them any rewards or blessings for them. This is similar to His saying,\nوَقَدِمْنَا إِلَىٰ مَا عَمِلُوا مِنْ عَمَلٍ فَجَعَلْنَاهُ هَبَاءً مَنْثُورًا\n(And We will approach what they have done of deeds and make them as dispersed dust.)(25:23) Allah then says,\nوَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ\n(And those who believe and do righteous good deeds,) Which means that their hearts and souls have believed, and their limbs and their hidden and apparent acts have complied with Allah's Law.\nوَآمَنُوا بِمَا نُزِّلَ عَلَىٰ مُحَمَّدٍ\n(And believe in that which has been sent down to Muhammad) Adding this statement to the previous one is a method of adding a specific meaning to a general one. This provides proof that after Muhammad's advent, believing in him is a required condition for the true faith. Allah then says,\nوَهُوَ الْحَقُّ مِنْ رَبِّهِمْ\n(For it is the truth from their Lord.) which is a beautifully placed parenthetical clause. Thus, Allah says,\nكَفَّرَ عَنْهُمْ سَيِّئَاتِهِمْ وَأَصْلَحَ بَالَهُمْ\n(He expiates from them their sins and amends their Bal.)\nIbn 'Abbas, said, \"This means their matter.\" Mujahid said, \"This means their affair.\" Qatadah and Ibn Zayd both said, \"Their condition.\" And all of these are similar in meaning. It has been mentioned (from the Prophet ﷺ) in the Hadith of the responding to one who sneezes,\nيَهْدِيكُمُ اللهُ وَيُصْلِحُ بَالَكُمْ\n(May Allah guide you and rectify your (Bal) affairs.) Then Allah says,\nذَٰلِكَ بِأَنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا اتَّبَعُوا الْبَاطِلَ\n(That is because those who disbelieve follow falsehood,) meaning, 'We only invalidate the deeds of the disbelievers and overlook the sins of the righteous, and amend their affairs, because those who disbelieve follow falsehood.' Meaning, they choose falsehood over the truth.\nوَأَنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اتَّبَعُوا الْحَقَّ مِنْ رَبِّهِمْ ۚ كَذَٰلِكَ يَضْرِبُ اللَّهُ لِلنَّاسِ أَمْثَالَهُمْ\n(while those who believe follow the truth from their Lord. Thus does Allah set forth for the people their parables.) Thus He makes the consequence of their actions clear to them, and He shows them where they will end in their next life – and Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/47?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:47:4","title":"Ibn Kathir · 47:4–9","text":"So, when you meet those who disbelieve (in battle), smite (their) necks until you have fully defeated them, then tighten their bonds. Thereafter (is the time) either for generosity or ransom, until the war lays down its burden. Thus, and had Allah so willed, He could have taken vengeance against them;–but (He lets you struggle) so as to test with one another. But those who are killed in the way of Allah, He will never let their deeds be lost (4)He will guide them and amend their condition (5)And admit them to Paradise, which He has made known to them (6)O you who believe! If you support (in the cause of) Allah, He will support you, and make your foothold firm (7)But as for those who disbelieve, misery awaits them, and (Allah) will make their deeds vain (8)That is because they hate that which Allah has sent down; so He has made their deeds fruitless (9)\nThe Command to strike the Enemies' Necks, tighten Their Bonds, and then free Them either by an Act of Grace or for a Ransom\nGuiding the believers to what they should employ in their fights against the idolators, Allah says,\nفَإِذَا لَقِيتُمُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا فَضَرْبَ الرِّقَابِ\n(So, when you meet those who disbelieve (in battle), smite their necks) which means, 'when you fight against them, cut them down totally with your swords.'\nحَتَّىٰ إِذَا أَثْخَنْتُمُوهُمْ\n(until you have fully defeated them,) meaning, 'you have killed and utterly destroyed them.'\nفَشُدُّوا الْوَثَاقَ\n(tighten their bonds.) 'This is referring to the prisoners of war whom you have captured. Later on, after the war ends and the conflict has ceased, you have a choice in regard to the captives: You may either act graciously toward them by setting them free without charge, or free them for a ransom that you require from them.' It appears that this Ayah was revealed after the battle of Badr. At that time, Allah reproached the believers for sparing many of the enemy's soldiers, and holding too many captives in order to take ransom from them. So He said then:\nمَا كَانَ لِنَبِيٍّ أَنْ يَكُونَ لَهُ أَسْرَىٰ حَتَّىٰ يُثْخِنَ فِي الْأَرْضِ ۚ تُرِيدُونَ عَرَضَ الدُّنْيَا وَاللَّهُ يُرِيدُ الْآخِرَةَ ۗ وَاللَّهُ عَزِيزٌ حَكِيمٌ - لَوْلَا كِتَابٌ مِنَ اللَّهِ سَبَقَ لَمَسَّكُمْ فِيمَا أَخَذْتُمْ عَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ\n(It is not for a Prophet to have captives of war until he had made a great slaughter (among the enemies) in the land. You desire the commodities of this world, but Allah desires (for you) the Hereafter. Allah is Mighty and Wise. Were it not for a prior decree from Allah, a severe torment would have touched you for what you took.)(8:67-68) Allah's saying,\nحَتَّىٰ تَضَعَ الْحَرْبُ أَوْزَارَهَا\n(...until the war lays down its burden.) Mujahid said: \"Until 'Isa bin Maryam (peace be upon him) descends.\" It seems as if he derived this opinion from the Prophet's ﷺ saying,\nلَا تَزَالُ طَائِفَةٌ مِنْ أُمَّتِي ظَاهِرِينَ عَلَى الْحَقِّ حَتّٰى يُقَاتِلَ آخِرُهُمُ الدَّجَّالَ\n(There will always be a group of my Ummah victorious upon the truth, until the last of them fight against Ad-Dajjal.) Imam Ahmad recorded from Jubayr bin Nufayr who reported from Salamah bin Nufayl that he went to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and said, \"I have let my horse go, and thrown down my weapon, for the war has ended. There is no more fighting.\" Then the Prophet ﷺ said to him,\nالْآنَ جَاءَ الْقِتَالُ، لَا تَزَالُ طَائِفَةٌ مِنْ أُمَّتِي ظَاهِرِينَ عَلَى النَّاسِ، يُزِيغُ اللهُ تَعَالَىٰ قُلُوبَ أَقْوَامٍ، فَيُقَاتِلُونَهُمْ وَيَرْزُقُهُمُ اللهُ مِنْهُمْ حَتّٰى يَأْتِيَ أَمْرُ اللهِ وَهُمْ عَلَىٰ ذٰلِكَ، أَلَا إِنَّ عُقْرَ دَارِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ الشَّامُ، وَالْخَيْلُ مَعْقُودٌ فِي نَوَاصِيهَا الْخَيْرُ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ\n(Now the time of fighting has come. There will always be a group of my Ummah dominant over others. Allah will turn the hearts of some people away (from the truth), so they (that group) will fight against them, and Allah will bestow on them (war spoils) from them (the enemies) – until Allah's command comes to pass while they are in that state. Verily, the center of the believers' abode is Ash-Sham. And goodness is tied around the horses' foreheads till the Day of Resurrection.) An-Nasa'i also recorded this narration.\nAllah then says,\nذَٰلِكَ وَلَوْ يَشَاءُ اللَّهُ لَانْتَصَرَ مِنْهُمْ\n(Thus, and had Allah so willed, He could have taken vengeance against them;) which means that had He so willed, He could have taken immediate vengeance against the disbelievers with a chastisement or exemplary punishment directly from Him.\nوَلَٰكِنْ لِيَبْلُوَ بَعْضَكُمْ بِبَعْضٍ\n(but (He lets you struggle) so as to test with one another.) meaning, He has ordered Jihad and fighting against the enemies in order to try you and test your affairs. Allah also expresses His wisdom by the legislation of Jihad in the following two Surahs, Al 'Iman and At-Tawbah, in which He says,\nأَمْ حَسِبْتُمْ أَنْ تَدْخُلُوا الْجَنَّةَ وَلَمَّا يَعْلَمِ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ جَاهَدُوا مِنْكُمْ وَيَعْلَمَ الصَّابِرِينَ\n(Or did you think that you would enter the Paradise before Allah had made evident those of you who fight in His cause and made evident those who are steadfast?)(3:142)\nقَاتِلُوهُمْ يُعَذِّبْهُمُ اللَّهُ بِأَيْدِيكُمْ وَيُخْزِهِمْ وَيَنْصُرْكُمْ عَلَيْهِمْ وَيَشْفِ صُدُورَ قَوْمٍ مُؤْمِنِينَ - وَيُذْهِبْ غَيْظَ قُلُوبِهِمْ ۗ وَيَتُوبُ اللَّهُ عَلَىٰ مَنْ يَشَاءُ ۗ وَاللَّهُ عَلِيمٌ حَكِيمٌ\n(Fight them; Allah will then punish them by your hands, disgrace them, grant you victory over them, satisfy the breasts of a believing people, and remove the fury of their (the believers') hearts. Allah turns in forgiveness to whom He wills; Allah is Knowing and Wise.)(9:14-15)\nMerit of the Martyrs\nSince it is customary during wars that many of the believers die, Allah says:\nوَالَّذِينَ قُتِلُوا فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ فَلَنْ يُضِلَّ أَعْمَالَهُمْ\n(But those who are killed in the way of Allah, He will never let their deeds be lost.) which means that He would not let their good deeds go to waste, but would rather multiply and increase them. Some of them will continue being rewarded for their good deeds for the entire length of their stay in Al-Barzakh. This has been mentioned in a Hadith recorded by Imam Ahmad in his Musnad on the authority of Kathir bin Murrah, who reported from Qays Al-Judhami, may Allah be pleased with him, that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nيُعْطَى الشَّهِيدُ سِتَّ خِصَالٍ عِنْدَ أَوَّلِ قَطْرَةٍ مِنْ دَمِهِ: تُكَفَّرُ عَنْهُ كُلُّ خَطِيئَةٍ، وَيَرَى مَقْعَدَهُ مِنَ الْجَنَّةِ، وَيُزَوَّجُ مِنَ الْحُورِ الْعِينِ، وَيَأْمَنُ مِنَ الْفَزَعِ الْأَكْبَرِ، وَمِنْ عَذَابِ الْقَبْرِ، وَيُحَلَّىٰ حُلَّةَ الْإِيمَانِ\n(As the first drop of his blood gushes forth, a martyr is granted six merits: all of his sins are forgiven, he is shown his place in Paradise, he is married to wide-eyed Huris, he is secured from the great fear (on Judgement Day) and the torment of the grave, and he is adorned with the adornments of Iman.) Ahmad was alone in recording this Hadith.\nAbu Ad-Darda', may Allah be pleased with him, reported that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nيُشَفَّعُ الشَّهِيدُ فِي سَبْعِينَ مِنْ أَهْلِ بَيْتِهِ\n(A martyr is allowed to intercede for seventy members of his household.) This was recorded by Abu Dawud, and there are numerous other Hadiths mentioning the merits of the martyrs. As for Allah's saying,\nسَيَهْدِيهِمْ\n(He will guide them) meaning, He will guide them to Jannah. This is similar to Allah's saying,\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ يَهْدِيهِمْ رَبُّهُمْ بِإِيمَانِهِمْ ۖ تَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِهِمُ الْأَنْهَارُ فِي جَنَّاتِ النَّعِيمِ\n(Indeed, those who have believed and done righteous good deeds, their Lord will guide them because of their Faith: beneath them rivers will flow in the Gardens of Pleasure.)(10:9) Allah says,\nوَيُصْلِحُ بَالَهُمْ\n(and amend their condition.) meaning, their situation and affairs.\nوَيُدْخِلُهُمُ الْجَنَّةَ عَرَّفَهَا لَهُمْ\n(And (He will) admit them to Paradise, which He has made known to them.)\nIt means that He has acquainted them with Paradise and guided them to it. Mujahid said: \"The people of Paradise will be guided to their houses and dwellings and whatever sections Allah has ordained for them in it. They will not make mistakes in this, nor will they ask anyone for directions to their dwellings – as if they had dwelt in it from the time they were first created.\"\nAl-Bukhari recorded from Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri, may Allah be pleased with him, that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nإِذَا خَلَصَ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ مِنَ النَّارِ حُبِسُوا بِقَنْطَرَةٍ بَيْنَ الْجَنَّةِ وَالنَّارِ، يَتَقَاصُّونَ مَظَالِمَ كَانَتْ بَيْنَهُمْ فِي الدُّنْيَا، حَتّٰى إذَا هُذِّبُوا وَنُقُّوا أُذِنَ لَهُمْ فِي دُخُولِ الْجَنَّةِ، وَالَّذِي نَفْسِي بِيَدِهِ! إِنَّ أَحَدَهُمْ بِمَنْزِلِهِ فِي الْجَنَّةِ أَهْدَىٰ مِنْهُ بِمَنْزِلِهِ الَّذِي كَانَ فِي الدُّنْيَا\n(After the believers securely pass the Fire (on the Day of Judgement), they will be held back upon a bridge between Paradise and the Fire. There, they will have any acts of injustice that they committed against one another in the life of this world rectified. After they are completely purified and cleansed (from injustice), they will be admitted into Paradise. By the One in Whose Hand is my soul, each one of them will find his way to his dwelling in Paradise better than he found his way to his dwelling in the worldly life.)\nSupport Allah's Cause, He will then support You\nAllah then says:\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِنْ تَنْصُرُوا اللَّهَ يَنْصُرْكُمْ وَيُثَبِّتْ أَقْدَامَكُمْ\n(O you who believe! If you support (the cause of) Allah, He will support you and make your foothold firm.) This is similar to His saying,\nوَلَيَنْصُرَنَّ اللَّهُ مَنْ يَنْصُرُهُ ۗ\n(Indeed, Allah will surely support those who support Him (His cause).)(22:40) That is because the reward is comparable to the type of deed that is performed. Thus, Allah says here,\nوَيُثَبِّتْ أَقْدَامَكُمْ\n(and make your foothold firm.) Allah then says,\nوَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا فَتَعْسًا لَهُمْ\n(But as for those who disbelieve – misery awaits them) This misery is the opposite of making firm the footholds of the believers who support the cause of Allah and His Messenger ﷺ. It has been confirmed in a Hadith that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nتَعِسَ عَبْدُالدِّينَارِ، تَعِسَ عَبْدُالدِّرْهَمِ، تَعِسَ عَبْدُالْقَطِيفَةِ، تَعِسَ وَانْتَكَسَ وَإِذَا شِيكَ فَلَا انْتَقَشَ\n(Misery awaits the servant of the Dinar; misery awaits the servant of the Dirham; misery awaits the servant of velvet. Misery awaits him, and degeneracy; and if he is pricked by a thorn, may he not find anyone to pull it for him.) This means may Allah not cure him. Then Allah says,\nوَأَضَلَّ أَعْمَالَهُمْ\n(and (Allah) will make their deeds vain.) meaning, He will nullify them and make them fruitless. Thus, Allah says,\nذَٰلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ كَرِهُوا مَا أَنْزَلَ اللَّهُ\n(That is because they hate that which Allah has sent down;) which means that they did not want or like what Allah revealed.\nفَأَحْبَطَ أَعْمَالَهُمْ\n(so He made their deeds fruitless.)","href":"/tafsir/47?verse=4","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:47:10","title":"Ibn Kathir · 47:10–13","text":"Have they not traveled through the earth and seen what happened in the end to those before them? Allah destroyed them completely, and a similar (awaits) the disbelievers (10)That is because Allah is the Protector of those who believe, whereas the disbelievers have no protector (11)Certainly Allah will admit those who believe and do righteous good deeds, into Gardens under which rivers flow (Paradise); while those who disbelieve enjoy their life and eat as cattle eat; but the Fire will be their abode (12)And how many a town mightier than your town that has driven you out We have destroyed, with none to help them (13)\nAdmonition and Fire for the Disbelievers; Paradise for Those Who have Taqwa\nAllah says,\nأَفَلَمْ يَسِيرُوا\n(Have they not traveled) meaning, those who associate partners with Allah and deny His Messenger ﷺ.\nفِي الْأَرْضِ فَيَنْظُرُوا كَيْفَ كَانَ عَاقِبَةُ الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ ۚ دَمَّرَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِمْ ۖ\n(through the land and seen what happened in the end to those before them? Allah destroyed them completely,) which means that Allah punished them because of their denial and disbelief, and saved the believers from among them. That is why He says,\nوَلِلْكَافِرِينَ أَمْثَالُهَا\n(and a similar (end awaits) the disbelievers.) Then Allah says,\nذَٰلِكَ بِأَنَّ اللَّهَ مَوْلَى الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَأَنَّ الْكَافِرِينَ لَا مَوْلَىٰ لَهُمْ\n(That is because Allah is the Protector of all those who believe, whereas the disbelievers have no protector.)\nAfter the battle of Uhud, Abu Sufyan Sakhr bin Harb, the commander of the idolators at that time, inquired about the Prophet ﷺ, Abu Bakr, and 'Umar, may Allah be pleased with them. When he heard no response, he announced: \"Verily, those three have died!\" 'Umar then responded to him: \"You lie, O enemy of Allah! Allah has indeed saved those who will displease you. Indeed, those whom you mentioned are all alive!\"\nAbu Sufyan then said: \"Well, today makes up for (the defeat on) the day of Badr, and the war has its ups and downs. And indeed, you are going to find mutilation (in the bodies of your dead) that I did not command, nor did I prohibit.\" Then he turned around chanting: \"Glory to Hubal (their greatest idol), Glory to Hubal.\" Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nأَلَا تُجِيبُوهُ؟\n(Aren't you going to respond to him?) The Companions said: \"What should we say, O Messenger of Allah?\" He ﷺ said:\nقُولُوا: اللهُ أَعْلَىٰ وَأَجَلُّ\n(Say: \"Allah is Most High and Most Glorious.\") Then Abu Sufyan said: \"We have Al-'Uzza (their second idol), and you have no 'Uzza. (honor).\" Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nأَلَا تُجِيبُوهُ؟\n(Aren't you all going to respond to him?) They said: \"What should we say, O Messenger of Allah?\" He said:\nقُولُوا: اللهُ مَوْلَانَا وَلَا مَوْلَىٰ لَكُمْ\n(Say: \"Allah is our Protector, and you have no protector.\") Allah then says,\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ يُدْخِلُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ ۖ\n(Verily, Allah will admit those who believe and do righteous good deeds into Gardens through which rivers flow.) meaning, on the Day of Resurrection.\nوَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا يَتَمَتَّعُونَ وَيَأْكُلُونَ كَمَا تَأْكُلُ الْأَنْعَامُ\n(Whereas those who disbelieve enjoy their life and eat as cattle eat.) Which means that the disbelievers enjoy their worldly life and eat in it like animals, munching and gnawing (with greed). They have no concern other than that. Thus, it has been confirmed in the Sahih that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nالْمُؤْمِنُ يَأْكُلُ فِي مِعىً وَاحِدٍ، وَالْكَافِرُ يَأْكُلُ فِي سَبْعَةِ أَمْعَاءٍ\n(A believer eats with one intestine, and a disbeliever eats with seven intestines.) Then Allah says,\nوَالنَّارُ مَثْوًى لَهُمْ\n(but the Fire will be their abode.) meaning, on the Day of their Reckoning. Allah then says,\nوَكَأَيِّنْ مِنْ قَرْيَةٍ هِيَ أَشَدُّ قُوَّةً مِنْ قَرْيَتِكَ الَّتِي أَخْرَجَتْكَ\n(And how many a town mightier than your town that has driven you out) meaning, Makkah.\nأَهْلَكْنَاهُمْ فَلَا نَاصِرَ لَهُمْ\n(We have destroyed, with none to help them!)\nThis is a great threat and severe warning to the people of Makkah because they rejected Allah's Messenger ﷺ, who was the chief of the Messengers and the last of the Prophets. If Allah had destroyed the previous nations because of their denial of their Messengers, what then would those (people of Makkah) expect that Allah would do to them in the worldly life and the Hereafter? And if the torment were to be lifted off some of them in this life by the blessing of the presence of the Messenger, the Prophet of Mercy, the torment will be stored for them in their next life, as Allah says,\nيُضَاعَفُ لَهُمُ الْعَذَابُ ۚ مَا كَانُوا يَسْتَطِيعُونَ السَّمْعَ وَمَا كَانُوا يُبْصِرُونَ\n(Their torment will be doubled! They could not bear to hear (the preaching), and they used not to see (the truth).)(11:20) Concerning Allah's saying,\nمِنْ قَرْيَتِكَ الَّتِي أَخْرَجَتْكَ\n(than Your town that has driven you out) This means, 'its people who have driven you (Muhammad ﷺ) out from amongst them (the people of Makkah).' Ibn Abi Hatim recorded from Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, that when Allah's Messenger ﷺ left Makkah (at the time of Hijrah – migration), and he reached the cave and hid inside it, he looked back toward Makkah and said,\nأَنْتِ أَحَبُّ بِلَادِ اللهِ إِلَى اللهِ، وَأَنْتِ أَحَبُّ بِلَادِ اللهِ إِلَيَّ، وَلَوْلَا أَنَّ الْمُشْرِكِينَ أَخْرَجُونِي لَمْ أَخْرُجْ مِنْكِ\n(You are the most beloved to Allah among Allah's lands, and you are also the most beloved to me among Allah's lands. Were it not that the idolators have driven me out from you, I would never have left you.)\nIbn 'Abbas then said, \"The worst of enemies is he who transgresses against Allah in His own sacred place, who kills a person who is not trying to kill him, or who kills because of Jahiliyyah vengeance. Allah then revealed to His Prophet ﷺ,\nوَكَأَيِّنْ مِنْ قَرْيَةٍ هِيَ أَشَدُّ قُوَّةً مِنْ قَرْيَتِكَ الَّتِي أَخْرَجَتْكَ أَهْلَكْنَاهُمْ فَلَا نَاصِرَ لَهُمْ\n(And how many a town mightier than your town that has driven you out have We destroyed, with none to help them!)\"","href":"/tafsir/47?verse=10","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:47:14","title":"Ibn Kathir · 47:14–15","text":"Can then he, who stands on clear evidence from his Lord, be like those for whom their evil deeds are beautified for them, while they follow their own lusts (14)The description of Paradise which is promised to those who have Taqwa, (is that) in it are rivers of water that are not Asin, rivers of milk the taste of which never changes, rivers of wine delicious to those who drink it, and rivers of refined honey; and therein for them are all kinds of fruits, and forgiveness from their Lord. Can this be likened to those who abide eternally in the Fire and are given to drink boiling water that severs their intestines (15)\nThe Worshipper of the Truth and the Worshipper of Lust are not Equal\nAllah says:\nأَفَمَنْ كَانَ عَلَىٰ بَيِّنَةٍ مِنْ رَبِّهِ\n(Can then he, who stands on clear evidence from his Lord...) This means a person who is upon clear vision and certainty concerning Allah's commands and His religion, because of the guidance and knowledge that Allah has revealed in His Book, and because of the pure nature upon which Allah has created him.\nكَمَنْ زُيِّنَ لَهُ سُوءُ عَمَلِهِ وَاتَّبَعُوا أَهْوَاءَهُمْ\n((Can he) be likened to those for whom their evil deeds are beautified for them, while they follow their own lusts?) which means that they cannot be equal. This is similar to Allah's saying,\nأَفَمَنْ يَعْلَمُ أَنَّمَا أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْكَ مِنْ رَبِّكَ الْحَقُّ كَمَنْ هُوَ أَعْمَىٰ ۚ\n(Can he who knows that what has been revealed unto you from your Lord is the truth be like him who is blind?)(13:19) And,\nلَا يَسْتَوِي أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ وَأَصْحَابُ الْجَنَّةِ ۚ أَصْحَابُ الْجَنَّةِ هُمُ الْفَائِزُونَ\n(Not equal are the people of the Fire and the people of Paradise. The People of Paradise will be the successful ones.)(59:20)\nDescription of Paradise and Its Rivers\nAllah then says:\nمَثَلُ الْجَنَّةِ الَّتِي وُعِدَ الْمُتَّقُونَ ۖ\n(The description of Paradise which is promised for those who have Taqwa...) 'Ikrimah said,\nمَثَلُ الْجَنَّةِ\n(The description of Paradise) \"This means its description.\"\nفِيهَا أَنْهَارٌ مِنْ مَاءٍ غَيْرِ آسِنٍ\n(In it are rivers of water that are not Āsin,) Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, Al-Hasan, and Qatadah all said, \"It does not change.\" Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak, and 'Ata' Al-Khurasani all said, \"It is not foul-smelling.\" The Arabs say Asin if its (water) scent changes.\nوَأَنْهَارٌ مِنْ لَبَنٍ لَمْ يَتَغَيَّرْ طَعْمُهُ\n(rivers of milk, the taste of which never changes,) which means that the milk is of utmost whiteness, sweetness, and richness. It has been mentioned in a Hadith attributed to the Prophet ﷺ \"Their milk did not come out of the udders of cattle.\"\nوَأَنْهَارٌ مِنْ خَمْرٍ لَذَّةٍ لِلشَّارِبِينَ\n(rivers of wine delightful to those who drink it,) which means that the wine does not have a bad taste or foul smell like that of the worldly life. Rather, it is good in its appearance, taste, smell, and effect, as Allah says,\nلَا فِيهَا غَوْلٌ وَلَا هُمْ عَنْهَا يُنْزَفُونَ\n(it (the wine) has no bad effects, nor does it cause intoxication.)(37:47) and,\nلَا يُصَدَّعُونَ عَنْهَا وَلَا يُنْزِفُونَ\n(From which (the wine) they will have no headache, nor will they be intoxicated.)(56:19)\nبَيْضَاءَ لَذَّةٍ لِلشَّارِبِينَ\n(white, delicious to the drinkers.)(37:46) It has been mentioned in a Hadith attributed to the Prophet ﷺ, \"Their wine was not pressed under men's feet.\"\nوَأَنْهَارٌ مِنْ عَسَلٍ مُصَفًّى\n(and rivers of refined honey;) which means that the honey is of utmost purity and pleasant color, taste, and smell. It has been mentioned in a Hadith attributed to the Prophet ﷺ, \"Their honey did not come out of the bellies of bees.\"\nImam Ahmad recorded from Hakim bin Mu'awiyah who narrated from his father that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nفِي الْجَنَّةِ بَحْرُ اللَّبَنِ وَبَحْرُ الْمَاءِ وَبَحْرُ الْعَسَلِ وَبَحْرُ الْخَمْرِ، ثُمَّ تُشَقَّقُ الْأَنْهَارُ مِنْهَا بَعْدُ\n(Verily, there is in Paradise a lake of milk, a lake of water, a lake of honey, and a lake of wine. The rivers then gush out of them.\nAt-Tirmidhi reported this narration in his section of the Description of Paradise, and he said, \"Hasan Sahih.\nIn the Sahih, it is recorded that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nإِذَا سَأَلْتُمُ اللهَ تَعَالىٰ فَاسْأَلُوهُ الْفِرْدَوْسَ فَإِنَّهُ أَوْسَطُ الْجَنَّةِ، وَأَعْلَى الْجَنَّةِ، وَمِنْهُ تُفَجَّرُ أَنْهَارُ الْجَنَّةِ، وَفَوْقَهُ عَرْشُ الرَّحْمٰنِ\n(When you ask Allah, ask Him for Al-Firdaws, because it is the central and highest part of the Paradise, and from it gush the rivers of the Paradise and above it is the Throne of the Most Merciful.) Allah says,\nوَلَهُمْ فِيهَا مِنْ كُلِّ الثَّمَرَاتِ\n(...and therein for them are all kinds of fruits, ...) This similar to His saying,\nيَدْعُونَ فِيهَا بِكُلِّ فَاكِهَةٍ آمِنِينَ\n(They will call in it for every kind of fruit in peace and security.)(44:55) And His saying,\nفِيهِمَا مِنْ كُلِّ فَاكِهَةٍ زَوْجَانِ\n(In them will be every kind of fruits in pairs.)(55:52) Allah says\nوَمَغْفِرَةٌ مِنْ رَبِّهِمْ\n(...and forgiveness from their Lord.) meaning, in addition to all of the above. Allah says,\nكَمَنْ هُوَ خَالِدٌ فِي النَّارِ\n(Can this be likened to those who abide eternally in the Fire) meaning, 'can those that We have described their position in the Paradise be like those who will abide eternally in the Fire?' They are not equal, and nor are those who will be in the high ranks (in the Paradise) and those who will be in the lowest depths (Hell).\nوَسُقُوا مَاءً حَمِيمًا\n(and are given to drink boiling water) meaning, extremely hot; so hot that it is unbearable.\nفَقَطَّعَ أَمْعَاءَهُمْ\n(that severs their intestines) meaning, that will cut their insides – both bowels and intestines. We seek refuge in Allah from that.","href":"/tafsir/47?verse=14","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:47:16","title":"Ibn Kathir · 47:16–19","text":"And among them are some who listen to you till when they go out from you, they say to those who have received knowledge: \"What is it that he has said just now? \"Such are men whose hearts Allah has sealed because they followed their lusts (16)And as for those who accept guidance, He increases them in guidance and bestows on them their Taqwa (17)Do they then await except that the Hour should come upon them suddenly? But already there have come (some of) its portents; and when it (actually) is on them, how can they benefit then by their reminder (18)So know that La ilaha illallah and ask forgiveness for your sin, and also for (the sin of) believing men and women. And Allah knows well your moving about, and your place of rest (19)\nThe Description of the Situation of the Hypocrites and the Command to maintain Tawhid and seek Forgiveness\nAllah describes the hypocrites' stupidity and limited understanding. They used to sit before Allah's Messenger ﷺ and listen to his words without understanding anything. Then when they left from his presence,\nقَالُوا لِلَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْعِلْمَ\n(they say to those who have received knowledge) from the Companions\nمَاذَا قَالَ آنِفًا\n(\"What is it that he has said just now?\") meaning, at this moment. They did not understand what he said, nor did they care about it. Allah says,\nأُولَٰئِكَ الَّذِينَ طَبَعَ اللَّهُ عَلَىٰ قُلُوبِهِمْ وَاتَّبَعُوا أَهْوَاءَهُمْ\n(Such are the men whose hearts Allah has sealed because they followed their lusts.) which means that they had neither sound understanding nor correct intentions. Allah then says,\nوَالَّذِينَ اهْتَدَوْا زَادَهُمْ هُدًى\n(And as for those who accept guidance, He increases them in guidance) which means that those who seek guidance, Allah facilitates it for them; He guides them to it, makes them firm on it, and gives them more of it.\nوَآتَاهُمْ تَقْوَاهُمْ\n(and bestows on them their Taqwa.) meaning, He inspires them to their righteous guidance. Allah then says,\nفَهَلْ يَنْظُرُونَ إِلَّا السَّاعَةَ أَنْ تَأْتِيَهُمْ بَغْتَةً ۖ\n(Do they then await except that the Hour should come upon them suddenly?) meaning, while they are unaware of it.\nفَقَدْ جَاءَ أَشْرَاطُهَا ۚ\n(But already there have come (some of) its portents;) meaning, the signs of its approach. This is similar to Allah's saying,\nهَٰذَا نَذِيرٌ مِنَ النُّذُرِ الْأُولَىٰ - أَزِفَتِ الْآزِفَةُ\n(This is a warner of the warners of old. The approaching Day has drawn near.)(53:56-57) And His saying,\nاقْتَرَبَتِ السَّاعَةُ وَانْشَقَّ الْقَمَرُ\n(The Hour has drawn near, and the moon has split.)(54:1) And His saying,\nأَتَىٰ أَمْرُ اللَّهِ فَلَا تَسْتَعْجِلُوهُ ۚ\n(The command of Allah is coming, so do not be impatient for it.)(16:1) And His saying,\nاقْتَرَبَ لِلنَّاسِ حِسَابُهُمْ وَهُمْ فِي غَفْلَةٍ مُعْرِضُونَ\n(The people's Day of Reckoning has approached while they turn away in heedlessness.)(21:1)\nThus, the Messenger's advent is one of the signs of the Hour, because he is the Finality of the Messengers. With him, Allah has completed the religion and established the evidence against all people in a way that was never done by a previous Prophet. Allah's Messenger ﷺ has most clearly informed about the signs and indications of the Hour, as we have discussed elsewhere.\nAl-Bukhari recorded from Sahl bin Sa'd, may Allah be pleased with him, that he saw Allah's Messenger ﷺ bring his index and middle fingers together while he said,\nبُعِثْتُ أَنَا وَالسَّاعَةُ كَهَاتَيْنِ\n(I have been sent before the Hour as these two (fingers).) Allah continues,\nفَأَنَّىٰ لَهُمْ إِذَا جَاءَتْهُمْ ذِكْرَاهُمْ\n(and when it (actually) is on them, how can they benefit then by their reminder) meaning, how would remembering benefit the disbelievers when the Hour comes upon them? This is similar to Allah's saying,\nيَوْمَئِذٍ يَتَذَكَّرُ الْإِنْسَانُ وَأَنَّىٰ لَهُ الذِّكْرَىٰ\n(On that Day will the human being remember, but what would that remembrance avail him then?)(89:23) And His saying,\nوَقَالُوا آمَنَّا بِهِ وَأَنَّىٰ لَهُمُ التَّنَاوُشُ مِنْ مَكَانٍ بَعِيدٍ\n(They will say (in the Hereafter): \"Now we believe in it!\" But how could they claim belief from such a far place?)(34:52) Allah then says,\nفَاعْلَمْ أَنَّهُ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا اللَّهُ\n(So know that La ilaha illallah) This is a declaration that there is no true God except Allah. It is not something that is easy for him to command the people to have knowledge of. That is why Allah connected it with,\nوَاسْتَغْفِرْ لِذَنْبِكَ وَلِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتِ\n(and ask forgiveness for your sin and for the believing men and women.) In the Sahih, it is recorded that Allah's Messenger ﷺ used to say,\nاللّٰهُمَّ اغْفِرْ لِي خَطِيئَتِي وَجَهْلِي وَإِسْرَافِي فِي أَمْرِي وَمَا أَنْتَ أَعْلَمُ بِهِ مِنِّي، اللّٰهُمَّ اغْفِرْ لِي هَزْلِي وَجِدِّي، وَخَطَئِي وَعَمْدِي، وَكُلُّ ذٰلِكَ عِنْدِي\n(O Allah, forgive my sin, my ignorance, my immoderation in my affairs, and all that You know better about my (faults) than myself. O Allah, forgive for me my joking, my seriousness, my unintended error, and my deliberate (mistakes) – and I have done of all that.) It is also reported in the Sahih that he ﷺ used to say at the end of the prayer,\nاللّٰهُمَّ اغْفِرْ لِي مَا قَدَّمْتُ وَمَا أَخَّرْتُ، وَمَا أَسْرَرْتُ وَمَا أَعْلَنْتُ، وَمَا أَسْرَفْتُ، وَمَا أَنْتَ أَعْلَمُ بِهِ مِنِّي، أَنْتَ إِلهِٰي لَا إِلٰهَ إِلَّا أَنْتَ\n(O Allah, forgive for me what I have previously done, what I may commit in future, what I have committed secretly, what I have committed openly, what I have done excessively, and all sins that You know better than me. You are my God. There is no (true) God except You.)\nIt is also recorded in the Sahih that he ﷺ used to say,\nيَاأَيُّهَا النَّاسُ تُوبُوا إِلَىٰ رَبِّكُمْ، فَإِنِّي أَسْتَغْفِرُ اللهَ وَأَتُوبُ إِلَيْهِ فِي الْيَوْمِ أَكْثَرَ مِنْ سَبْعِينَ مَرَّةً\n(O people! Repent to your Lord! Verily, I ask Allah for forgiveness and repent to Him more than seventy times every day.) Allah then says,\nوَاللَّهُ يَعْلَمُ مُتَقَلَّبَكُمْ وَمَثْوَاكُمْ\n(And Allah knows well your moving about, and your place of rest.) means, He knows how you behave during the day, and where you settle at night. This is similar to His saying,\nوَهُوَ الَّذِي يَتَوَفَّاكُمْ بِاللَّيْلِ وَيَعْلَمُ مَا جَرَحْتُمْ بِالنَّهَارِ\n(It is He Who takes your souls by night and knows all that you do by day.)(6:60) And He says,\nوَمَا مِنْ دَابَّةٍ فِي الْأَرْضِ إِلَّا عَلَى اللَّهِ رِزْقُهَا وَيَعْلَمُ مُسْتَقَرَّهَا وَمُسْتَوْدَعَهَا ۚ كُلٌّ فِي كِتَابٍ مُبِينٍ\n(And there is no moving creature on earth but its provision is up to Allah, and He knows its dwelling place and its deposit (before birth and after death) – all is in a clear register.)(11:6)","href":"/tafsir/47?verse=16","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:47:20","title":"Ibn Kathir · 47:20–23","text":"Those who believe say: \"Why is not a Surah sent down (for us)?\" But now that a decisive Surah is sent down mentioning fighting, you can see those in whose hearts is disease (of hypocrisy) looking at you with the look of one who is about to faint for fear of death. But it was better for them (20)Obedience and good words. And when the matter is resolved, then if they had been true to Allah, it would have been better for them (21)So would you perhaps, if you turned away, spread corruption on earth, and sever your ties of kinship (22)Such are the ones whom Allah has cursed, so that He has made them deaf and blinded their vision (23)\nThe Situation of the True Believer and the Sick-Hearted when the Command for Jihad was revealed\nAllah mentions that the believers were hoping that Jihad would be legislated. But when Allah ordained it, many of the people turned back, as Allah says,\nأَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ قِيلَ لَهُمْ كُفُّوا أَيْدِيَكُمْ وَأَقِيمُوا الصَّلَاةَ وَآتُوا الزَّكَاةَ فَلَمَّا كُتِبَ عَلَيْهِمُ الْقِتَالُ إِذَا فَرِيقٌ مِنْهُمْ يَخْشَوْنَ النَّاسَ كَخَشْيَةِ اللَّهِ أَوْ أَشَدَّ خَشْيَةً ۚ وَقَالُوا رَبَّنَا لِمَ كَتَبْتَ عَلَيْنَا الْقِتَالَ لَوْلَا أَخَّرْتَنَا إِلَىٰ أَجَلٍ قَرِيبٍ ۗ قُلْ مَتَاعُ الدُّنْيَا قَلِيلٌ وَالْآخِرَةُ خَيْرٌ لِمَنِ اتَّقَىٰ وَلَا تُظْلَمُونَ فَتِيلًا\n(Have you not seen those who were told: \"Restrain your hands (from fighting), establish the Salah, and give Zakah.\" But then when fighting was ordained for them, you find a party of them fearing the people as they fear Allah or more. They said: \"Our Lord! Why have You decreed fighting upon us? If only You have postponed us for a short period.\" Say: \"The enjoyment of this world is little. The Hereafter is far better for him who had Taqwa of (Allah), and you will not be dealt with unjustly, even as much as a thin thread (inside a date's pit).\")(4:77)\nSimilarly, Allah says here,\nوَيَقُولُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَوْلَا نُزِّلَتْ سُورَةٌ ۖ\n(Those who believe say: \"Why is not a Surah sent down (for us)?\") means, a Surah containing an order to fight. Then He says,\nفَإِذَا أُنْزِلَتْ سُورَةٌ مُحْكَمَةٌ وَذُكِرَ فِيهَا الْقِتَالُ ۙ رَأَيْتَ الَّذِينَ فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ مَرَضٌ يَنْظُرُونَ إِلَيْكَ نَظَرَ الْمَغْشِيِّ عَلَيْهِ مِنَ الْمَوْتِ ۖ\n(But now that a decisive Surah is sent down mentioning fighting, you can see those in whose hearts is disease looking at you with the look of one who is about to faint for fear of death.) meaning, due to their fear, terror, and cowardice concerning meeting the enemies. Allah then encourages them by saying,\nفَأَوْلَىٰ لَهُمْ - طَاعَةٌ وَقَوْلٌ مَعْرُوفٌ ۚ\n(But it was better for them, obedience and good words.) which means that it would have been better for them to listen and obey in that present situation.\nفَإِذَا عَزَمَ الْأَمْرُ\n(When the matter (of fighting) is resolved.) which means when the situation becomes serious and the time of fighting truly arrives.\nفَلَوْ صَدَقُوا اللَّهَ\n(if they had been true to Allah,) meaning, by making their intentions sincerely for Him.\nلَكَانَ خَيْرًا لَهُمْ\n(it would have been better for them) Allah then says,\nفَهَلْ عَسَيْتُمْ إِنْ تَوَلَّيْتُمْ\n(So would you perhaps, if you turned away) meaning, from Jihad and you withdrew from it.\nأَنْ تُفْسِدُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ وَتُقَطِّعُوا أَرْحَامَكُمْ\n(spread corruption on earth, and sever your ties of kinship?) which means, would you then go back to your old practices of the time of ignorance: shedding blood and severing kinship ties? Allah then says,\nأُولَٰئِكَ الَّذِينَ لَعَنَهُمُ اللَّهُ فَأَصَمَّهُمْ وَأَعْمَىٰ أَبْصَارَهُمْ\n(Such are the ones whom Allah has cursed, so He has made them deaf and blinded their vision.)\nThis involves a general prohibition of spreading corruption on earth, and a specific prohibition of severing the ties of kinship. In fact, Allah has commanded the people to establish righteousness on earth, as well as to join the ties of kinship by treating the relatives well in speech, actions, and spending wealth in charity. Many authentic and sound Hadiths have been reported through numerous routes of transmission from Allah's Messenger in this regard. Al-Bukhari recorded from Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nخَلَقَ اللهُ تَعَالَىٰ الْخَلْقَ فَلَمَّا فَرَغَ مِنْهُ قَامَتِ الرَّحِمُ فَأَخَذَتْ بِحَقْوِ الرَّحْمٰنِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ فَقَالَ: مَهْ، فَقَالَتْ: هٰذَا مَقَامُ الْعَائِذِ بِكَ مِنَ الْقَطِيعَةِ، فَقَالَ تَعَالَىٰ: أَلَا تَرْضَيْنَ أَنْ أَصِلَ مَنْ وَصَلَكِ وَأَقْطَعَ مَنْ قَطَعَكِ؟ قَالَتْ: بَلَىٰ، قَالَ: فَذَاكِ لَكِ\n(After Allah completed creating the creation, the womb stood up and pulled at the lower garment of the Most Merciful. He said, 'Stop that!' It replied, 'My stand here is the stand of one seeking refuge in you from severance of ties.' Allah said, 'Would it not please you that I join whoever joins you and sever whoever severs you?' It replied, 'Yes indeed!' He said, 'You are granted that!') Abu Hurayrah then added, \"Read if you wish:\nفَهَلْ عَسَيْتُمْ إِنْ تَوَلَّيْتُمْ أَنْ تُفْسِدُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ وَتُقَطِّعُوا أَرْحَامَكُمْ\n(So would you perhaps, if you turned away, spread corruption on earth, and sever your ties of kinship?)\" Then Al-Bukhari recorded it with another wording which states that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nاقْرَءُوا إِنْ شِئْتُمْ\nفَهَلْ عَسَيْتُمْ إِنْ تَوَلَّيْتُمْ أَنْ تُفْسِدُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ وَتُقَطِّعُوا أَرْحَامَكُمْ\n(Read if you wish: (So would you perhaps, if you turned away, spread corruption on earth, and sever your ties of kinship)?) Muslim also recorded it.\nImam Ahmad recorded from Abu Bakrah, may Allah be pleased with him, that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nمَا مِنْ ذَنْبٍ أَحْرَى أَنْ يُعَجِّلَ اللهُ تَعَالَىٰ عُقُوبَتَهُ فِي الدُّنْيَا، مَعَ مَا يَدَّخِرُ لِصَاحِبِهِ فِي الْآخِرَةِ، مِنَ الْبَغْيِ وَقَطِيعَةِ الرَّحِمِ\n(No sin deserves that Allah hasten its punishment in the worldly life, in addition to what He reserves in the Hereafter for those who commit it, more than injustice and severance of the ties of kinship.)\nThis was also recorded by Abu Dawud, At-Tirmidhi, and Ibn Majah. At-Tirmidhi said, \"This Hadith is Sahih.\" Imam Ahmad recorded from Thawban, may Allah be pleased with him, that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nمَنْ سَرَّهُ النَّسَاءُ فِي الْأَجَلِ وَالزِّيَادَةُ فِي الرِّزْقِ،فَلْيَصِلْ رَحِمَهُ\n(Whoever likes for his life to be extended, and his provision increased, let him connect his ties of kinship.) Ahmad was alone in recording this narration, but it has a supporting narration in the Sahih.\nImam Ahmad recorded from 'Abdullah bin 'Amr, may Allah be pleased with him, that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ الرَّحِمَ مُعَلَّقَةٌ بِالْعَرْشِ، وَلَيْسَ الْوَاصِلُ بِالْمُكَافِىءِ، وَلٰكِنِ الْوَاصِلُ الَّذِي إِذَا قُطِعَتْ رَحِمُهُ وَصَلَهَا\n(Verily, the womb is attached to the Throne. And connecting its ties does not mean dealing evenly (with the kinsfolk), but it rather means that if one's kinsfolk sever the ties, he connects them.) This Hadith was also recorded by Al-Bukhari.\nAhmad also recorded from 'Abdullah bin 'Amr, may Allah be pleased with him, that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nتُوضَعُ الرَّحِمُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ لَهَا (حُجْنَةٌ كَحُجْنَةِ) الْمِغْزَلِ تَكَلَّمُ بِلِسَانٍ طَلِقٍ ذَلِقٍ، فَتَقْطَعُ مَنْ قَطَعَهَا وَتَصِلُ مَنْ وَصَلَهَا\n(The womb will be placed on the Day of Resurrection, curved like a spinning wheel, speaking with an eloquent fluent tongue, calling to severing whoever had severed it, and joining whoever had joined it.)\nImam Ahmad recorded from 'Abdullah bin 'Amr, may Allah be pleased with him, that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nالرَّاحِمُونَ يَرْحَمُهُمُ الرَّحْمٰنُ، ارْحَمُوا أَهْلَ الْأَرْضِ يَرْحَمْكُمْ أَهْلُ السَّمَاءِ، وَالرَّحِمُ شُجْنَةٌ مِنَ الرَّحْمٰنِ، مَنْ وَصَلَهَا وَصَلَتْهُ وَمَنْ قَطَعَهَا بَتَّتْهُ\n(The merciful ones will be granted mercy from the Most Merciful. Have mercy on those on earth – the One above the heavens will then have mercy on you. And Ar-Rahim (the womb) is from Ar-Rahman, so whoever joins it, it joins him; and whoever severs it, it severs him.)\nAbu Dawud and At-Tirmidhi both recorded this Hadith and it has been reported with continuous chains of transmission. At-Trimidhi said, \"Hasan Sahih.\" There are numerous other Hadiths in this regard.","href":"/tafsir/47?verse=20","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:47:24","title":"Ibn Kathir · 47:24–28","text":"Will they not then reflect upon the Qur'an, or are there locks upon their hearts (24)Verily, those who have turned back as disbelievers after guidance had become clear to them – Shaytan has enticed them and filled them with false hopes (25)That is because they said to those who hate what Allah has sent down: \"We will obey you in part of the matter.\" And Allah knows their secrets (26)Then how (will it be) when the angels will take their souls at death, striking their faces and their backs (27)That is because they followed that which angered Allah and hated what earns His pleasure, so He rendered their deeds worthless (28)\nThe Command to reflect upon the Qur'an\nCommanding the people to reflect and ponder upon the Qur'an, and prohibiting them from turning away from it, Allah says,\nأَفَلَا يَتَدَبَّرُونَ الْقُرْآنَ أَمْ عَلَىٰ قُلُوبٍ أَقْفَالُهَا\n(Will they not then reflect upon the Qur'an, or are there locks upon their hearts?) means, there indeed are locks upon some hearts, firmly closing them so that none of its meanings can reach them. Ibn Jarir recorded from Hisham bin 'Urwah, from his father, may Allah be pleased with him, that Allah's Messenger ﷺ once recited this Ayah,\nأَفَلَا يَتَدَبَّرُونَ الْقُرْآنَ أَمْ عَلَىٰ قُلُوبٍ أَقْفَالُهَا\n(Will they not then reflect upon the Qur'an, or are there locks upon their hearts?) and a young man from Yemen said, \"Indeed, there are locks upon them – until Allah opens them totally or slightly.\" After that 'Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, always liked that young man, and kept that to himself until he became in charge, upon which he utilized him (as a consultant).\nCondemning Apostasy\nAllah then says,\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ ارْتَدُّوا عَلَىٰ أَدْبَارِهِمْ\n(Verily, those who have turned back) meaning, they departed from the faith and returned to disbelief.\nمِنْ بَعْدِ مَا تَبَيَّنَ لَهُمُ الْهُدَى ۙ الشَّيْطَانُ سَوَّلَ لَهُمْ\n(...after guidance had become clear to them – Shaytan has enticed them) meaning he adorned and beautified that (apostasy) for them.\nوَأَمْلَىٰ لَهُمْ\n(and filled them with false hopes.) meaning, he tempted them, and deceived them.\nذَٰلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ قَالُوا لِلَّذِينَ كَرِهُوا مَا نَزَّلَ اللَّهُ سَنُطِيعُكُمْ فِي بَعْضِ الْأَمْرِ ۖ\n(That is because they said to those who hate what Allah sent down: \"We will obey your in part of the matter.\") means, they plotted secretly with them and gave them evil advice – as is the common practice of the hypocrites who declare the opposite of what they conceal. Because of this, Allah says,\nوَاللَّهُ يَعْلَمُ إِسْرَارَهُمْ\n(And Allah knows their secrets.) whatever they hide and conceal, Allah is well-acquainted with it and He knows it. This is similar to His saying,\nوَاللَّهُ يَكْتُبُ مَا يُبَيِّتُونَ ۖ\n(...And Allah records all that they plot by night.)(4:81) Allah then says,\nفَكَيْفَ إِذَا تَوَفَّتْهُمُ الْمَلَائِكَةُ يَضْرِبُونَ وُجُوهَهُمْ وَأَدْبَارَهُمْ\n(How (will it be) when the angels will take their souls at death, striking their faces and their backs?)\nThat is, how their situation will be when the angels come to take their lives, and their souls cling to their bodies, causing the angels to extract them by force, harshness, and beating. This is similar to Allah's saying,\nوَلَوْ تَرَىٰ إِذْ يَتَوَفَّى الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا ۙ الْمَلَائِكَةُ يَضْرِبُونَ وُجُوهَهُمْ وَأَدْبَارَهُمْ\n(If you could but see when the angels take away the lives of the disbelievers, striking their faces and their backs.)(8:50) And His saying,\nوَلَوْ تَرَىٰ إِذِ الظَّالِمُونَ فِي غَمَرَاتِ الْمَوْتِ وَالْمَلَائِكَةُ بَاسِطُو أَيْدِيهِمْ\n(If you could but see when the wrongdoers are in the agonies of death, while the angels extend their hands)(6:93). meaning, to beat them.\nأَخْرِجُوا أَنْفُسَكُمُ ۖ الْيَوْمَ تُجْزَوْنَ عَذَابَ الْهُونِ بِمَا كُنْتُمْ تَقُولُونَ عَلَى اللَّهِ غَيْرَ الْحَقِّ وَكُنْتُمْ عَنْ آيَاتِهِ تَسْتَكْبِرُونَ\n((saying): \"Deliver your souls! This day you will be recompensed with the torment of degradation because of what you used to utter against Allah other than the truth, and because you used to arrogantly reject His signs.\")(6:93) Because of the above, Allah says,\nذَٰلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمُ اتَّبَعُوا مَا أَسْخَطَ اللَّهَ وَكَرِهُوا رِضْوَانَهُ فَأَحْبَطَ أَعْمَالَهُمْ\n(That is because they pursued what angered Allah and disliked what earns His pleasure, so He rendered their deeds worthless.)","href":"/tafsir/47?verse=24","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:47:29","title":"Ibn Kathir · 47:29–31","text":"Or do those in whose hearts is a disease, think that Allah will not expose their ill–wills (29)Had We so willed, We could have shown them clearly to you, so that you would know them by their marks; but you will know them by the tone of their speech! And Allah knows (all) your deeds (30)And We will surely, try you until We know those who strive among you and the patient, and We will put to a test all your affairs (31)\nExposing the Hidden Secret of the Hypocrites\nAllah says,\nأَمْ حَسِبَ الَّذِينَ فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ مَرَضٌ أَنْ لَنْ يُخْرِجَ اللَّهُ أَضْغَانَهُمْ\n(Or do those in whose hearts is disease think that Allah would never expose their ill–wills?) meaning, do the hypocrites think that Allah will not expose their affair to His believing servant? Yes indeed, He will expose their affair and manifest it so that those with insight will be able to understand it. In that regard, Allah revealed Surah Bara'ah (or At-Tawbah), in which He clarified the hypocrites' scandals, and pinpointed their practices that are indicative of their hypocrisy. Because of that, this Surah (Surah Bara'ah) is also called \"The Exposer\". Adghan is the plural of Dighn, which means what the souls harbor of envy and hatred toward Islam and its people who support it.\nAllah then says,\nوَلَوْ نَشَاءُ لَأَرَيْنَاكَهُمْ فَلَعَرَفْتَهُمْ بِسِيمَاهُمْ ۚ\n(Had We so willed, We could have shown them clearly to you, so that you would know them by their marks.)\nAllah is telling His Messenger ﷺ, \"Had We willed, O Muhammad, We would have shown you the specific individuals who are hypocrites, so that you would plainly know them.\" However, Allah did not do that in regard to all of the hypocrites. He conceals His creation, lets their affairs run according to apparent purity, and leaves the inner secrets to the One Who is well aware of them. Allah then adds,\nوَلَتَعْرِفَنَّهُمْ فِي لَحْنِ الْقَوْلِ ۚ\n(But you will know them by the tone of their speech!) which means, 'you will know them by their speech that reveals their intentions.' A person declares his association through the context and meaning of his words – as the Commander of the faithful 'Uthman bin 'Affan, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"Never would one conceal a secret but Allah will expose it by the look on his face and the uncontrolled words of his tongue.\" Allah then says,\nوَلَنَبْلُوَنَّكُمْ\n(And We will surely try you) meaning, 'We will surely test you with commands and prohibitions.'\nحَتَّىٰ نَعْلَمَ الْمُجَاهِدِينَ مِنْكُمْ وَالصَّابِرِينَ وَنَبْلُوَ أَخْبَارَكُمْ\n(until We know those who strive among you and the patient, and We will put to a test all your affairs.)\nThere is absolutely no doubt that Allah's knowledge precedes the occurrence of all events. In this Ayah, \"until We know\" means 'until We know of its occurrence.' This is why Ibn 'Abbas said in regard to this and similar texts, \"Except so that We may know, means, so that We may see.\"","href":"/tafsir/47?verse=29","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:47:32","title":"Ibn Kathir · 47:32–35","text":"Verily, those who disbelieve, and hinder from the path of Allah, and oppose the Messenger, after the guidance has been clearly shown to them, they will not harm Allah in the least, but He will make their deeds fruitless (32)O you who believe! Obey Allah, and obey the Messenger and invalidate not your deeds (33)Verily, those who disbelieved and obstructed others from the path of Allah and then died as disbelievers – never will Allah not forgive them (34)So do not lose heart and beg for peace while you are superior. Allah is with you and He will never deprive you of (the reward of) your deeds (35)\nNullifying the Disbelievers' Deeds and the Command to chase Them\nAllah then informs about those who disbelieve, obstruct others from the path of Allah, oppose the Messenger ﷺ and contend with him, and revert from the faith after guidance has become clear to them. He indicates that those people can never harm Allah in the least, and rather they only harm themselves and become losers on the Day of Resurrection. He will nullify their deeds. Allah will not reward them even the weight of a mosquito (i.e., the smallest thing) for any good that they did before their apostasy, but would instead totally invalidate and destroy it. Their apostasy wipes away their good deeds entirely, just as the good deeds would normally wipe away the evil deeds. Imam Ahmad Ibn Nasr Al-Marwazi reported in Kitab As-Salah (the Book of Prayer) that Abu Al-'Aliyah said, \"The Prophet's Companions used to think that no sin would harm a person who says 'La ilaha illallah,' just as no good deed would benefit a person who joins partners with Allah. So Allah revealed,\nأَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُوا الرَّسُولَ وَلَا تُبْطِلُوا أَعْمَالَكُمْ\n(Obey Allah and obey the Messenger and do not invalidate your deeds.)\nThis made them fear that some sins could nullify their deeds.\"\nIt has also been reported from Ibn 'Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, that he said, \"We, the Companions of Allah's Messenger ﷺ, used to think that good deeds would all be accepted, until Allah revealed,\nأَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُوا الرَّسُولَ وَلَا تُبْطِلُوا أَعْمَالَكُمْ\n(Obey Allah and obey the Messenger and do not invalidate your deeds.) So we asked each other: 'What is it that can nullify our deeds?' So we said, 'The major sins, great offenses that require admission into the Fire and immoral sins.' But then Allah revealed,\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَغْفِرُ أَنْ يُشْرَكَ بِهِ وَيَغْفِرُ مَا دُونَ ذَٰلِكَ لِمَنْ يَشَاءُ ۚ\n(Verily, Allah does not forgive joining partners with Him in worship, but He forgives except that to whom He wills.)(4:48)\nAfter this was revealed, we ceased saying that. We thereafter continued to fear for those who committed great sins and immoral sins and to have hope for those who did not.\"\nThen, Allah commands His believing servants to obey Him and His Messenger ﷺ, which would result in their happiness in this worldly life and the Hereafter. He also prohibits them from apostasy, because that would result in the nullification of their deeds. Thus He says,\nوَلَا تُبْطِلُوا أَعْمَالَكُمْ\n(and do not invalidate your deeds.) meaning, by apostasy. Thus, Allah says after this,\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَصَدُّوا عَنْ سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ ثُمَّ مَاتُوا وَهُمْ كُفَّارٌ فَلَنْ يَغْفِرَ اللَّهُ لَهُمْ\n(Verily, those who disbelieved and obstructed others from the path of Allah and then died as disbelievers – never will Allah forgive them.) This is similar to His saying,\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَغْفِرُ أَنْ يُشْرَكَ بِهِ وَيَغْفِرُ مَا دُونَ ذَٰلِكَ لِمَنْ يَشَاءُ ۚ\n(Verily, Allah does not forgive joining partners with Him in worship, but He forgives except that to whom He wills.)(4:48) Allah then addresses His believing servants by saying,\nفَلَا تَهِنُوا\n(So do not lose heart) meaning, do not be weak concerning the enemies.\nوَتَدْعُوا إِلَى السَّلْمِ\n(and beg for peace) meaning, compromise, peace, and ending the fighting between you and the disbelievers while you are in a position of power, both in great numbers and preparations. Thus, Allah says,\nفَلَا تَهِنُوا وَتَدْعُوا إِلَى السَّلْمِ وَأَنْتُمُ الْأَعْلَوْنَ\n(So do not lose heart and beg for peace while you are superior.) meaning, in the condition of your superiority over your enemy. If, on the other hand, the disbelievers are considered more powerful and numerous than the Muslims, then the Imam (general commander) may decide to hold a treaty if he judges that it entails a benefit for the Muslims. This is like what Allah's Messenger ﷺ did when the disbelievers obstructed him from entering Makkah and offered him treaty in which all fighting would stop between them for ten years. Consequently, he ﷺ agreed to that. Allah then says:\nوَاللَّهُ مَعَكُمْ\n(And Allah is with you) This contains the good news of victory and triumph over the enemies.\nوَلَنْ يَتِرَكُمْ أَعْمَالَكُمْ\n(and He will never deprive you of (the reward of) your deeds.) meaning, Allah will never invalidate your deeds, nullify them, or deprive you of them, but rather He will give you your rewards complete, without any reduction.\" And Allah knows best.","href":"/tafsir/47?verse=32","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:47:36","title":"Ibn Kathir · 47:36–38","text":"This worldly life is only amusement and diversion. And if you believe and have Taqwa of Allah, He will grant you your rewards, and will not ask from you (to sacrifice all of) your possessions (36)If He would demand of you all of it and urge you, you would withhold. And He will expose your (secret) ill–wills (37)Here you are now invited to spend in Allah's cause; but among you are those who withhold (stingily). And whoever acts stingily is but stingy toward himself. For Allah is indeed free of needs, while you are the needy. And if you turn away, He will replace you with other people; then they will not be like you (38)\nShowing the Triviality of the Worldly Life and encouraging Spending\nExpressing the insignificance and worthlessness of the worldly life, Allah says,\nإِنَّمَا الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا لَعِبٌ وَلَهْوٌ ۚ\n(This worldly life is only amusement and diversion.) which means that such is its outcome, except for that which is done for the sake of Allah. Because of this, Allah says,\nوَإِنْ تُؤْمِنُوا وَتَتَّقُوا يُؤْتِكُمْ أُجُورَكُمْ وَلَا يَسْأَلْكُمْ أَمْوَالَكُمْ\n(And if you believe and have Taqwa of Allah, He will grant you your rewards, and will not ask from you (to sacrifice all of) your possessions.) meaning, He is in no need of you, and asks you for nothing. He only ordained giving charity from your wealth so that you would help your needy brothers. The benefit of that would then come back to you, as well as the rewards. Allah then says,\nإِنْ يَسْأَلْكُمُوهَا فَيُحْفِكُمْ تَبْخَلُوا\n(If He would demand of you all of it and urge you, you would withhold.) meaning, if He pressures you much, you would become stingy.\nوَيُخْرِجْ أَضْغَانَكُمْ\n(And He will expose your (secret) ill–wills.) Qatadah said, \"Allah knows that extracting wealth (i.e., money from people) brings about ill-wills. \" Indeed, Qatadah has said the truth, because money is dear to the people, and they do not spend it except in things that are dearer to them than it. Allah then says,\nهَا أَنْتُمْ هَٰؤُلَاءِ تُدْعَوْنَ لِتُنْفِقُوا فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ فَمِنْكُمْ مَنْ يَبْخَلُ ۖ\n(Here you are now invited to spend in Allah's cause; but among you are those who withhold (stingily).) meaning, they refuse to spend. Allah continues,\nوَمَنْ يَبْخَلْ فَإِنَّمَا يَبْخَلُ عَن نَّفْسِهِ ۚ\n(And whoever acts stingily is but stingy toward himself.) meaning, he only reduces his own rewards, and the bad outcome of that will come back to him.\nوَاللَّهُ الْغَنِيُّ\n(For Allah is indeed Al-Ghani) Allah is in need of nothing else, whereas everything is ever in need of Him. Thus, Allah says,\nوَأَنْتُمُ الْفُقَرَاءُ ۚ\n(while you are the needy.) meaning, specifically of Him. The description of Allah as Al-Ghani (in no need) is a necessary description of Allah; on the other hand, the description of the creation as Faqr (needy) is a necessary description for them that they cannot avoid. Allah then says,\nوَإِنْ تَتَوَلَّوْا\n(And if you turn away,) which means, if you turn away from obeying Him and adhering to His Laws.\nيَسْتَبْدِلْ قَوْمًا غَيْرَكُمْ ثُمَّ لَا يَكُونُوا أَمْثَالَكُم\n(He will replace you with other people; then they will not be like you.) meaning, rather, they will be people who will listen to Him and obey His commands.\nThis concludes the Tafsir of Surat Al-Qital. And Allah is worthy of all praise and gratitude.","href":"/tafsir/47?verse=36","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:48:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 48:1–3","text":"The Merit of Surah Al-Fath\nImam Ahmad recorded from 'Abdullah bin Mughaffal, who said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ recited Surah Al-Fath on the (day) of the conquest of Makkah, riding on his she-camel. He recited it in a vibrating and pleasant tone. Mu'awiyah (a subnarrator) added: \"Were I not afraid that the people would crowd around me, I would surely try to imitate and produce his recitation.\" Both Al-Bukhari and Muslim recorded this Hadith through Shu'bah.\nبِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nإِنَّا فَتَحْنَا لَكَ فَتْحًا مُبِينًا - لِيَغْفِرَ لَكَ اللَّهُ مَا تَقَدَّمَ مِنْ ذَنْبِكَ وَمَا تَأَخَّرَ وَيُتِمَّ نِعْمَتَهُ عَلَيْكَ وَيَهْدِيَكَ صِرَاطًا مُسْتَقِيمًا - وَيَنْصُرَكَ اللَّهُ نَصْرًا عَزِيزًا\n(1. Verily, We have given you a manifest victory.)(2. That Allah may forgive you your sins of the past and the future, and complete His favor on you, and guide you on the straight path,)(3. And that Allah may help you with strong help.)\nThe Reason behind revealing Surat Al-Fath\nThis honorable Surah was revealed after the Messenger of Allah ﷺ returned from the area of Al-Hudaybiyyah, during the month of Dhul-Qa'dah, in the sixth year of Hijrah. This is when the idolators prevented him from reaching Al-Masjid Al-Haram to perform the 'Umrah he intended. They stopped the Prophet ﷺ from reaching Makkah at that time, but then were prone to peace negotiations. A peace treaty was conducted stipulating that the Messenger ﷺ would return this year and then come back for 'Umrah the following year. The Messenger ﷺ agreed. However, some of the Companions disliked these terms, including 'Umar bin Al-Khattab, as we will mention in detail, Allah willing, while explaining this Surah. After the Prophet ﷺ slaughtered his sacrificial animals in the area where he was stopped and headed back to Al-Madinah, Allah the Exalted and Most Honored revealed this Surah about what occurred between him and the idolators. Allah declared the Al-Hudaybiyyah peace treaty a manifest victory, because of the benefits peace would carry and the good results that did originate from it. 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud and other Companions said, \"You consider the conquering of Makkah to be Al-Fath (the victory), while to us, Al-Fath is the treaty conducted at Al-Hudaybiyyah.\" Jabir (bin 'Abdullah) said, \"We only considered Al-Fath to be the day of Hudaybiyyah!\" Al-Bukhari recorded that Al-Bara' (bin 'Azib) said, \"You consider Al-Fath to be the conquest of Makkah, which was indeed a victory. However, we consider Al-Fath to be the pledge of Ar-Ridwan on the Day of Al-Hudaybiyyah. Then, we were fourteen hundred with the Messenger of Allah ﷺ. Al-Hudaybiyyah had a well, whose water we consumed, not leaving a drop of water in it. When the news of what happened reached the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, he came towards us and sat on the edge of the well. Then he asked to be brought a bucket of water and used it for ablution. He next rinsed his mouth, invoked Allah and poured that water into the well. Soon after, that well provided us, as well as our animals, with sufficient water, in whatever amount of water we wished.\nImam Ahmad recorded that 'Umar bin Al-Khattab said, \"We were with the Messenger of Allah ﷺ on a trip, and I asked him about a matter three times, but he did not answer me. So I said to myself, 'May your mother lose you, O son of Al-Khattab! You were stubborn in repeating your question three times to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ; each time he did not respond to you.' So I mounted my animal, my camel, and went ahead for fear that a part of the Qur'an might be revealed in my case. Suddenly, I heard a caller calling, 'O 'Umar!' So, I went to the Messenger ﷺ while fearing that part of the Qur'an was revealed about me. The Prophet ﷺ said,\nنَزَلَ عَلَيَّ الْبَارِحَةَ سُورَةٌ هِيَ أَحَبُّ إِلَيَّ مِنَ الدُّنْيَا وَمَا فِيهَا:\nإِنَّا فَتَحْنَا لَكَ فَتْحًا مُبِينًا - لِيَغْفِرَ لَكَ اللَّهُ مَا تَقَدَّمَ مِنْ ذَنْبِكَ وَمَا تَأَخَّرَ\n(Last night, a Surah was revealed to me that is dearer to me than this life and all that it contains: (Verily, We have given you a manifest victory. That Allah may forgive you your sins of the past and the future.))\nAl-Bukhari, At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa'i collected this Hadith from several chains of narration through Malik, may Allah grant him His mercy. 'Ali bin Al-Madini commented, \"This is a good chain of narration consisting of the scholars of Al-Madinah.\" Imam Ahmad recorded that Anas bin Malik said, \"This Ayah was revealed to the Prophet ﷺ,\nلِيَغْفِرَ لَكَ اللَّهُ مَا تَقَدَّمَ مِنْ ذَنْبِكَ وَمَا تَأَخَّرَ\n(That Allah may forgive you your sins of the past and the future,) on his return from Al-Hudaybiyyah. The Prophet ﷺ said,\nلَقَدْ أُنْزِلَتْ عَلَيَّ اللَّيْلَةَ آيَةٌ أَحَبُّ إِلَيَّ مِمَّا عَلَى الْأَرْضِ\n(Tonight, an Ayah, that is dearer to me than all that the earth carries, was revealed to me.)\nThe Prophet ﷺ recited the Ayah to them. They said, 'Congratulations, O Allah's Messenger! Allah the Exalted and Most Honored has stated what He will do with you. So what will He do with us?' These Ayat were revealed to the Prophet ﷺ,\nلِيُدْخِلَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتِ جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ\n(That He may admit the believing men and the believing women to Gardens under which rivers flow...), until,\nفَوْزًا عَظِيمًا\n(...a supreme success.)\" This Hadith is recorded in the Two Sahihs. Imam Ahmad recorded that Al-Mughirah bin Shu'bah said, \"The Prophet ﷺ used to pray until both his feet were swollen. He was asked, 'Has not Allah forgiven you all your sins of the past and of future?' He ﷺ said,\nأَفَلَا أَكُونُ عَبْدًا شَكُورًا؟\n(Should I not be a thankful servant?)\" The two collectors of the Sahihs collected this Hadith, as well as, the rest of the Group, except Abu Dawud. Allah's statement,\nإِنَّا فَتَحْنَا لَكَ فَتْحًا مُبِينًا\n(Verily, We have given you a manifest victory.) means, clear and apparent victory. This Ayah is about the treaty at Al-Hudaybiyyah, which resulted in great goodness, including people embracing Islam in large crowds and having the chance to meet each other openly. During that time, the believers preached to the idolators and thus beneficial knowledge and faith spread all around. Allah's statement,\nلِيَغْفِرَ لَكَ اللَّهُ مَا تَقَدَّمَ مِنْ ذَنْبِكَ وَمَا تَأَخَّرَ\n(That Allah may forgive you your sins of the past and the future,) contains one of the special virtues of the Messenger ﷺ, and no one else shares this honor with him. There is not an authentic Hadith that states that any person other than the Messenger ﷺ earned forgiveness for all of his sins of the past and future on account of performing good deeds. This, indeed, is a great honor for the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, who fulfilled the requirements of Allah's obedience, righteousness and straightness at a level never surpassed by a human being in past generations, nor will it ever be surpassed in the generations to come. Muhammad ﷺ is the perfect human being and the leader and chief of all mankind in this life and the Hereafter. And since he was, and will always be, the most obedient of Allah's creation to Him and the most honoring of Allah's commands and prohibitions, he said when his she-camel insisted on kneeling down,\nحَبَسَها حَابِسُ الْفِيلِ\n(He Who stopped the elephant, has stopped her too.) The Prophet ﷺ then declared,\nوَالَّذِي نَفْسِي بِيَدِهِ! لَا يَسْأَلُونِّي الْيَوْمَ شَيْئًا يُعَظِّمُونَ بِهِ حُرُمَاتِ اللهِ إِلَّا أَجَبْتُهُمْ إِلَيْهَا\n(By the Name of Him in Whose Hand my soul is, this day, if they ask me anything which will respect the ordinances of Allah, I will grant it to them.)\nAnd when the Messenger ﷺ obeyed Allah and accepted the peace offer from the Quraysh, Allah the Exalted said to him,\nإِنَّا فَتَحْنَا لَكَ فَتْحًا مُبِينًا - لِيَغْفِرَ لَكَ اللَّهُ مَا تَقَدَّمَ مِنْ ذَنْبِكَ وَمَا تَأَخَّرَ وَيُتِمَّ نِعْمَتَهُ عَلَيْكَ\n(Verily, We have given you a manifest victory. That Allah may forgive you your sins of the past and the future, and complete His favor on you,) in this life and the Hereafter,\nوَيَهْدِيَكَ صِرَاطًا مُسْتَقِيمًا\n(and guide you on the straight path,) with the glorious legislation and the straight religion that He ordains on you,\nوَيَنْصُرَكَ اللَّهُ نَصْرًا عَزِيزًا\n(And that Allah may help you with strong help.) due to your obedience of the orders of Allah, the Exalted and Most Honored; Allah will elevate your status and give you victory above your enemies. An authentic Hadith states,\nوَمَا زَادَ اللهُ عَبْدًا بِعَفْوٍ إِلَّا عِزًّا. وَمَا تَوَاضَعَ أَحَدٌ للهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ إِلَّا رَفَعَهُ اللهُ تَعَالَىٰ\n(No servant pardons but Allah grants him honor, and none humbles himself for Allah except that Allah the exalted and sublime raises him (in rank).)\nUmar bin Al-Khattab said, \"You will never punish someone who disobeyed Allah with you better than obeying Allah the Exalted and Most Honored with him.\"","href":"/tafsir/48?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:48:4","title":"Ibn Kathir · 48:4–7","text":"He it is Who sent down As-Sakinah into the hearts of the believers, that they may grow more in faith along with their faith. And to Allah belong the armies of the heavens and the earth, and Allah is Ever All-Knower, All-Wise (4)That He may admit the believing men and the believing women to Gardens under which rivers flow to abide therein forever, and He may expiate from them their sins; and that is with Allah supreme success (5)And that He may punish the hypocrites men and women, and also the idolators men and women, who think evil thoughts about Allah, for them is a disgraceful torment. And the anger of Allah is upon them, and He has cursed them and prepared Hell for them and worst indeed is that destination (6)And to Allah belong the armies of the heavens and the earth. And Allah is Ever All-Powerful, All-Wise (7)\nAllah sent down the Sakinah into the Hearts of the Believers\nAllah the Exalted said,\nهُوَ الَّذِي أَنْزَلَ السَّكِينَةَ\n(He it is Who sent down As-Sakinah), meaning, tranquility. Qatadah commented, \"Grace into the hearts of the believers\", that is, the Companions, may Allah be pleased with them, on the Day of Al-Hudaybiyyah. The companions were they, who accepted the call of Allah and His Messenger ﷺ and obeyed the decisions of Allah and His Messenger ﷺ. When their hearts felt content with acceptance and were at peace, Allah increased their faith, joining it to the faith they already had. Al-Bukhari, and other Imams, relied on this Ayah as proof that faith increases and decreases in the hearts. Allah the Exalted said next that had He willed, He would have inflicted defeat on the disbelievers, Allah says;\nوَلِلَّهِ جُنُودُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ ۚ\n(And to Allah belong the armies of the heavens and the earth) and had He willed to send only one angel to them, that angel would have brought destruction to all what they had. However, Allah the Exalted willed Jihad and fighting to be established for, and by, the believers for great wisdom, clear reasons and unequivocal evidences that He had in all this. This is why Allah the Great said next,\nوَكَانَ اللَّهُ عَلِيمًا حَكِيمًا\n(and Allah is Ever All-Knower, All-Wise.) Allah the Exalted and Most Honored said,\nلِيُدْخِلَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتِ جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا\n(That He may admit the believing men and the believing women to Gardens under which rivers flow to abide therein forever,) We mentioned the Hadith that Anas narrated in which the Companions said, \"Congratulations, O Allah's Messenger! This good news is for you, so what good news do we have?\" Allah the Exalted sent down this Ayah,\nلِيُدْخِلَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتِ جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا\n(That He may admit the believing men and the believing women to Gardens under which rivers flow to abide therein forever,) meaning they will remain in Paradise forever,\nوَيُكَفِّرَ عَنْهُمْ سَيِّئَاتِهِمْ\n(and He may expiate from them their sins;) Allah will not punish them for their errors and mistakes. Rather, He will forgive, absolve and pardon them and cover the errors, grant mercy and appreciate,\nوَكَانَ ذَٰلِكَ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ فَوْزًا عَظِيمًا\n(and that is with Allah supreme success.) Allah the Exalted said in a similar Ayah,\nفَمَنْ زُحْزِحَ عَنِ النَّارِ وَأُدْخِلَ الْجَنَّةَ فَقَدْ فَازَ ۗ\n(And whoever is removed away from the Fire and admitted to Paradise, he indeed is successful.)(3:185) Allah said,\nوَيُعَذِّبَ الْمُنَافِقِينَ وَالْمُنَافِقَاتِ وَالْمُشْرِكِينَ وَالْمُشْرِكَاتِ الظَّانِّينَ بِاللَّهِ ظَنَّ السَّوْءِ ۚ\n(And that He may punish the hypocrites, men and women, and also the idolators, men and women, who think evil thoughts about Allah,) who question the wisdom in Allah's decisions and think that the Messenger ﷺ and his Companions, may Allah be pleased with them, might be killed and exterminated. This is why Allah the Exalted said,\nعَلَيْهِمْ دَائِرَةُ السَّوْءِ ۖ وَغَضِبَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلَعَنَهُمْ\n(for them is a disgraceful torment. And the anger of Allah is upon them, and He has cursed them) He has cast them away from His mercy,\nوَأَعَدَّ لَهُمْ جَهَنَّمَ ۖ وَسَاءَتْ مَصِيرًا\n(and prepared Hell for them – and worst indeed is that destination.) Allah the Exalted and Most Honored asserted His ability to take revenge from the enemies of Islam and all disbelievers and hypocrites,\nوَلِلَّهِ جُنُودُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ ۚ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ عَزِيزًا حَكِيمًا\n(And to Allah belong the armies of the heavens and the earth. And Allah is Ever All-Powerful, All-Wise.)","href":"/tafsir/48?verse=4","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:48:8","title":"Ibn Kathir · 48:8–10","text":"Verily, We have sent you as a witness, as a bearer of glad tidings, and as a warner (8)In order that you (O mankind) may believe in Allah and His Messenger and that you Tu'azziruh and Tuwaqqiruh, and Tusabbihuh Bukrah and Asila (9)Verily, those who give pledge to you, they are giving pledge to Allah. The Hand of Allah is over their hands. Then whosoever breaks his pledge, breaks it only to his own harm; and whosoever fulfills what he has the covenants he makes with Allah, He will bestow on him a great reward (10)\nQualities of the Messenger of Allah (ﷺ)\nAllah the Exalted says to His Prophet, Muhammad ﷺ,\nإِنَّا أَرْسَلْنَاكَ شَاهِدًا\n(Verily, We have sent you as a witness,) of the creation,\nوَمُبَشِّرًا\n(as a bearer of glad tidings,) to the believers,\nوَنَذِيرًا\n(and as a warner.) to the disbelievers. We explained these meanings in the Tafsir of Surat Al-Ahzab. Allah said,\nلِتُؤْمِنُوا بِاللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ وَتُعَزِّرُوهُ\n(In order that you may believe in Allah and His Messenger, and that you Tu'azziruh) or you honor him, according to 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas and several others,\nوَتُوَقِّرُوهُ\n(and Tuwaqqiruh), where Tawqir means, respect, honor and high regard,\nوَتُسَبِّحُوهُ\n(and that you Tusabbihuh), glorify Allah's praises,\nبُكْرَةً وَأَصِيلًا\n(Bukrah and Asila), the early and late part of the day.\nThe Pledge of Ar-Ridwan\nAllah the Exalted and Most Honored honors, regards and praises His Messenger ﷺ by saying,\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ يُبَايِعُونَكَ إِنَّمَا يُبَايِعُونَ اللَّهَ\n(Verily, those who give pledge to you, they are giving pledge to Allah.) Allah the Exalted and Most High said in another Ayah,\nمَنْ يُطِعِ الرَّسُولَ فَقَدْ أَطَاعَ اللَّهَ ۖ\n(He who obeys the Messenger, has indeed obeyed Allah.)(4:80) Allah said, next,\nيَدُ اللَّهِ فَوْقَ أَيْدِيهِمْ\n(The Hand of Allah is over their hands.) meaning, He is with them, hearing their statements and witnessing their stand, having full knowledge of them inwardly and outwardly. Therefore, Allah the Exalted was indeed taking the pledge from them through His Messenger ﷺ,\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ اشْتَرَىٰ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَنْفُسَهُمْ وَأَمْوَالَهُمْ بِأَنَّ لَهُمُ الْجَنَّةَ ۚ يُقَاتِلُونَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ فَيَقْتُلُونَ وَيُقْتَلُونَ ۖ وَعْدًا عَلَيْهِ حَقًّا فِي التَّوْرَاةِ وَالْإِنْجِيلِ وَالْقُرْآنِ ۚ وَمَنْ أَوْفَىٰ بِعَهْدِهِ مِنَ اللَّهِ ۚ فَاسْتَبْشِرُوا بِبَيْعِكُمُ الَّذِي بَايَعْتُمْ بِهِ ۚ وَذَٰلِكَ هُوَ الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ\n(Verily, Allah has purchased of the believers their lives and their properties for which theirs shall be the Paradise. They fight in Allah's cause, so they kill and are killed. It is a promise in truth, binding on Him in the Tawrah and the Injil and the Qur'an. And who is truer to his covenant than Allah? Then rejoice in the bargain you have concluded. That is the supreme success.)(9:111)\nAllah said,\nوَمَنْ أَوْفَىٰ بِمَا عَاهَدَ عَلَيْهُ اللَّهَ فَسَيُؤْتِيهِ أَجْرًا عَظِيمًا\n(...and whosoever fulfills what the covenants he makes with Allah, He will bestow on him a great reward.) a generous reward. The pledge mentioned here is the pledge of Ar-Ridwan which was pledged under a tree, a Samurah, in the area of Al-Hudaybiyyah. The number of the Companions who gave their pledge to Allah's Messenger ﷺ at that time was either 1,300, 1,400 or 1,500. However, 1,400 is the better choice.\nHadiths about the Pledge at Al-Hudaybiyyah\nAl-Bukhari recorded that Jabir bin 'Abdullah, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"We numbered one thousand and four hundred on the day of Hudaybiyyah.\" Muslim also collected this Hadith.\nThe Two Sahihs recorded that Jabir said; \"We numbered one thousand and four hundred at that time. The Messenger ﷺ placed his hand in the water and it started gushing forth from between his fingers until everyone had quenched their thirst.\" This is a short form of the story. Another narration of it mentioned that the Companions became thirsty on the day of Al-Hudaybiyyah and the Messenger of Allah ﷺ gave them an arrow from his quiver. They took the arrow, placed it in the well of Al-Hudaybiyyah and the water gushed out until they all satisfied their thirst. Jabir was asked how many of them there were on that day and he said, \"We were one thousand and four hundred. And had we been a hundred thousand, that water would still have been sufficient to satisfy us all.\" In another narration collected in the Two Sahihs, Jabir bin 'Abdullah said that they were one thousand and five hundred at the time.\nAl-Bukhari recorded that Sa'id bin Al-Musayyib was asked by Qatadah, \"How many were present for the pledge of Ar-Ridwan?\" Sa'id said, \"One thousand and five hundred.\" Qatadah posed, \"Jabir bin 'Abdullah, may Allah be pleased with them both, said that they were one thousand and four hundred.\" Sa'id said, \"He forgot. He told me that they were one thousand and five hundred.\" However, Al-Bayhaqi commented, \"This narration testifies that Jabir used to state that they were one thousand and five hundred, but later on remembered the true number and said that they were one thousand and four hundred.\"\nThe Reason behind conducting the Pledge of Ar-Ridwan\nMuhammad bin Ishaq bin Yasar said in his book on Sirah: \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ beckoned 'Umar bin Al-Khattab in order to send him to Makkah, so that he could inform the chiefs of Quraysh of the Prophet's intent (to perform 'Umrah at Makkah). 'Umar said, 'O Allah's Messenger! I fear the Quraysh for my being. There are no longer any chiefs from the tribe of Bani 'Adi bin Ka'b remaining in Makkah who would protect me, in addition, the Quraysh know my enmity and harshness against them. However, I could tell you about a man who is mightier than I in Makkah: 'Uthman bin 'Affan. We should send him to Abu Sufyan and the chiefs of the Quraysh informing them that you did not come to fight them, but to visit this House and to honor its holiness.' 'Uthman left to Makkah. He met Aban bin Sa'id bin Al-'As upon entering Makkah or just before that. As a result, Aban took 'Uthman with him and extended his protection to him so he could deliver the message of Allah's Messenger ﷺ. 'Uthman indeed went to Abu Sufyan and the chiefs of Quraysh and imparted the Prophet's message that he was sent with. When 'Uthman finished delivering the Prophet's message to them they said to him, 'If you wish, you can perform Tawaf around the House.' 'Uthman replied, 'I would not do that before the Messenger of Allah ﷺ gets the chance to perform Tawaf around it.' So the Quraysh kept 'Uthman waiting in Makkah. However, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and the Muslims were told that 'Uthman had been killed.\" Ibn Ishaq continued, \"I was told by 'Abdullah bin Abu Bakr that when news of 'Uthman's death was conveyed to him, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nلَا نَبْرَحُ حَتّٰى نُنَاجِزَ الْقَوْمَ\n(We will not leave until we fight the people.)\" Ibn Ishaq continued, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ called the Muslims to give a pledge of allegiance, resulting in the pledge of Ar-Ridwan being conducted under the tree. Later, people used to say that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ took the pledge from them to die. However, Jabir bin 'Abdullah said, 'The Messenger of Allah ﷺ did not ask us to give a pledge to die (or be victorious), but that we would not run away (from battle).' The Muslims gave their pledge and none among them held back from giving it, except Al-Jadd bin Qays from the tribe of Bani Salamah. Jabir used to say afterwards, 'By Allah, it is as if I am looking at him now next to the shoulder of his camel taking refuge behind it, so that the people did not see him.' Soon afterwards, news came to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ that the story of 'Uthman's death was not true.\"\nAl-Bukhari recorded that Nafi' said, \"People said that 'Abdullah bin 'Umar embraced Islam before 'Umar, but this is not true. What happened is that on the Day of Hudaybiyyah, 'Umar sent 'Abdullah to bring his horse that he kept with a man from Al-Ansar, so he could use it to fight. The Messenger of Allah ﷺ was then taking the pledge from the Muslims under the tree while 'Umar was unaware. So, 'Abdullah conducted his pledge and fetched the horse and brought it to 'Umar, who was wearing his armor in preparation for battle. 'Abdullah told 'Umar that the Messenger of Allah was accepting the pledge under the tree. 'Umar proceeded with 'Abdullah and gave his pledge to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ. This is why some people thought that 'Abdullah bin 'Umar embraced Islam before 'Umar, may Allah be pleased with them both.\"\nAl-Bukhari also recorded Ibn 'Umar saying that, the people who were with the Messenger of Allah ﷺ scattered under the shade of trees. Suddenly, the people gathered around the Prophet ﷺ and 'Umar said, \"O 'Abdullah! Investigate why the people are gathering around Allah's Messenger.\" Ibn 'Umar found the people giving their pledge. He gave his pledge, then went back and told 'Umar, who also went and gave his pledge. In a Hadith collected by Muslim, Jabir bin 'Abdullah said, \"On the day of Al-Hudaybiyyah, we were one thousand and four hundred. We gave the pledge of allegiance to the Prophet while 'Umar was holding the Prophet's hand under the tree, which was a Samurah (a kind of thorny tree). We gave the pledge to him not to run away (from battle). We did not give the pledge to die.\"\nMuslim recorded that Ma'qil bin Yasar, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"On the day of the Tree, while the Prophet ﷺ was taking the pledge from the people, I was holding a branch of that tree away from his head. We were fourteen hundred. We did not give him our pledge to die, but gave the pledge not to run from battle.\"\nHowever, Al-Bukhari recorded that Salamah bin Al-Akwa', may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"I gave the pledge to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ under the tree.\" Yazid asked him, \"O Abu Maslamah, to what did you pledge at that time?\" Salamah said, \"To die!\" Al-Bukhari also collected a Hadith from Salamah bin Al-Akwa' that he said, \"I gave my pledge to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ on the day of Hudaybiyyah. I stood to the side and the Messenger ﷺ said,\nيَا سَلَمَةُ أَلَا تُبَايِعُ؟\n(Why not give the pledge, O Salamah?) and I said, 'I did.' He ﷺ said,\nأَقْبِلْ فَبَايِعْ\n(Come and give pledge). I went close to him and gave him my pledge.\" Salamah was asked, \"What was the pledge that you gave then, O Salamah?\" Salamah said, \"To die.\" Muslim collected this Hadith as well, while Al-Bukhari collected from 'Abbad bin Tamim that the pledge they gave was to die.\nAl-Bayhaqi recorded that Salamah bin Al-Akwa', may Allah be pleased with him said, \"We went to Al-Hudaybiyyah with the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, and we numbered fourteen hundred at that time. We reached the well and found around fifty sheep drinking from it, but its water was barely sufficient for them. The Messenger of Allah ﷺ sat on its rim, invoked Allah and spat in the well and its water gushed out. We made our animals drink from it and also drank from it. Next, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ called the people to give the pledge when he was under the tree, and I was among the first to give the pledge to him. The remaining people then started giving the pledge. When about half the people have given the pledge, the Messenger said ﷺ to me,\nبَايِعْنِي يَا سَلَمَةُ\n(Give me the pledge, O Salamah!) I said, 'O Allah's Messenger! I have already pledged my pledge in the first group of people.' He ﷺ said,\nوَأَيْضًا\n(Do it again.) So I pledged my pledge again. He also saw that I was not wearing any armor and gave me some. He went on accepting the pledge from the people. When they were about to finish, he said,\nأَلَا تُبَايِـــعُ يَا سَلَمَةُ؟\n(Will you not give me your pledge, O Salamah!) I said, 'O Allah's Messenger! I have given you the pledge in the beginning and the middle. ' He ﷺ said,\nوَأَيْضًا\n(Do it again,) I gave him my pledge for a third time. The Messenger of Allah ﷺ asked me,\nيَا سَلَمَةُ أَيْنَ حَجَفَتُكَ أَوْ دَرَقَتُكَ الَّتِي أَعْطَيْتُكَ؟\n(Where is the armor that I gave you O Salamah?) I said, 'O Allah's Messenger! 'Amir met me and I found that he did not have a shield, so I gave it to him.' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ laughed and said to me,\nإِنَّكَ كَالَّذِي قَالَ الْأَوَّلُ اللّٰهُمَّ أَبْغِنِي حَبِيبًا هُوَ أَحَبُّ إِلَيَّ مِنْ نَفْسِي\n(You are just like the man of old times who said, 'O Allah! Give me a dear person who is dearer to me than myself!')\nThen the idolators of Makkah sent a delegation asking for a peace treaty, and we agreed to make peace. I used to work for Talhah bin 'Ubaydullah, may Allah be pleased with him, by providing water for his horse. For taking care of it, Talhah gave me a portion of his food. I had left my family and wealth and migrated to Allah and His Messenger (so I was poor). After the people of Makkah and us conducted peace and were freely mingling with each other, I went by a tree, removed its thorny branches and rested under its shade. Four of the idolators of Makkah stood close to me and started mentioning the Messenger of Allah ﷺ in an improper way and I hated being close to them. So, I moved under the shade of another tree. They hanged their weapons and rested under it. Meanwhile, a caller shouted these words from the bottom of the valley, 'O Emigrants! Ibn Zunaym was killed,' so I held my sword and went after the four idolators. They were asleep, so I took possession of their weapons and held them in my hand, saying, 'By He Who has honored the face of Muhammad ﷺ, if any one of you raises his head, I will strike that which holds his eyes!' I brought them to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, while my uncle 'Amir brought another man, an idolator, whose name was Mikraz, and I and my uncle brought the men to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ. The number of captured idolators swelled to seventy. The Messenger of Allah ﷺ looked at them and said,\nدَعُوهُمْ يَكُنْ لَهُمْ بَدْءُ الْفُجُورِ وَثِنَاهُ\n(Let them go, for theirs will be the initiation of hostilities and its burden.) The Messenger of Allah ﷺ forgave them and Allah the Exalted and Most Honored said,\nوَهُوَ الَّذِي كَفَّ أَيْدِيَهُمْ عَنْكُمْ وَأَيْدِيَكُمْ عَنْهُمْ بِبَطْنِ مَكَّةَ مِنْ بَعْدِ أَنْ أَظْفَرَكُمْ عَلَيْهِمْ ۚ\n(And He it is Who has withheld their hands from you and your hands from them in the midst of Makkah, after He had made you victors over them.)(48:24)\" Muslim collected a narration that is the same or similar.\nThe Two Sahihs recorded that Sa'id bin Al-Musayyib said, \"My father was among those who gave the pledge to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ under the tree. He said, 'In the following year, we went for Hajj and we could not find the tree.' Therefore, if you know where that tree is, then you have more knowledge!\"\nAbu Bakr Al-Humaydi recorded that Jabir said, \"When the Messenger of Allah ﷺ called the people to the pledge, we found a man from our tribe whose name is Al-Jadd bin Qays, hiding under the shoulder of his camel.\" Muslim collected this Hadith. Al-Humaydi also recorded that 'Amr said that he heard Jabir say, \"On the day of Hudaybiyyah, we were one thousand and four hundred and the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said to us,\nأَنْتُمْ خَيْرُ أَهْلِ الْأَرْضِ الْيَوْمَ\n(Today, you are the best people on the earth.)\" Jabir went on saying, \"If I still had my sight, I would have shown you the tree.\" Sufyan commented that the Companions later on differed over the location of the tree of Al-Hudaybiyyah; the Two Sahihs collected this statement from him. Imam Ahmad recorded that Jabir said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nلَا يَدْخُلُ النَّارَ أَحَدٌ مِمَّنْ بَايَعَ تَحْتَ الشَّجَرَةِ\n(None among those who gave the pledge under the tree shall enter Hellfire.) 'Abdullah bin Imam Ahmad recorded that Jabir said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَنْ يَصْعَدُ الثَّنِيَّةَ ثَنِيَّةَ الْمُرَارِ فَإِنَّهُ يُحَطُّ عَنْهُ مَا حُطَّ عَنْ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ\n(He who ascends Thaniyyah (i.e. a mountainous pass), the Thaniyyah of Al-Murar, will have as much of his sins relieved for him as the sins that were relieved from the Children of Israel.)\nThe first to ascend that hill were the horsemen of (the Ansar tribe of) Banu Al-Khazraj, then the Muslims followed suit. The Prophet ﷺ said,\nكُلُّكُمْ مَغْفُورٌ لَهُ إِلَّا صَاحِبَ الْجَمَلِ الْأَحْمَرِ\n(All of you will be forgiven, except the owner of the red camel.) We said to him, \"Come, let the Messenger of Allah invoke Allah to forgive you,\" but he said, \"By Allah! Finding my lost camel is dearer to me than having your companion invoke Allah to forgive me. \" That man was only looking for his lost camel.\nMuslim collected this Hadith from Ubaydullah (from Jabir). Muslim also recorded that Abu Az-Zubayr heard Jabir say, \"Umm Mubashshir told me that she heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ saying, while he was with Hafsah,\nلَا يَدْخُلُ النَّارَ إِنْ شَاءَ اللهُ تَعَالَىٰ مِنْ أَصْحَابِ الشَّجَرَةِ الَّذِينَ بَايَعُوا تَحْتَهَا، أَحَدٌ\n(Allah willing, none of the Companions of the tree, who gave the pledge under it, will ever enter Hellfire.) She said, 'No, O Allah's Messenger.' The Prophet ﷺ rebuked her but Hafsah said,\nوَإِنْ مِنْكُمْ إِلَّا وَارِدُهَا ۚ\n(There is not one of you but will pass over it (Hell))(19:71) but the Prophet ﷺ responded,\nقَدْ قَالَ اللهُ تَعَالَىٰ\nثُمَّ نُنَجِّي الَّذِينَ اتَّقَوْا وَنَذَرُ الظَّالِمِينَ فِيهَا جِثِيًّا\n(Allah the Exalted said next, (Then We shall save those who had Taqwa and We shall leave the wrongdoers therein on their knees.))(19:72)\"\nMuslim also narrated that Jabir said, \"A slave of Hatib bin Abi Balta'ah came to the Messenger ﷺ complaining against Hatib and saying, 'O Allah's Messenger! Hatib shall surely enter Hell.' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ replied,\nكَذَبْتَ لَا يَدْخُلُهَا فَإِنَّهُ قَدْ شَهِدَ بَدْرًا وَالْحُدَيْبِيَّةَ\n(You lie, he shall never enter the Fire; he participated in Badr and Al-Hudaybiyyah.) This is why Allah the Exalted said while praising these Companions,\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ يُبَايِعُونَكَ إِنَّمَا يُبَايِعُونَ اللَّهَ يَدُ اللَّهِ فَوْقَ أَيْدِيهِمْ ۚ فَمَنْ نَكَثَ فَإِنَّمَا يَنْكُثُ عَلَىٰ نَفْسِهِ ۖ وَمَنْ أَوْفَىٰ بِمَا عَاهَدَ عَلَيْهُ اللَّهَ فَسَيُؤْتِيهِ أَجْرًا عَظِيمًا\n(Verily, those who give pledge to you, they are giving pledge to Allah. The Hand of Allah is over their hands. Then whosoever breaks his pledge, breaks it only to his own harm; and whosoever fulfills whatever covenant he has made with Allah, He will bestow on him a great reward.) Allah the Exalted and Most Honored said in another Ayah,\nلَقَدْ رَضِيَ اللَّهُ عَنِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ إِذْ يُبَايِعُونَكَ تَحْتَ الشَّجَرَةِ فَعَلِمَ مَا فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ فَأَنْزَلَ السَّكِينَةَ عَلَيْهِمْ وَأَثَابَهُمْ فَتْحًا قَرِيبًا\n(Indeed, Allah was pleased with the believers when they gave the pledge to you under the tree, He knew what was in their hearts, and He sent down tranquillity upon them, and He rewarded them with a near victory.)(48:18)","href":"/tafsir/48?verse=8","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:48:11","title":"Ibn Kathir · 48:11–14","text":"Those of the bedouins who lagged behind will say to you: \"Our possessions and our families occupied us, so ask forgiveness for us.\" They say with their tongues what is not in their hearts. Say: \"Who then has any power at all (to intervene) on your behalf with Allah, if He intends you hurt or intends you benefit? Nay, but Allah is Aware of what you do (11)Nay, but you thought that the Messenger and the believers would never return to their families, and that was made fair seeming in your hearts, and you did think an evil thought and you became a Bura. (12)And whosoever does not believe in Allah and His Messenger, then verily, We have prepared for the disbelievers a blazing Fire (13)And to Allah belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. He forgives whom He wills, and punishes whom He wills. And Allah is Forgiving, Most Merciful (14)\nThe Fabricated Excuse offered by Those Who lagged behind and did not participate in Al-Hudaybiyyah; Allahs Warning for Them\nAllah informs His Messenger ﷺ of the excuses that the bedouins who lagged behind would offer him, those bedouins who preferred to remain in their homes and possessions and did not join the Messenger of Allah ﷺ. They offered an excuse for lagging behind, as that of being busy – in their homes and with their wealth! They asked the Messenger of Allah ﷺ to invoke Allah to forgive them, not because they had faith in the Prophet ﷺ and his invocation, but to show off and pretend. This is why Allah the Exalted said about them,\nيَقُولُونَ بِأَلْسِنَتِهِمْ مَا لَيْسَ فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ ۚ قُلْ فَمَنْ يَمْلِكُ لَكُمْ مِنَ اللَّهِ شَيْئًا إِنْ أَرَادَ بِكُمْ ضَرًّا أَوْ أَرَادَ بِكُمْ نَفْعًا ۚ\n(They say with their tongues what is not in their hearts. Say: \"Who then has any power at all (to intervene) on your behalf with Allah, if He intends you hurt or intends you benefit?\")\nAllah says, none can resist what Allah has decided in your case, all praise and honor belong to Him. Allah is the Knower of your secrets and what your hearts conceal, even if you pretend and choose to be hypocritical with us. This is why Allah the Exalted said,\nبَلْ كَانَ اللَّهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ خَبِيرًا\n(Nay, but Allah is Ever All-Aware of what you do.) then He said,\nبَلْ ظَنَنْتُمْ أَنْ لَنْ يَنْقَلِبَ الرَّسُولُ وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ إِلَىٰ أَهْلِيهِمْ أَبَدًا\n(Nay, but you thought that the Messenger and the believers would never return to their families,) 'for your lagging behind was not an excusable act or just a sin. Rather, your lagging behind was because of hypocrisy and because you thought that the Muslims would be killed to the extent of extermination, their lives would be extinguished and none of them will ever come back,'\nوَظَنَنْتُمْ ظَنَّ السَّوْءِ وَكُنْتُمْ قَوْمًا بُورًا\n(and you did think an evil thought and you became a people Bur) going for destruction, according to 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas, Mujahid and several others. Qatadah explained Bur to mean, corrupt and some said that it is a word used in the Arabic dialect of the area of Oman. Allah the Exalted then said,\nوَمَنْ لَمْ يُؤْمِنْ بِاللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ\n(And whosoever does not believe in Allah and His Messenger,) Allah states here that whoever does not purify his actions outwardly and inwardly for Allah's sake, then Allah the Exalted will punish him in the Blazing Fire, even if he pretends to show people that he follows the faith, contradicting his true creed. Allah the Exalted then states that He is the Only Authority, King and Owner Who has full control over the residents of the heavens and earth,\nيَغْفِرُ لِمَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيُعَذِّبُ مَنْ يَشَاءُ ۚ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ غَفُورًا رَحِيمًا\n(He forgives whom He wills, and punishes whom He wills. And Allah is Forgiving, Most Merciful.) with those who repent, return and submit to Him with humiliation.","href":"/tafsir/48?verse=11","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:48:15","title":"Ibn Kathir · 48:15","text":"Those who lagged behind will say, when you set forth to take the spoils, \"Allow us to follow you.\" They want to change Allah's Words. Say: \"You shall not follow us; thus Allah has said beforehand.\" Then they will say: \"Nay, you envy us.\" Nay, but they understand not except a little (15)\nAllah characterizes the bedouins who lagged behind the Messenger of Allah ﷺ during the 'Umrah of Hudaybiyyah, saying that when the Prophet ﷺ and his Companions later went on to conquer Khaybar, the bedouins asked them to take them along. They were hoping to collect war booty, having been absent when it was time to fight the enemy and enduring with patience therein. Allah the Exalted ordered His Messenger ﷺ to refuse to give them permission to accompany him, being a punishment that is similar to their error. Allah has promised those who were present at Al-Hudaybiyyah to earn Khaybar's war spoils alone, not shared in that with the bedouins who lagged behind. Therefore, the legislation that Allah gave in this regard was joined to the destiny that He decided, occurring just as He decided. Allah's statement,\nيُرِيدُونَ أَنْ يُبَدِّلُوا كَلَامَ اللَّهِ\n(They want to change Allah's Words), which refers to the promise that Allah gave those who were present at Al-Hudaybiyyah, according to the explanation reported from Mujahid, Qatadah, Juwaybir and which Ibn Jarir preferred. Allah said,\nقُلْ لَنْ تَتَّبِعُونَا كَذَٰلِكُمْ قَالَ اللَّهُ مِنْ قَبْلُ ۖ\n(Say: \"You shall not follow us; thus Allah has said beforehand.\") 'when He promised the participants of Al-Hudaybiyyah before you asked to join them,'\nفَسَيَقُولُونَ بَلْ تَحْسُدُونَنَا\n(Then they will say: \"Nay, you envy us.\") 'you do not want us to share the war spoils with you,'\nبَلْ كَانُوا لَا يَفْقَهُونَ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا\n(Nay, but they understand not except a little.) the truth is nothing close to what they claimed, but they understand not.","href":"/tafsir/48?verse=15","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:48:16","title":"Ibn Kathir · 48:16–17","text":"Say to the bedouins who lagged behind: \"You shall be called to fight against a people given to great warfare, then you shall fight them, or they shall surrender. Then if you obey, Allah will give you a fair reward; but if you turn away as you did turn away before, He will punish you with a painful torment. (16)No blame or sin is there upon the blind, nor is there sin upon the lame, nor is there sin upon the sick. And whosoever obeys Allah and His Messenger, He will admit him to Gardens beneath which rivers flow; and whosoever turns back, He will punish him with a painful torment (17)\nAllah conveys the News that there will be Many Cases of Jihad, and that Jihad distinguishes the Ranks of the Believers and exposes the Hypocrites\nScholars of Tafsir differ over who the people mentioned here are. They are people experienced at warfare who will be called to fight. There are many opinions, first, they are the tribe of Hawazin, as Shu'bah narrated from Abu Bishr from Sa'id bin Jubayr, or 'Ikrimah, or both of them. Hushaym narrated this explanation from Abu Bishr, from both Sa'id bin Jubayr and 'Ikrimah. Qatadah, as narrated from him in one version, held the same view. The second view is that these people are the tribe of Thaqif, according to Ad-Dahhak. The third view is that they are Banu Hanifah, according to Juwaybir and Az-Zuhri, as Muhammad bin Ishaq narrated from him. Similar was narrated from Sa'id bin Jubayr and 'Ikrimah. The fourth opinion is that they are the Persians, according to 'Ali bin Abi Talhah who reported that from 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas. This is also the view of 'Ata', Mujahid, and 'Ikrimah. Ka'b Al-Ahbar said that they are the Romans, while Ibn Abi Layla, 'Ata, Al-Hasan and Qatadah – in a different narration from him, said that they are the Persians and Romans. Mujahid also said that they are the idolators. In another narration Mujahid said, \"They are men given to great warfare,\" and did not specify any particular people. This last explanation is the view preferred by Ibn Jurayj and Ibn Jarir. Allah's statement,\nتُقَاتِلُونَهُمْ أَوْ يُسْلِمُونَ\n(Then you shall fight them, or they shall surrender.) means, 'you are called to fight them in Jihad, through constant warfare, until you become victorious over them or they surrender. Or, they will embrace your religion without a fight, but with their full consent.' Allah the Exalted and Most Honored said next,\nفَإِنْ تُطِيعُوا\n(Then if you obey,) 'if you accept the call to Jihad and prepare for it and fulfill your duty in this regard,'\nيُؤْتِكُمُ اللَّهُ أَجْرًا حَسَنًا ۖ وَإِنْ تَتَوَلَّوْا كَمَا تَوَلَّيْتُمْ مِنْ قَبْلُ\n(Allah will give you a fair reward; but if you turn away as you turned away before,) 'on the day of Al-Hudaybiyyah, when you were called to Jihad, yet lagged behind,'\nيُعَذِّبْكُمْ عَذَابًا أَلِيمًا\n(He will punish you with a painful torment.)\nAcceptable Reasons for not joining Jihad\nAllah then mentions the legal reasons that allow one to be excused from joining the Jihad, such as blindness and being lame, and various illnesses that strike one and are remedied in few days. When one is ill, he is allowed to remain behind and will have a valid excuse to do so, until his illness ends. Allah the Exalted and Most honored then said, while ordaining joining the Jihad and obeying Allah and His Messenger ﷺ,\nوَمَنْ يُطِعِ اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ يُدْخِلْهُ جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ ۖ وَمَنْ يَتَوَلَّ\n(And whosoever obeys Allah and His Messenger, He will admit him to Gardens beneath which rivers flow; and whosoever turns back,) from joining the Jihad and busies himself in his livelihood,\nيُعَذِّبْهُ عَذَابًا أَلِيمًا\n(He will punish him with a painful torment.) in this life with humiliation and in the Hereafter with the Fire. Allah the Exalted has the best knowledge.","href":"/tafsir/48?verse=16","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:48:18","title":"Ibn Kathir · 48:18–19","text":"Indeed, Allah was pleased with the believers when they gave the pledge to you under the tree, He knew what was in their hearts, and He sent down As-Sakinah upon them, and He rewarded them with a near victory (18)And abundant spoils that they will capture. And Allah is Ever All-Mighty, All-Wise (19)\nGood News to the Participants of the Ridwan Pledge of Allah's Pleasure and earning Spoils of War\nAllah declares that He is pleased with the believers who gave the pledge to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ under the tree. We mentioned the number of these believers as being one thousand and four hundred and that the tree was a Samurah tree, located in the area of Hudaybiyyah.\nAl-Bukhari narrated from Tariq that 'Abdur-Rahman said, \"I went on Hajj and passed by people praying and asked, 'What is this Masjid?' They said, 'This is the tree where the Messenger of Allah ﷺ took the pledge of Ar-Ridwan.' So, I went to Sa'id bin Al-Musayyib and told him. Sa'id said, 'My father told me that he was among those who gave their pledge to the Messenger of Allah under the tree. My father said: The following year, when we went out, we forgot its place and could not agree which tree it was.' Sa'id said, 'The Companions of Muhammad ﷺ forgot where the tree was, but you know where it is. Therefore, you have better knowledge than them!'\" Allah said,\nفَعَلِمَ مَا فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ\n(He knew what was in their hearts,) meaning, of truthfulness, trustworthiness, obedience and adherence,\nفَأَنْزَلَ السَّكِينَةَ\n(and He sent down As-Sakinah), calmness and tranquillity,\nعَلَيْهِمْ وَأَثَابَهُمْ فَتْحًا قَرِيبًا\n(upon them, and He rewarded them with a near victory.) in reference to the goodness that Allah the Exalted and Most Honored caused to happened to the Companions on account of the peace treaty between them and their disbelieving enemies. Ever after that, the Companions gained abundant, general and continuous benefits and accomplishments, leading to the conquest of Khaybar and Makkah and then the various surrounding provinces and areas. They earned tremendous glory, triumphs and an elevated and honorable status in this life and in the Hereafter, just as Allah the Exalted said,\nوَمَغَانِمَ كَثِيرَةً يَأْخُذُونَهَا ۗ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ عَزِيزًا حَكِيمًا\n(And abundant spoils that they will capture. And Allah is Ever All-Mighty, All-Wise.)","href":"/tafsir/48?verse=18","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:48:20","title":"Ibn Kathir · 48:20–24","text":"Allah has promised you abundant spoils that you will capture, and He has hastened for you this, and He has restrained the hands of men from you, that it may be a sign for the believers, and that He may guide you to the straight path (20)And other (victories) which are not yet within your power; indeed Allah encompasses them. And Allah is Ever Able to do all things (21)And if those who disbelieve fight against you, they certainly would have turned their backs; then they would have found neither a protector nor a helper (22)That has been the way of Allah already with those who passed away before. And you will not find any change in the way of Allah (23)And He it is Who has withheld their hands from you and your hands from them in the midst of Makkah, after He had made you victors over them. And Allah sees what you do (24)\nGood News of abundant Spoils of War\nMujahid said that Allah's statement,\nوَعَدَكُمُ اللَّهُ مَغَانِمَ كَثِيرَةً تَأْخُذُونَهَا\n(Allah has promised you abundant spoils that you will capture,) refers to the spoils that Muslims earned up until this time, while,\nفَعَجَّلَ لَكُمْ هَٰذِهِ\n(and He has hastened for you this,) means, the conquest of Khaybar. Al-'Awfi reported that Ibn 'Abbas said,\nفَعَجَّلَ لَكُمْ هَٰذِهِ\n(and He has hastened for you this,) means, \"The peace treaty of Al-Hudaybiyyah.\" Allah said,\nوَكَفَّ أَيْدِيَ النَّاسِ عَنْكُمْ\n(and He has restrained the hands of men from you,) meaning, 'no harm that your enemies had planned against you, both fighting and warfare, touched you. Allah also restrained the hands of men, whom you left behind close to your families and children, from harming them,'\nوَلِتَكُونَ آيَةً لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ\n(that it may be a sign for the believers,) with which they take heed and understand. Verily, Allah the Exalted and Most Honored shall help and protect the believers against all enemies, even though the believers are few in number. By doing so, the believers will come to know that Allah is truly the Knower of the consequences of all matters and that the best decisions are those which He prefers for His believing servants, even though these decisions might look unfavorable outwardly,\nوَعَسَىٰ أَنْ تَكْرَهُوا شَيْئًا وَهُوَ خَيْرٌ لَكُمْ ۖ\n(It may be that you dislike a thing that is good for you)(2:216). Allah said,\nوَيَهْدِيَكُمْ صِرَاطًا مُسْتَقِيمًا\n(and that He may guide you to the straight path) on account of your obeying His commands and adhering by His orders by following the path of His Messenger ﷺ,\nGood News of continuous Muslim Victories until the Day of Resurrection\nThe statement of Allah the Exalted and Most Honored,\nوَأُخْرَىٰ لَمْ تَقْدِرُوا عَلَيْهَا قَدْ أَحَاطَ اللَّهُ بِهَا ۚ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرًا\n(And other (victories) which are not yet within your power; indeed Allah encompasses them. And Allah is Ever Able to do all things.)\nMeaning, there are other war spoils and victories to come which are not within your grasp now. However, Allah will make them within your reach and indeed He compasses all these victories for your benefit. Surely, Allah the Exalted provides provisions and sustenance for His servants who have Taqwa, from resources they could never imagine.\nScholars of Tafsir differ over the reference to other war spoils mentioned here. Al-'Awfi reported that Ibn 'Abbas said that it refers to the conquest of Khaybar. This meaning is sound according to the Ayah,\nفَعَجَّلَ لَكُمْ هَٰذِهِ\n(and He has hastened for you this.) which refers to the treaty of Al-Hudaybiyyah. This is view of Ad-Dahhak, Muhammad bin Ishaq and 'Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam. Qatadah said that this part of the Ayah refers to the conquest of Makkah, and this opinion was preferred by Ibn Jarir. Ibn Abi Layla and Al-Hasan Al-Basri said that it refers to victories over the Persians and the Romans, while Mujahid said that it refers to every victory and all spoils of war, until the Day of Resurrection. Abu Dawud At-Tayalisi recorded that Ibn 'Abbas commented on the Ayah,\nوَأُخْرَىٰ لَمْ تَقْدِرُوا عَلَيْهَا قَدْ أَحَاطَ اللَّهُ بِهَا ۚ\n(And other (victories) which are not yet within your power; indeed Allah compasses them.), \"They are the victories that are continuing until this day.\"\nHad Makkah's Disbelievers fought at Al-Hudaybiyyah, They would have retreated in Defeat\nAllah said,\nوَلَوْ قَاتَلَكُمُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَوَلَّوُا الْأَدْبَارَ ثُمَّ لَا يَجِدُونَ وَلِيًّا وَلَا نَصِيرًا\n(And if those who disbelieve fight against you, they certainly would have turned their backs; then they would have found neither a protector nor a helper.) Allah the Exalted and Most Honored delivers the glad tidings to His believing servants that had the idolators fought them, Allah would have given victory to His Messenger ﷺ and His faithful servants. Then, the army of the disbelievers would have been defeated and would have deserted the battlefield and fled. They would not have found any helper or supporter, because they were fighting Allah, His Messenger ﷺ and His Faithful Party. Allah the Exalted and Most Honored said,\nسُنَّةَ اللَّهِ الَّتِي قَدْ خَلَتْ مِنْ قَبْلُ ۖ وَلَنْ تَجِدَ لِسُنَّةِ اللَّهِ تَبْدِيلًا\n(That has been the way of Allah already with those who passed away before. And you will not find any change in the way of Allah.) means this is the way Allah deals with His creation. Whenever faith and disbelief meet at any distinguishing juncture, Allah gives victory to faith over disbelief, raises high truth and destroys falsehood. For instance, Allah the Exalted helped His loyal faithful supporters during the battle of Badr and they defeated His idolator enemies, even though the Muslims were few in number and lightly armed, while the idolators were large in number and heavily armed. Allah the Exalted and Most Honored said,\nوَهُوَ الَّذِي كَفَّ أَيْدِيَهُمْ عَنْكُمْ وَأَيْدِيَكُمْ عَنْهُمْ بِبَطْنِ مَكَّةَ مِنْ بَعْدِ أَنْ أَظْفَرَكُمْ عَلَيْهِمْ ۚ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ بَصِيرًا\n(And He it is Who has withheld their hands from you and your hands from them in the midst of Makkah, after He had made you victors over them. And Allah is Ever the All-Seer of what you do.)\nAllah the Exalted reminds His faithful servants of His favor when He restrained the hands of the idolators, and thereby, no harm touched the Muslims from the idolators. Allah restrained the hands of the believers and they did not fight the idolaters near Al-Masjid Al-Haram. Rather, Allah saved both parties from battle and brought forth a peace treaty that produced good results for the believers, in addition to, earning them the good end in this life and the Hereafter. We stated a Hadith from Salamah bin Al-Akwa' in which he narrated that when the Muslims brought forth those seventy idolator prisoners, they tied and paraded them before the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, who looked at them and said,\nأَرْسِلُوهُمْ يَكُنْ لَهُمْ بَدْءُ الْفُجُورِ وَثِنَاهُ\n(Release them, so that they earn the burden of starting hostilities and its infamy.)\nThereafter, Allah the Exalted and Most Honored sent down this Ayah about that incident,\nوَهُوَ الَّذِي كَفَّ أَيْدِيَهُمْ عَنْكُمْ وَأَيْدِيَكُمْ عَنْهُمْ\n(And He it is Who has withheld their hands from you and your hands from them...) Imam Ahmad recorded that Anas bin Malik said, \"On the day of Hudaybiyyah, eighty armed men from Makkah went down the valley coming from Mount At-Tan'im to ambush the Messenger of Allah ﷺ. The Messenger ﷺ invoked Allah against them, and they were taken prisoners.\" 'Affan added, \"The Messenger ﷺ pardoned them, and this Ayah was later on revealed,\nوَهُوَ الَّذِي كَفَّ أَيْدِيَهُمْ عَنْكُمْ وَأَيْدِيَكُمْ عَنْهُمْ بِبَطْنِ مَكَّةَ مِنْ بَعْدِ أَنْ أَظْفَرَكُمْ عَلَيْهِمْ ۚ\n(And He it is Who has withheld their hands from you and your hands from them in the midst of Makkah, after He had made you victors over them.)\" Muslim, Abu Dawud in his Sunan and At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa'i, in the Tafsir section of their Sunan, collected this Hadith.","href":"/tafsir/48?verse=20","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:48:25","title":"Ibn Kathir · 48:25–26","text":"They are those who disbelieved and hindered you from Al-Masjid Al-Haram and detained the sacrificial animals, from reaching their place of sacrifice. Had there not been believing men and believing women whom you did not know, that you may kill and on whose account a sin would have been committed by you without (your) knowledge, that Allah might bring into His mercy whom He wills – if they had been apart, We verily, would have punished with painful torment those of them who disbelieved (25)When those who disbelieve had put in their hearts pride and haughtiness – the pride and haughtiness of the time of ignorance, – then Allah sent down His calmness and tranquillity upon His Messenger and upon the believers, and made them stick to the word of Taqwa; and they were well entitled to it and worthy of it. And Allah is the All-Knower of everything (26)\nSome of the Benefits gained from the Treaty at Al-Hudaybiyyah\nAllah the Exalted states that the Arab idolators from Quraysh and their allies who extended help to them against His Messenger ﷺ,\nهُمُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا\n(They are those who disbelieved), they are indeed the disbelievers,\nوَصَدُّوكُمْ عَنِ الْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ\n(and hindered you from Al-Masjid Al-Haram) 'even though you are its people and more worthy of being responsible for it,'\nوَالْهَدْيَ مَعْكُوفًا أَنْ يَبْلُغَ مَحِلَّهُ\n(and detained the sacrificial animals, from reaching their place of sacrifice.) they prevented, because of transgression and stubbornness, the sacrificial animals from being reached to the place where they would be slaughtered. There were seventy sacrificial camels designated for sacrifice, as we will mention, Allah willing. Allah the Exalted and Most Honored said,\nوَلَوْلَا رِجَالٌ مُؤْمِنُونَ وَنِسَاءٌ مُؤْمِنَاتٌ\n(Had there not been believing men and believing women) 'living among the Makkans hiding their faith for fearing for their safety from the pagans. Otherwise, We would have given you authority over the Makkans and you would have killed them to the brink of extermination. However, there were some faithful believers, men and women, living among them, about whom you had no knowledge of being believers and you might try to kill them.' Allah's statement,\nلَمْ تَعْلَمُوهُمْ أَنْ تَطَئُوهُمْ فَتُصِيبَكُمْ مِنْهُمْ مَعَرَّةٌ\n(whom you did not know, that you may kill them and on whose account a sin would have been committed by you) an evil and erroneous act,\nبِغَيْرِ عِلْمٍ ۖ لِيُدْخِلَ اللَّهُ فِي رَحْمَتِهِ مَنْ يَشَاءُ\n(without (your) knowledge, that Allah might bring into His mercy whom He wills) that Allah might delay the punishment of the pagans of Makkah to save the believers who lived among them, and so that many of the idolators might embrace Islam. Allah the Exalted and Most Honored said,\nلَوْ تَزَيَّلُوا\n(if they had been apart), if the disbelievers and the believers who were living among them had been apart,\nلَعَذَّبْنَا الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنْهُمْ عَذَابًا أَلِيمًا\n(We verily, would have punished with painful torment those of them who disbelieved) 'We would have given you dominance over the disbelievers and you would have inflicted tremendous slaughter on them.' Allah the Exalted and Most Honored said,\nإِذْ جَعَلَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا فِي قُلُوبِهِمُ الْحَمِيَّةَ حَمِيَّةَ الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ\n(When those who disbelieve had put in their hearts pride and haughtiness – the pride and haughtiness of the time of ignorance,) when they refused to write (in the treaty document), 'In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful,' and, 'These are the terms agreed on by Muhammad, Allah's Messenger,'\nفَأَنْزَلَ اللَّهُ سَكِينَتَهُ عَلَىٰ رَسُولِهِ وَعَلَى الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَأَلْزَمَهُمْ كَلِمَةَ التَّقْوَىٰ\n(then Allah sent down His calmness and tranquillity upon His Messenger and upon the believers and made them stick to the word of Taqwa;) the word of Taqwa refers to sincerity, according to Mujahid. 'Ata' bin Abi Rabah commented, \"None has the right to be worshipped but Allah, alone without partners. All the dominion belongs to Him and all praise is due to Him. He is Ever Able to do everything.\" Yunus bin Bukayr said that Ibn Ishaq narrated from Az-Zuhri, from 'Urwah, from Al-Miswar, commenting on,\nوَأَلْزَمَهُمْ كَلِمَةَ التَّقْوَىٰ\n(and made them stick to the word of Taqwa;) \"'La ilaha illallah, alone without partners.\"\nThe Hadiths that tell the Story of Al-Hudaybiyyah and the Peace Treaty that followed\nAl-Bukhari, may Allah have mercy with him, recorded in his Sahih in 'Book of Conditions' that Al-Miswar bin Makhramah and Marwan bin Al-Hakam, both narrated attesting to the truthfulness of the other, \"Allah's Messenger ﷺ set out at the time of Al-Hudaybiyyah with several hundred of his Companions. When he reached Dhul-Hulayfah, he had the sacrificial animals garlanded and marked and resumed the state of Ihram for 'Umrah. He then sent several men from the tribe of Khuza'ah to gather news for him and then he proceeded. When he arrived at a village called Al-Ashtat, his advance regiment came back and said, 'The Quraysh have gathered their forces against you, including Al-Ahabish tribes. They are intent on fighting you, stopping you, and preventing you.' The Messenger ﷺ said,\nأَشِيرُوا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ عَلَيَّ، أَتُرَوْنَ أَنْ نَمِيلَ عَلَىٰ عِيَالِهِمْ وَذَرَارِيِّ هٰؤُلَاءِ، الَّذِينَ يُرِيدُونَ أَنْ يَصُدُّونَا عَنِ الْبَيْتِ؟\n(Give me your opinion, O people! Do you think we should attack the families and offspring of those who seek to prevent us from reaching the House?)\" in another narration, the Prophet ﷺ said,\nتُرَوْنَ أَنْ نَمِيلَ عَلَىٰ ذَرَارِيِّ هٰؤُلَاءِ الَّذِينَ أَعَانُوهُمْ، فَإِنْ يَأْتُونَا كَانَ اللهُ قَدْ قَطَعَ عُنُقًا مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ، وَإِلَّا تَرَكْنَاهُمْ مَحْزُونِينَ\n(Do you think we should attack the families of those who helped the Quraysh? If they come to defend against us, then Allah would have diminished the idolator forces. Or we leave them to grieve!)\" In another narration, the Prophet ﷺ said,\nفَإِنْ قَعَدُوا قَعَدُوا مَوْتُورِينَ مَجْهُودِينَ مَحْزُونِينَ، وَإِنْ نَجَوْا يَكُنْ عُنُقًا قَطَعَهَا اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ. أَمْ تُرَوْنَ أَنْ نَؤُمَّ الْبَيْتَ فَمَنْ صَدَّنَا عَنْهُ قَاتَلْنَاهُ\n(If they remain where they have gathered, they do so in grief, fatigued and depressed. If they save their families, it would be a neck that Allah the Exalted and Most Honored has cut off. Or, should we head towards the House and if anyone prevents us from reaching it we would fight them?)\n\"Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, said, \"O, Allah's Messenger! You only intended to visit the House, not to kill anyone or start a war. Therefore, head towards the House and whoever stands in our way, then we will fight him.\" In another narration, Abu Bakr said, \"Allah and His Messenger know that we only came to perform 'Umrah not to fight anyone. However, anyone who tries to prevent us from reaching the House, we will fight him.\" The Prophet ﷺ said,\nفَرُوحُوا إِذَنْ\n(Go forth then.) In another narration, the Prophet ﷺ said,\nفَامْضُوا عَلَى اسْمِ اللهِ تَعَالَىٰ\n(Go forth, in the Name of Allah, the Exalted.) \"When they proceeded for a distance, the Prophet ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ خَالِدَ بْنَ الْوَلِيدِ فِي خَيْلٍ لِقُرَيْشٍ طَلِيعَةً، فَخُذُوا ذَاتَ الْيَمِينِ\n(Khalid bin Al-Walid is leading the cavalry of Quraysh forming the front of the army, so take the path on the right.)\nBy Allah, Khalid did not perceive the arrival of the Muslims until the dust arising from the march of the Muslim army reached him, then he turned back hurriedly to inform the Quraysh. The Prophet ﷺ went on advancing until he reached the Thaniyyah (i. e., a mountainous way) through which he could reach them. The she-camel of the Prophet ﷺ sat down. The people tried their best to cause her to rise, but it was in vain. So, they said, 'Al-Qaswa' has become stubborn! Al-Qaswa' has become stubborn!' The Prophet ﷺ said,\nمَا خَلَأَتِ الْقَصْوَاءُ وَمَا ذَاكَ لَهَا بِخُلُقٍ، وَلٰكِنْ حَبَسَها حَابِسُ الْفِيلِ\n(Al-Qaswa' has not become stubborn, for stubbornness is not her habit, but she was stopped by Him Who stopped the elephant.) Then he ﷺ said,\nوَالَّذِي نَفْسِي بِيَدِهِ! لَا يَسْأَلُونِّي خُطَّةً يُعَظِّمُونَ فِيهَا حُرُمَاتِ اللهِ تَعَالَىٰ إِلَّا أَعْطَيْتُهُمْ إِيَّاهَا\n(By the Name of Him in Whose Hands is my soul, if they ask me anything which will respect the ordinances of Allah, the Exalted, I will grant it to them.)\nThe Prophet ﷺ then rebuked the she-camel and she got up. The Prophet ﷺ changed his direction, until he dismounted at the farthest end of Al-Hudaybiyyah. There was a pit containing a little water which the people used in small amounts, and after a short time the people exhausted all its water and complained of thirst to Allah's Messenger ﷺ. The Prophet ﷺ took an arrow out of his quiver and ordered them to put the arrow in the pit. By Allah, the water started flowing and continued sprouting until all the people quenched their thirst and returned satisfied.\nWhile they were still in that state, Budayl bin Warqa' Al-Khuza'i came with some people from his tribe, Khuza'ah. They were the advisers of Allah's Messenger ﷺ who would keep no secret from him and were from the people of Tihamah. Budayl said, 'I left (the tribes of) Ka'b bin Lu'ay and 'Amir bin Lu'ay residing at the abundant water of Al-Hudaybiyyah. They had milk camels with them, intending to wage war against you and prevent you from visiting the Ka'bah.' Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nإِنَّا لَمْ نَجِىءْ لِقِتَالِ أَحَدٍ، وَلٰكِنْ جِئْنَا مُعْتَمِرِينَ، وَإِنَّ قُرَيْشًا قَدْ نَهَكَتْهُمُ الْحَرْبُ، وَأَضَرَّتْ بِهِمْ، فَإِنْ شَاؤُوا مَادَدْتُهُمْ مُدَّةً وَيُخَلُّوا بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَ النَّاسِ، فَإِنْ أَظْهَرْ، فَإِنْ شَاءُوا أَنْ يَدْخُلُوا فِيمَا دَخَلَ فِيهِ النَّاسُ فَعَلُوا، وَإِلَّا فَقَدْ جَمُّوا، وَإِنْ هُمْ أَبَوْا فَوَالَّذِي نَفْسِي بِيَدِهِ! لَأُقَاتِلَنَّهُمْ عَلَىٰ أَمْرِي هٰذَا حَتّٰى تَنْفَرِدَ سَالِفَتِي أَوْ لَيُنْفِذَنَّ اللهُ أَمْرَهُ\n(We have not come to fight anyone, but to perform 'Umrah. No doubt, war has weakened Quraysh and they have suffered great losses. So if they wish, I will conclude a truce with them, during which they should refrain from interfering between me and others. If I have victory over those infidels, Quraysh will have the option to embrace Islam as the other people do, if they wish. They will at least get strong enough to fight. But if they do not accept the truce, by Allah in Whose Hands my life is, I will fight with them defending my cause until I get killed, but (I am sure) Allah will definitely make His cause victorious.)\nBudayl said, 'I will inform them of what you have said.' So, he set off until he reached Quraysh and said, 'We have come from that man whom we heard saying something which we will disclose to you, if you should like.' Some of the fools among the Quraysh shouted that they were not in need of this information, but the wiser among them said, 'Relate what you heard him saying.' Budayl said, 'I heard him saying such and such,' relating what the Prophet ﷺ had told him. 'Urwah bin Mas'ud stood up and said, 'O people! Aren't you the sons?' They said, 'Yes.' He added, 'Am I not the father?' They said, 'Yes.' He said, 'Do you mistrust me?' They said, 'No.' He said, 'Don't you know that I invited the people of 'Ukaz for your help, and when they refused I brought my relatives and children and those who obeyed me?' They said, 'Yes.' He said, 'Well, this man has offered you a reasonable proposal, it is better for you to accept it and allow me to meet him.' They said, 'You may meet him.'\nSo, he went to the Prophet ﷺ and started talking to him. The Prophet ﷺ said the same to him as he had to Budayl bin Warqa. Then 'Urwah said, 'O Muhammad! Won't you feel any qualms by exterminating your relations? Have you ever heard of anyone among the Arabs annihilating his relatives before you On the other hand, if the reverse should happen, by Allah, I do not see dignified people here, but people from various tribes who would run away leaving you alone.' Hearing that, Abu Bakr verbally abused him and said, 'Go suck Al-Lat's womb! Are you saying we would run and leave the Prophet alone?' 'Urwah said, 'Who is that man?' They said, 'He is Abu Bakr.' 'Urwah said to Abu Bakr, 'By Him in Whose Hands my life is, were it not for the favor which you did to me and which I did not compensate, I would rebuke you.' 'Urwah kept on talking to the Prophet ﷺ and seizing the Prophet's beard as he was talking, while Al-Mughirah bin Shu'bah was standing near the head of the Prophet ﷺ, holding a sword and wearing a helmet. Whenever 'Urwah stretched his hand towards the beard of the Prophet ﷺ, Al-Mughirah would hit his hand with the handle of the sword and say, 'Remove your hand from the beard of Allah's Messenger.' 'Urwah raised his head and asked, 'Who is that?' The people said, 'He is Al-Mughirah bin Shu'bah.' 'Urwah said, 'O treacherous (one)! Am I not doing my best to prevent evil consequences of your treachery?'\nBefore embracing Islam, Al-Mughirah was in the company of some people. He killed them, took their property and came (to Al-Madinah) to embrace Islam. The Prophet ﷺ said to him,\nأَمَّا الْإِسْلَامُ فَأَقْبَلُ، وَأَمَّا الْمَالُ فَلَسْتُ مِنْهُ فِي شَيْءٍ\n(As regards to your Islam, I accept it, but as for the property I do not take anything of it.)\nUrwah then started looking at the Companions of the Prophet ﷺ. By Allah, whenever Allah's Messenger ﷺ spat, the spittle would fall in the hand of one of them, who would rub it on his face and skin. If he ordered them, they would carry his orders immediately, if he performed ablution, they would struggle to take the remaining water, and when they spoke to him, they would lower their voices and would not look at his face constantly out of respect. 'Urwah returned to his people and said, 'O people! By Allah, I have been to the kings and to Caesar, Khosrau and An-Najashi. Yet, by Allah! I have never seen any of them respected by his courtiers, as much as, Muhammad is respected by his companions. By Allah, if he spat, the spittle would fall into the hand of one of them and he would rub it on his face and skin. If he ordered them, they would carry out his order immediately, if he performed ablution, they would struggle to take the remaining water, and when they spoke, they would lower their voices and would not look at his face constantly out of respect. No doubt, he has presented to you a good reasonable offer, so please accept it.'\nA man from the tribe of Bani Kinanah said, 'Allow me to go to him,' and they allowed him. When he approached the Prophet ﷺ and his Companions, Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nهٰذَا فُلَانٌ وَهُوَ مِنْ قَوْمٍ يُعَظِّمُونَ الْبُدْنَ فَابْعَثُوهَا لَهُ\n(He is so-and-so who belongs to the tribe that respects the sacrificial camels. So, bring the sacrificial camels before him.) So, the sacrificial camels were brought before him and the people received him while they were reciting Talbiyah. When he saw that scene, he said, 'Glorified is Allah! It is not fair to prevent these people from visiting the Ka'bah.' When he returned to his people, he said, 'I saw the sacrificial camels garlanded and marked. I do not think it is advisable to prevent them from visiting the Ka'bah.' Another person called Mikraz bin Hafs stood up and sought their permission to go to Muhammad ﷺ, and they allowed him, too. When he approached the Muslims, the Prophet ﷺ said,\nهَذَا مِكْرَزٌ وَهُوَ رَجُلٌ فَاجِرٌ\n(Here is Mikraz and he is a vicious man.) Mikraz started talking to the Prophet ﷺ and as he was talking, Suhayl bin 'Amr came.\"\nMa'mar said that Ayyub said to him that 'Ikrimah said, \"When Suhayl bin 'Amr came, the Prophet ﷺ said,\nقَدْ سَهُلَ لَكُمْ مِنْ أَمْرِكُمْ\n(Now the matter has become easy for you.)\" Ma'mar said that Az-Zuhri narrated, \"When Suhayl bin 'Amr came, he said to the Prophet ﷺ, 'Please conclude a peace treaty with us.' So, the Prophet ﷺ called 'Ali bin Abi Talib and said to him,\nاكْتُبْ بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\n(Write: In the Name of Allah, Ar-Rahman, Ar-Rahim.) Suhayl bin 'Amr said, 'As for Ar-Rahman, by Allah, I do not know what it means. So write: By Your Name, O Allah, as you used to write previously.' The Muslims said, 'By Allah, we will not write except: By the Name of Allah, Ar-Rahman, Ar-Rahim.' The Prophet ﷺ said,\nاكْتُبْ بِاسْمِكَ اللّٰهُمَّ\n(Write: \"In Your Name O Allah.\") Then he dictated,\nهذَا مَا قَاضَىٰ عَلَيْهِ مُحَمَّدٌ رَسُولُ اللهِ\n(This is a peace treaty, which Muhammad, Allah's Messenger has concluded.) Suhayl said, 'By Allah, if we knew that you are Allah's Messenger, we would not prevent you from visiting the Ka'bah, and would not fight with you. So, write: Muhammad bin 'Abdullah.' The Prophet ﷺ said to him,\nوَاللهِ إِنِّي لَرَسُولُ اللهِ وَإِنْ كَذَّبْتُمُونِي، اكْتُبْ مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ عَبْدِاللهِ\n(By Allah! I am the Messenger of Allah even if your people do not believe me. Write: \"Muhammad bin 'Abdullah.\")\"\nAz-Zuhri continued, \"The Prophet ﷺ accepted all those things, since he had already said that he would accept everything they would demand if it respects the ordinance of Allah, the Exalted.\"\nThe Hadith continues, \"The Prophet ﷺ said to Suhayl,\nعَلَىٰ أَنْ تُخَلُّوا بَيْنَنَا وَبَيْنَ الْبَيْتِ فَنَطُوفَ بِهِ\n(On the condition that you allow us to visit the House so that we may perform Tawaf around it.)\nSuhayl said, 'By Allah, we will not, so as not to give the Arabs a chance to say that we have yielded to your pressure, but we will allow you next year.' So, the Prophet ﷺ had that written. Then Suhayl said, 'We also stipulate that you should return to us whoever comes to you from us, even if he embraced your religion.' The Muslims protested, 'Glorified be Allah! How can a person be returned to the idolators after he has become a Muslim?' While they were in this state Abu Jandal bin Suhayl bin 'Amr came from the valley of Makkah staggering with his chains and fell down among the Muslims. Suhayl said, 'O Muhammad! This is the very first term with which we make peace with you, that is, you shall return Abu Jandal to me.' The Prophet ﷺ said,\nإِنَّا لَمْ نَقْضِ الْكِتَابَ بَعْدُ\n(The peace treaty has not been written yet.) Suhayl said, 'Then by Allah, I will never conduct peace with you.' The Prophet ﷺ said,\nفَأَجِزْهُ لِي\n(Release him to me,) and Suhayl responded, 'I will never allow you to keep him.' The Prophet ﷺ said,\nبَلَىٰ فَافْعَلْ\n(Yes, do.) He said, 'I will not.' Mikraz said, 'We allow you (to keep him).' Abu Jandal said, 'O, Muslims! Will I be returned to the idolators although I have come as a Muslim? Don't you see how much I have suffered?' Abu Jandal had been tortured severely for the cause of Allah, the Exalted and Most Honored.\nUmar bin Al-Khattab said, 'I went to the Prophet and said: Aren't you truly the Messenger of Allah?' The Prophet ﷺ said,\nبَلَىٰ\n(Yes, indeed.) I said, 'Isn't our cause just and the cause of the enemy unjust?' He said,\nبَلَىٰ\n(Yes.) I said, 'Then why should we be humble in our religion?' He said,\nإِنِّي رَسُولُ اللهِ وَلَسْتُ أَعْصِيهِ وَهُوَ نَاصِرِي\n(I am Allah's Messenger and I do not disobey Him, and He will make me victorious.) I said, 'Didn't you tell us that we would go to the Ka'bah and perform Tawaf around it?' He said,\nبَلَىٰ أَفَأَخْبَرْتُكَ أَنَّا نَأْتِيهِ الْعَامَ؟\n(Yes, but did I tell you that we would visit the Ka'bah this year?) I said, 'No.' He said,\nفَإِنَّكَ آتِيهِ وَمُطَّوِّفٌ بِهِ\n(So you will visit it and perform Tawaf around it.) 'Umar further said, 'I went to Abu Bakr and said: O Abu Bakr! Isn't he truly Allah's Prophet?' He replied, 'Yes.' I said, 'Is not our cause just and the cause of our enemy unjust?' He said, 'Yes.' I said, 'Then why should we be humble in our religion?' He said, 'O you man! Indeed, he is Allah's Messenger and he does not disobey his Lord, and He will make him victorious. Adhere to him for, by Allah, he is on the right path.' I said, 'Was he not telling us that we would go to the Ka'bah and perform Tawaf around it?' He said, 'Yes, but did he tell you that you would go to the Ka'bah this year?' I said, 'No.' He said, 'You will go to the Ka'bah and perform Tawaf around it.'\nAz-Zuhri said, \"'Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, said, 'I performed many good deeds as expiation for the improper questions I asked them.'\"\n\"When the writing of the peace treaty was concluded, Allah's Messenger ﷺ said to his Companions,\nقُومُوا فَانْحَرُوا ثُمَّ احْلِقُوا\n(Get up and slaughter your sacrifices and have your heads shaved.)\nBy Allah none of them got up, and the Prophet ﷺ repeated his order thrice. When none of them got up, he left them and went to Umm Salamah and told her of the people's attitudes towards him. Umm Salamah said, 'O Prophet of Allah! Do you want your order to be carried out? Go out and don't say a word to anybody until you have slaughtered your sacrifice and call your barber to shave your head.' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ went out and did not talk to anyone until he did what she suggested, slaughtered the sacrifice and shaved his head. Seeing that, the Companions got up, slaughtered their sacrifices, and started shaving the heads of one another. There was so much of a rush – and sadness – that there was a danger of killing each other. Then some believing women came and Allah the Exalted and most Honored revealed the following Ayat,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِذَا جَاءَكُمُ الْمُؤْمِنَاتُ\n(O you who believe! When believing women come to you)(60:10), until,\nبِعِصَمِ الْكَوَافِرِ\n(Likewise hold not the disbelieving women as wives.) 'Umar then divorced two of his wives, who were disbelievers. Later on Mu'awiyah bin Abu Sufyan married one of them, and Safwan bin Umayyah married the other.\nWhen the Prophet ﷺ returned to Al-Madinah, Abu Basir, a new Muslim convert from the Quraysh, came to him. The disbelievers sent two men in pursuit who said to the Prophet ﷺ, 'Abide by the promise you gave us.' So, the Prophet ﷺ handed him over to them. They took him out (of Al-Madinah) until they reached Dhul-Hulayfah where they dismounted to eat some dates they had with them. Abu Basir said to one of them, 'By Allah, O, so-and-so, I see you have a fine sword.' The other drew it out (of its sheath) and said, 'Yes, by Allah, it is very fine and I have tried it many times.' Abu Basir said, 'Let me have a look at it.' When the other gave the sword to Abu Basir, he struck him with it until he died. His companion ran away until he reached Al-Madinah, entering the Masjid running. When Allah's Messenger ﷺ saw him he said,\nلَقَدْ رَأَى هٰذَا ذُعْرًا\n(This man appears to have been frightened.) When he reached the Prophet ﷺ he said, 'My companion has been murdered, by Allah, and I would have been murdered too. ' Abu Basir came and said, 'O Allah's Messenger, by Allah! Allah has made you fulfill your obligations by returning me to them, but Allah the Exalted has saved me from them.' The Prophet ﷺ said,\nوَيْلُ أُمِّهِ مِسْعَرَ حَرْبٍ لَوْ كَانَ مَعَهُ أَحَدٌ\n(Woe to his mother! What an excellent war kindler he would be, if he only have supporters.)\nWhen Abu Basir heard this from the Prophet ﷺ, he understood that he would return him to the idolators again, so he set off until he reached the seashore. Abu Jandal bin Suhayl also got himself released from the disbelievers and joined Abu Basir. Thereafter, whenever a man from Quraysh embraced Islam he would follow Abu Basir until they formed a strong group. By Allah, whenever they heard about a caravan of the Quraysh heading towards Ash-Sham (Greater Syria), they stopped it, attacked and killed the disbelievers and took their properties. The people of Quraysh sent a message to the Prophet ﷺ requesting him for the sake of Allah and kith and kin to send for (Abu Basir and his companions) promising that whoever among them came to the Prophet ﷺ, would be secure. So, the Prophet ﷺ sent for them and Allah the Exalted and Most Honored revealed the following Ayat,\nوَهُوَ الَّذِي كَفَّ أَيْدِيَهُمْ عَنْكُمْ وَأَيْدِيَكُمْ عَنْهُمْ بِبَطْنِ مَكَّةَ\n(And He it is Who has withheld their hands from you and your hands from them in the midst of Makkah),(48:24) until,\nحَمِيَّةَ الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ\n(the pride and haughtiness of the time of ignorance,) Their pride and haughtiness was that they did not confess that Muhammad ﷺ was the Prophet of Allah, refused to write, 'In the Name of Allah, Ar-Rahman, Ar-Rahim,' and prevented Muslims from visiting the Ka'bah.\" This is the narration Al-Bukhari collected in the Book of Tafsir, 'Umrat Al-Hudaybiyyah, Hajj, and so forth. Allah is the Only One sought for help, all reliance is on Him alone and there is no might or strength except from Allah, the Almighty, the All-Wise.\nAl-Bukhari narrated in the Book of Tafsir that Habib bin Abi Thabit said that he went to Abu Wa'il asking him about something and he said, \"We were at Siffin, when a man said, 'Do you not see those who call to Allah's Book?' 'Ali bin Abi Talib said, 'Yes.' Sahl bin Hunayf said, 'Do not feel certain in the reliability of your own opinions! On the day of Hudaybiyyah, the day the treaty of peace was signed between the Prophet ﷺ and idolators, had we found a chance to fight, we would have done so.' 'Umar came (to the Prophet ﷺ) and said, 'Are we not on the true cause and theirs is the false cause? Are not our killed in Paradise and theirs in the Fire?' He said, 'Yes.' 'Umar said, 'Why then should we be humble with regards to the cause of our religion? Why should we go back before Allah decides in the matter between us (between Muslims and the idolators.)' The Prophet ﷺ said,\nيَا ابْنَ الْخَطَّابِ إِنِّي رَسُولُ اللهِ وَلَنْ يُضَيِّعَنِي اللهُ أَبَدًا\n(O son of Al-Khattab! I am Allah's Messenger and He will never abandon me.)\nUmar left while feeling angry and soon went to Abu Bakr and said, 'O Abu Bakr! Are we not on the true cause and they are on falsehood?' Abu Bakr said, 'O son of Al-Khattab! He is Allah's Messenger and Allah will never abandon him.' Surat Al-Fath was later revealed.\"' Al-Bukhari collected this Hadith in several other parts of his Sahih, and so did Muslim and An-Nasa'i using various chains of narration from Abu Wa'il, Sufyan bin Salamah, from Sahl bin Hunayf. Some of these narrations read,\n\"O people! Accuse sheer opinion (of being imperfect)! On the day Abu Jandal came, I saw myself willing to reject the command of Allah's Messenger ﷺ, had I had the chance. In yet another narration, \"Surat Al-Fath was revealed and the Messenger of Allah ﷺ called 'Umar bin Al-Khattab and recited it to him.\"\nImam Ahmad recorded that Anas said, \"Quraysh resorted to peace with the Prophet ﷺ. Suhayl bin 'Amr was among the idolators then. The Prophet ﷺ said to 'Ali,\nاكْتُبْ بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\n(Write: \"In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\") Suhayl said, 'We do not know the meaning of: In the Name of Allah, Ar-Rahman Ar-Rahim. However, write what we do know: In Your Name, O Allah!' The Messenger ﷺ said,\nاكْتُبْ مِنْ مُحَمَّدٍ رَسُولِ اللهِ\n(Write: \"From Muhammad, Allah's Messenger,\") and Suhayl said, 'If we knew that you are Allah's Messenger, we would have followed you. However, write your name and the name of your father.' The Prophet ﷺ said,\nاكْتُبْ مِنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ عَبْدِاللهِ\n(Write: \"From Muhammad son of 'Abdullah.\") They set the terms with the Prophet ﷺ that, 'If anyone comes from your side to us, we will not send him back to you. If anyone from among us came to you, you send him back to us.' 'Ali said, 'O Allah's Messenger! Should I write this,' and the Prophet ﷺ said,\nنَعَمْ، إِنَّهُ مَنْ ذَهَبَ مِنَّا إِلَيْهِمْ فَأَبْعَدَهُ اللهُ\n(Yes. Surely, those who revert from our side and go to them, then may Allah cast them away.) Muslim also collected this Hadith.\"\nAhmad recorded that 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas said, \"When Al-Haruriyyah rebelled, they set a separate camp for their group. I said to them, 'On the day of Al-Hudaybiyyah, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ agreed to conduct peace with the idolators. He said to 'Ali,\nاكْتُبْ يَا عَلِيُّ، هٰذَا مَا صَالَحَ عَلَيْهِ مُحَمَّدٌ رَسُولُ اللهِ\n(Write, O 'Ali: \"These are the terms agreed to by Muhammad, Allah's Messenger.\")' The idolators said, 'If we knew that you are Allah's Messenger, we would not have fought you.' Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nامْحُ يَا عَلِيُّ، اللّٰهُمَّ إِنَّكَ تَعْلَمُ أَنِّي رَسُولُكَ، امْحُ يَا عَلِيُّ وَاكْتُبْ: هٰذَا مَا صَالَحَ عَلَيْهِ مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ عَبْدِاللهِ\n(O 'Ali! Erase it. O Allah! You know that I am Your Messenger. O 'Ali! Erase it and write instead: \"These are the peace terms agreed to by Muhammad bin 'Abdullah.\")\nBy Allah, Allah's Messenger ﷺ is better than 'Ali, and the Messenger ﷺ erased his title. However, erasing his title did not mean that he was erased from being a Prophet. Have I given you sufficient proof in this.' They said, 'Yes.'\" Abu Dawud also collected a similar narration.\nImam Ahmad recorded that 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas said, \"On the day of Hudaybiyyah, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ slaughtered seventy sacrificial camels, including a camel that belonged to Abu Jahl. When the camel was prevented from coming to the House, she cried just as she would cry when seeing her offspring.\"","href":"/tafsir/48?verse=25","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:48:27","title":"Ibn Kathir · 48:27–28","text":"Indeed Allah shall fulfill the true vision which He showed to His Messenger in very truth. Certainly, you shall enter Al-Masjid Al-Haram, if Allah wills, secure, (some) having your heads shaved, and (some) having your hair cut short, having no fear. He knew what you knew not, and He granted besides that a near victor (27)He it is Who has sent His Messenger with guidance and the religion of truth, that He may make it superior to all religions. And All-Sufficient is Allah as a Witness (28)\nAllah has indeed fulfilled the True Vision which He showed to His Prophet (ﷺ)\nIn a dream, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ saw himself entering Makkah and performing Tawaf around the House. He told his Companions about this dream when he was still in Al-Madinah. When they went to Makkah in the year of Al-Hudaybiyyah, none of them doubted that the Prophet's vision would come true that year. When the treaty of peace was conducted and they had to return to Al-Madinah that year, being allowed to return to Makkah the next year, some of the Companions disliked what happened. 'Umar bin Al-Khattab asked about this, saying, \"Haven't you told us that we will go to the House and perform Tawaf around it?\" The Prophet ﷺ said,\nبَلَىٰ أَفَأَخْبَرْتُكَ أَنَّكَ تَأْتِيهِ عَامَكَ هٰذَا؟\n(Yes. Have I told you that you will go to it this year?) 'Umar said, \"No.\" The Prophet ﷺ said,\nفَإِنَّكَ آتِيهِ وَمُطَّوِّفٌ بِهِ\n(Then you will go to it and perform Tawaf around it.) 'Umar received the same answer from Abu Bakr As-Siddiq, letter for letter. This is why Allah the Exalted and Most honored said,\nلَقَدْ صَدَقَ اللَّهُ رَسُولَهُ الرُّؤْيَا بِالْحَقِّ ۖ لَتَدْخُلُنَّ الْمَسْجِدَ الْحَرَامَ إِنْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ\n(Indeed Allah shall fulfill the true vision which He showed to His Messenger in very truth. Certainly, you shall enter Al-Masjid Al-Haram, if Allah wills,) and He willed that this matter shall certainly occur,\nآمِنِينَ\n(secure,) means, 'upon your entering,'\nمُحَلِّقِينَ رُءُوسَكُمْ وَمُقَصِّرِينَ\n((some) having your heads shaved, and (some) having your hair cut short,) and some of them indeed had their head hair shaved, while some of them had their head hair shortened. The Two Sahihs recorded that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nرَحِمَ اللهُ الْمُحَلِّقِينَ\n(O Allah! Be merciful to those who have their head shaved.) The people said, \"O Allah's Messenger! And (invoke Allah for) those who get their hair cut short.\" He ﷺ said,\nرَحِمَ اللهُ الْمُحَلِّقِينَ\n(O Allah! Be merciful to those who have their head shaved.) The people said, \"O Allah's Messenger! And those who get their hair cut short.\" The Prophet ﷺ said,\nرَحِمَ اللهُ الْمُحَلِّقِينَ\n(O Allah! Be merciful to those who have their head shaved.) The people said, \"O Allah's Messenger! And those who get their hair cut short.\" The Prophet ﷺ said (the third or the fourth time),\nوَالْمُقَصِّرِينَ\n(And to those who get their hair cut short.) Allah said,\nلَا تَخَافُونَ\n(having no fear), indicating that they will be safe and will have no fear when they enter Makkah. This occurred in the 'Umrah performed the following year, on the seventh year of Hijrah during the month of Dhul-Qa'dah.\nWhen the Messenger ﷺ left from Al-Hudaybiyyah, during the month of Dhul-Qa'dah (the sixth year of Hijrah), he went back to Al-Madinah. He remained in Al-Madinah during the months of Dhul-Hijjah and Al-Muharram. In Safar, he marched forth to Khaybar, and Allah opened that city for him, partly by force and partly by its people surrendering to him. Khaybar was a wealthy province that had abundant date trees and vegetation. The Prophet ﷺ hired the (defeated) Jews of Khaybar to attend to a part of its green fields and divided the province among those who attended Al-Hudaybiyyah with him. No one else except those Companions took part in attacking Khaybar, except Ja'far bin Abi Talib, who came back with his companions from Ethiopia. Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari and his people also attended that battle. None of them were absent except Abu Dujanah Simak bin Kharashah, according to Ibn Zayd. This fact is well recorded in (the Books of) history. The Prophet ﷺ then returned to Al-Madinah.\nWhen the month of Dhul-Qa'dah came, the seventh year of Hijrah, the Prophet ﷺ went to Makkah for 'Umrah accompanied by those who were with him at Al-Hudaybiyyah. He resumed Ihram from Dhul-Hulayfah and took the sacrificial animals with him. It was said that the sacrificial animals were sixty. The Prophet ﷺ and his Companions started reciting the Talbiyah aloud. When they came close to Marr Az-Zahran, he sent Muhammad bin Maslamah before him with the horses and weapons. When the idolators saw this advance regiment, they were overwhelmed with fear. They thought that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ would attack them and that he had betrayed the treaty that he conducted with them, which stipulated cessation of hostilities for ten years. The idolators went quickly to Makkah to inform its people. When the Prophet ﷺ made camp in the area of Marr Az-Zahran, where he was close enough to see the idols that were erected all around the Haram, he sent the weaponry, arrows, arrow cases and spears, to the valley of Ya'jaj. He next went on his way towards Makkah with the swords resting in their sheaths, just as he agreed to in the peace treaty. While the Prophet ﷺ was still on the way to Makkah, the Quraysh sent Mikraz bin Hafs who said, \"O Muhammad! We never knew you to be one who betrays his promises.\" The Prophet ﷺ said,\nوَمَا ذَاكَ؟\n(Why do you say that?) Mikraz said, \"You are headed towards us with the weaponry, the arrows and the spears.\" The Prophet ﷺ said,\nلَمْ يَكُنْ ذٰلِكَ وَقَدْ بَعَثْنَا بِهِ إِلَىٰ يَأْجَجَ\n(I did not do that, I sent all that to the valley of Ya'jaj.)\nMikraz said, \"This is the way we knew you to be, trustworthy and keeping to your promises.\" The leaders of the disbelievers left Makkah so that they would not have to look at the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and his Companions, out of rage and anger. As for the rest of the people of Makkah, men, women and children, they sat on the pathways and house roofs watching the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and his Companions. The Messenger ﷺ entered Makkah with his Companions while reciting the Talbiyah. The Prophet ﷺ sent the sacrificial animals to Dhu Tuwa while riding his camel, Al-Qaswa', the same camel he was riding on the day of Hudaybiyyah. 'Abdullah bin Rawahah, from Al-Ansar, was holding the bridle of the Prophet's camel and repeating this poem,\n\"In the Name of He, other than Whose religion there is no true religion, In the Name of He, Whom Muhammad is His Messenger, O children of the disbelievers, stay out of his way, For today, we shall impose on you the fulfillment of its interpretation, Just as we fought with you to accept its revelation, Severe fighting that removes the heads from where they rest, And overwhelms the companion from attending to his companion, Ar-Rahman has sent down in His revelation, In pages that are being recited before His Messenger, That the best death is that which occurs in His cause, So, O Lord, I believe in its statements.\" This story is collected from various narrations.\nImam Ahmad recorded that 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas said, \"When Allah's Messenger ﷺ and his Companions came to Makkah, the fever of Yathrib (Al-Madinah) had weakened and bothered them. The idolators circulated the news that a group of people were coming to them and that they had been weakened and bothered by the fever of Yathrib (Al-Madinah). The idolators sat in the area close to Al-Hijr. Allah conveyed to His Prophet what the idolators said, so he ordered his Companions to do Ramal in the first three rounds, so that the idolaters witness their strength. The Companions did Ramal the first three rounds. He also ordered them to walk normally between the two corners, for from there the idolators would not be able to see them. The Prophet ﷺ did not order them to do Ramal in all the rounds of Tawaf out of pity for them. The idolators commented, 'Are these the people whom you claimed were weakened by the fever. They are stronger than so-and-so!'\" The Two Sahihs also recorded this Hadith.\nIn another narration, \"Allah's Messenger ﷺ and his Companions came (to Makkah) on the morning of the fourth day of Dhul-Qa'dah. The idolators circulated the news that a group of people was coming to them, who had been weakened by the fever of Yathrib (Al-Madinah). So, the Prophet ordered his Companions to do Ramal in the first three rounds of Tawaf. The Prophet ﷺ did not order them to do Ramal in all the rounds of Tawaf out of pity for them.\"\nAl-Bukhari recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"In the year when the Prophet ﷺ came as stipulated by the peace treaty, he said, 'Perform Ramal.' So that the idolators may witness their strength. At that time, the idolators were watching from the area of Qu'ayqi'an.\" Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Allah's Messenger ﷺ performed Tawaf of the Ka'bah and the Sa'y at As-Safa and Al-Marwah to show his strength to the idolators.\"\nAl-Bukhari recorded that 'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, \"Allah's Messenger ﷺ set out for 'Umrah, but the Quraysh idolators prevented him from reaching the Ka'bah. So, he slaughtered his sacrifice, got his head shaved at Al-Hudaybiyyah, agreed to a formal pact with them that he would perform 'Umrah the following year, would not carry weapons against them, except swords and would not stay in Makkah, except for the period they allowed. The Prophet ﷺ performed the 'Umrah in the following year and entered Makkah according to the treaty. And when he stayed for three days, the idolators ordered him to depart, and he ﷺ departed.\"\nAllah's statement,\nفَعَلِمَ مَا لَمْ تَعْلَمُوا فَجَعَلَ مِنْ دُونِ ذَٰلِكَ فَتْحًا قَرِيبًا\n(He knew what you knew not, and He granted besides that a near victory.) means, Allah the Exalted and Most Honored knew the benefit and goodness of turning you away from Makkah and preventing you from entering it in the year of Al-Hudaybiyyah, He knew that which you had no knowledge of,\nفَجَعَلَ مِنْ دُونِ ذَٰلِكَ\n(and He granted besides that) 'before entering Makkah as you were promised in the vision that the Prophet saw, He granted a close victory, i.e. the treaty of peace that you conducted between you and your idolator enemies.\nThe Good News that Muslims will conquer the Known World, and ultimately the Entire World\nAllah the Exalted and Most Honored said, while delivering the glad tidings to the believers that the Messenger ﷺ will triumph over his enemies and the rest of the people of the earth,\nهُوَ الَّذِي أَرْسَلَ رَسُولَهُ بِالْهُدَىٰ وَدِينِ الْحَقِّ\n(He it is Who has sent His Messenger with guidance and the religion of truth,) with beneficial knowledge and righteous good deeds. Indeed, the Islamic Shari'ah has two factors, knowledge and deeds. The true religious knowledge is by definition true, and the accepted Islamic acts are by definition accepted. Therefore, the news and creed that this religion conveys are true and its commandments are just,\nلِيُظْهِرَهُ عَلَى الدِّينِ كُلِّهِ\n(that He may make it superior to all religions.) all the religions of the people of the earth, Arabs and non-Arabs alike, whether having certain ideologies or being atheists or idolators.\nوَكَفَىٰ بِاللَّهِ شَهِيدًا\n(And All-Sufficient is Allah as a Witness.) that Muhammad is His Messenger ﷺ and that He will grant him victory. Allah the Exalted and Most Honored has the best knowledge.","href":"/tafsir/48?verse=27","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:48:29","title":"Ibn Kathir · 48:29","text":"Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah. And those who are with him are severe against disbelievers, and merciful among themselves. You see them bowing falling down prostrate, seeking reward from Allah and acceptance. The mark of them is on their faces from the traces of prostration. This is their description in the Tawrah. But their description in the Injil is like a seed which sends forth its shoot, then makes it strong, and becomes thick and it stands straight on its stem, delighting the sowers, that He may enrage the disbelievers with them. Allah has promised those among them who believe and do righteous good deeds, forgiveness and a mighty reward (29)\nQualities of the Faithful Believers and Their Refinement\nAllah declares that without doubt, Muhammad ﷺ is truly His Messenger,\nمُحَمَّدٌ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ ۚ\n(Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.) and this quality includes every beautiful description. Allah praises the Companions of the Messenger ﷺ, may Allah be pleased with them all,\nوَالَّذِينَ مَعَهُ أَشِدَّاءُ عَلَى الْكُفَّارِ رُحَمَاءُ بَيْنَهُمْ ۖ\n(And those who are with him are severe against disbelievers, merciful among themselves.) just as He, the Exalted and Most Honored, said in another Ayah,\nفَسَوْفَ يَأْتِي اللَّهُ بِقَوْمٍ يُحِبُّهُمْ وَيُحِبُّونَهُ أَذِلَّةٍ عَلَى الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَعِزَّةٍ عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ\n(Allah will bring a people whom He will love and they will love Him; humble towards the believers, stern towards the disbelievers.)(5:54)\nThis is the description of the believers; harsh with the disbelievers, merciful and kind to the believers, angry without smiling before the disbelievers, smiling and beaming with pleasure before his believing brother. Allah the Exalted said in another Ayah,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا قَاتِلُوا الَّذِينَ يَلُونَكُمْ مِنَ الْكُفَّارِ وَلْيَجِدُوا فِيكُمْ غِلْظَةً ۚ\n(O you who believe! Fight those of the disbelievers who are close to you, and let them find harshness in you.)(9:123) The Prophet ﷺ said,\nمَثَلُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ فِي تَوَادِّهِمْ وَتَرَاحُمِهِمْ كَمَثَلِ الْجَسَدِ الْوَاحِدِ، إِذَا اشْتَكَىٰ مِنْهُ عُضْوٌ تَدَاعَىٰ لَهُ سَائِرُ الْجَسَدِ بِالْحُمَّى وَالسَّهَرِ\n(The parable of the believers in their kindness and mercy for each other, is that of the body: when one of its organs falls ill, the rest of the body responds with fever and sleeplessness.) The Prophet ﷺ also said,\nالْمُؤْمِنُ لِلْمُؤْمِنِ كَالْبُنْيَانِ يَشُدُّ بَعْضُهُ بَعْضًا\n(A believer to another believer is like a building whose different parts enforce each other.) Then he clasped his hands with his fingers interlaced. Both of these Hadiths were collected in the Sahih. Allah the Exalted and Most Honored said,\nتَرَاهُمْ رُكَّعًا سُجَّدًا يَبْتَغُونَ فَضْلًا مِنَ اللَّهِ وَرِضْوَانًا ۖ\n(You see them bowing and falling down prostrate, seeking reward from Allah and acceptance.)\nAllah describes the believers as active in performing righteous deeds and in praying, which is the best action there is, all the while being sincere to Allah the Exalted and Most Honored in the prayer, awaiting His generous reward alone. Allah's best reward is Paradise that contains His bounties and favors, abundant provisions, as well as, earning His good pleasure that is greater than the former reward. Allah said,\nوَرِضْوَانٌ مِنَ اللَّهِ أَكْبَرُ ۚ\n(But the greatest bliss is the acceptance by Allah)(9:72) The statement of Allah the Exalted next,\nسِيمَاهُمْ فِي وُجُوهِهِمْ مِنْ أَثَرِ السُّجُودِ ۚ\n(The mark of them is on their faces from the traces of prostration.) refers to graceful appearance, according to Ibn 'Abbas as reported from him by 'Ali bin Abi Talhah. Mujahid and several others explained: \"It means, humbleness and reverence.\" Some said, \"The righteous good deed brings light to the heart, brightness to the face, ampleness in provisions, and love in people's hearts.\" The Leader of the faithful, 'Uthman bin 'Affan said, \"Everyone who hides a secret, then Allah the Exalted will either show on his face what he's done or by the words that accidentally slip from his mouth.\"\nImam Ahmad recorded that 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas said that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ الْهَدْيَ الصَّالِحَ، وَالسَّمْتَ الصَّالِحَ، وَالْاقْتِصَادَ، جُزْءٌ مِنْ خَمْسَةٍ وَعِشْرِينَ جُزْءًا مِنَ النُّبُوَّةِ\n(Verily, good conduct, graceful appearance and moderation are one part out of twenty-five parts of prophethood.)\nAbu Dawud also collected this Hadith. Therefore, since the Companions, may Allah be pleased with them all, had sincere intentions and righteous good deeds, all those who looked at them liked their appearance and conduct. Imam Malik said, \"I was told that when the Christians saw the Companions, who conquered Ash-Sham, they commented, 'These people are, by Allah, better than the Disciples (of 'Isa) according to what has been conveyed to us.'\" They indeed said the truth, for this Ummah was mentioned in an honorable way in previously revealed Scriptures. The best and most honored members of this Ummah are the Companions of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ. Allah, the Exalted and Most Honored, praised them in previous Books and Revelations, and this is why He said here,\nذَٰلِكَ مَثَلُهُمْ فِي التَّوْرَاةِ ۚ\n(This is their description in the Tawrah), then said,\nوَمَثَلُهُمْ فِي الْإِنْجِيلِ كَزَرْعٍ أَخْرَجَ شَطْأَهُ\n(But their description in the Injil is like a seed which sends forth its shoot (Shat'ah,)) its shoot or branch,\nفَآزَرَهُ\n(then makes it strong,) able to stand on its own,\nفَاسْتَغْلَظَ\n(and becomes thick), youthful and long,\nفَاسْتَوَىٰ عَلَىٰ سُوقِهِ يُعْجِبُ الزُّرَّاعَ\n(and it stands straight on its stem, delighting the sowers,) Such is the parable that describes the Companions of Allah's Messenger ﷺ. They gave the Messenger ﷺ aid, support and victory, just as the shoot hardens the plant,\nلِيَغِيظَ بِهِمُ الْكُفَّارَ\n(that He may enrage the disbelievers with them.) Relying on this Ayah, Imam Malik stated that the Rawafid are disbelievers because they hate the Companions, may Allah be pleased with them all. Malik said, \"The Companions enrage them, and according to this Ayah, he who is enraged by the Companions is a disbeliever.\" Several scholars agreed with Malik's opinion, may Allah be pleased with them. There are numerous Hadiths mentioning the virtues of the Companions and prohibiting the criticism on their mistakes. It is sufficient that Allah the Exalted has praised them and declared that He is pleased with them. Allah the Exalted and Most Honored said,\nوَعَدَ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ مِنْهُمْ مَغْفِرَةً\n(Allah has promised those among them who believe and do righteous deeds, forgiveness) for their sins,\nوَأَجْرًا عَظِيمًا\n(and a mighty reward.) a generous reward and honorable provisions. Certainly, Allah's promise is true and shall come to pass and will never be broken or changed. Surely, all those who follow the guidance of the Companions, may Allah be pleased with them all, will be similar to them. However, the Companions have the better virtue, the obvious lead and the perfection in character, on account of which none among this Ummah will be able to attain their level. May Allah be pleased with them and make them pleased. May He place them in the gardens of Al-Firdaws, and make it their abode, and He indeed has done all of that. In his Sahih, Muslim recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nلَا تَسُبُّوا أَصْحَابِي، فَوَالَّذِي نَفْسِي بِيَدِهِ! لَوْ أَنَّ أَحَدَكُمْ أَنْفَقَ مِثْلَ أُحُدٍ ذَهَبًا، مَا أَدْرَكَ مُدَّ أَحَدِهِمْ وَلَا نَصِيفَهُ\n(Do not abuse my Companions, for by the One in Whose Hand is my soul! If one of you spends the amount of Uhud in gold, that amount will never reach the level of one of them spending a Mudd half of it.)\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Al-Fath; all praise and thanks is due to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/48?verse=29","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:49:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 49:1–3","text":"بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تُقَدِّمُوا بَيْنَ يَدَيِ اللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ ۖ وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ - يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَرْفَعُوا أَصْوَاتَكُمْ فَوْقَ صَوْتِ النَّبِيِّ وَلَا تَجْهَرُوا لَهُ بِالْقَوْلِ كَجَهْرِ بَعْضِكُمْ لِبَعْضٍ أَنْ تَحْبَطَ أَعْمَالُكُمْ وَأَنْتُمْ لَا تَشْعُرُونَ - إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَغُضُّونَ أَصْوَاتَهُمْ عِنْدَ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ أُولَٰئِكَ الَّذِينَ امْتَحَنَ اللَّهُ قُلُوبَهُمْ لِلتَّقْوَىٰ ۚ لَهُمْ مَغْفِرَةٌ وَأَجْرٌ عَظِيمٌ\n(1. O you who believe! Make not (a decision) in advance before Allah and His Messenger, and have Taqwa of Allah. Verily, Allah is Hearing, Knowing.)(2. O you who believe! Raise not your voices above the voice of the Prophet, nor speak aloud to him in talk as you speak aloud to one another, lest your deeds should be thwarted while you perceive not.)(3. Verily, those who lower their voices in the presence of Allah's Messenger, they are the ones whose hearts Allah has tested for Taqwa. For them is forgiveness and a great reward.)\nThe Prohibition of making a Decision in advance of Allah and His Messenger; ordering Respect towards the Prophet (ﷺ)\nIn these Ayat, Allah the Exalted teaches His faithful servants the good manners they should observe with the Messenger ﷺ, which are respect, honor and esteem. Allah the Exalted and Most Honored said,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تُقَدِّمُوا بَيْنَ يَدَيِ اللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ ۖ\n(O you who believe! Make not (a decision) in advance before Allah and His Messenger,) meaning, do not rush in making decisions before him, rather, follow his lead in all matters. 'Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him, commented;\nلَا تُقَدِّمُوا بَيْنَ يَدَيِ اللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ\n(Make not (a decision) in advance before Allah and His Messenger,) \"Do not say anything that contradicts the Qur'an and Sunnah.\" Qatadah commented, \"We were told that some people used to say, 'Revelation should be sent down about such and such matters,' and, 'such and such practices should be rendered allowed.' Allah the Exalted disliked this attitude.\" Allah said,\nوَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ\n(and have Taqwa of Allah.) meaning, 'in what He has ordered you;'\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ سَمِيعٌ\n(Verily, Allah is Hearing,) 'your statements,'\nعَلِيمٌ\n(Knowing.) 'your intentions.' Allah said,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَرْفَعُوا أَصْوَاتَكُمْ فَوْقَ صَوْتِ النَّبِيِّ\n(O you who believe! Raise not your voices above the voice of the Prophet,) This contains another kind of favorable behavior. Allah the Exalted is teaching the believers that they should not raise their voices above the voice of the Prophet ﷺ. It was stated that this Ayah was revealed about Abu Bakr and 'Umar.\nAl-Bukhari recorded that Ibn Abi Mulaykah said, \"The two righteous ones, Abu Bakr and 'Umar, almost earned destruction when they raised their voices before the Prophet ﷺ who was receiving the delegation of Bani Tamim. One of them recommended Al-Aqra' bin Habis the member of the Banu Mujashi' while the other recommended another man. Nafi' (a subnarrator) said: \"I don't remember his name.\" Abu Bakr said to 'Umar, 'You only wanted to contradict me,' while 'Umar said, 'I did not intend to contradict you.' Their voices then became loud, thereupon Allah the Exalted sent down this Ayah,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَرْفَعُوا أَصْوَاتَكُمْ فَوْقَ صَوْتِ النَّبِيِّ وَلَا تَجْهَرُوا لَهُ بِالْقَوْلِ كَجَهْرِ بَعْضِكُمْ لِبَعْضٍ أَنْ تَحْبَطَ أَعْمَالُكُمْ وَأَنْتُمْ لَا تَشْعُرُونَ\n(O you who believe! Raise not your voices above the voice of the Prophet, nor speak aloud to him in talk as you speak aloud to one another, lest your deeds should be thwarted while you perceive not.)\"\nAbdullah bin Az-Zubayr said, \"After that, 'Umar's voice was so low that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ had to ask him to repeat what he said so that he could understand what he was saying to him.\" 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubayr did not mention the same regarding his father, Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him. Muslim did not collect this Hadith.\nIn another narration collected by Al-Bukhari, he said that a delegation from the tribe of Banu Tamim came to the Prophet ﷺ and that Abu Bakr recommended Al-Qa'qa' bin Ma'bad to be appointed as their leader, while 'Umar recommended Al-Aqra' bin Habis. Muslim did not collect this narration.\nAl-Bukhari recorded that Anas bin Malik said, \"The Prophet ﷺ missed Thabit bin Qays and a man said, 'O Allah's Messenger! I will find out about his news.' That man went to Thabit and found him sitting at home with his head lowered and asked him, 'What is the matter?' Thabit said, 'An evil matter!' And he said that he used to raise his voice above the voice of the Prophet ﷺ. He feared that his good deeds would be useless and he would be among the people of the Fire. The man went back to the Prophet ﷺ and conveyed Thabit's statement and returned to Thabit with a wonderfully good news. The Prophet ﷺ said,\nاذْهَبْ إِلَيْهِ فَقُلْ لَهُ: إِنَّكَ لَسْتَ مِنْ أَهْلِ النَّارِ، وَلَكِنَّكَ مِنْ أَهْلِ الْجَنَّةِ\n(Go back to him and tell him this news; you are not among the people of the Fire. Rather, you are among the dwellers of Paradise.)\" Al-Bukhari collected this Hadith with this wording.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Anas bin Malik said, \"When this Ayah was revealed,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَرْفَعُوا أَصْوَاتَكُمْ فَوْقَ صَوْتِ النَّبِيِّ\n(O you who believe! Raise not your voices above the voice of the Prophet), until,\nوَأَنْتُمْ لَا تَشْعُرُونَ\n(while you perceive not), Thabit bin Qays bin Ash-Shammas, whose voice was loud, said, 'I was the one who raised his voice above the voice of Allah's Messenger ﷺ. I am among the dwellers of the Fire. My good deeds have been done in vain.' He remained in his house feeling distressed, and the Messenger of Allah ﷺ noticed his absence. So some men went to Thabit and said to him, 'The Prophet ﷺ noticed your absence. What is the matter with you?' Thabit said, 'I used to raise my voice above the voice of the Prophet ﷺ and speak loudly in front of him. My deeds have been rendered useless and I am among the people of the Fire.' They went to the Prophet ﷺ and told him what Thabit said and the Prophet ﷺ said,\nلَا، بَلْ هُوَ مِنْ أَهْلِ الْجَنَّةِ\n(Nay, he is among the dwellers of Paradise.)\" Anas commented, \"We used to see Thabit walk among us knowing that he was (to be) among the dwellers of Paradise. During the battle of Yamamah, our forces suffered retreat. Suddenly, Thabit bin Qays bin Shammas came, having put on his Hanut and shrouds, and said, 'The worst habit is the one you acquire from your enemy and do not set a bad example for your companions.' And he went on fighting until he was martyred, may Allah be pleased with him.\"\nAllah then prohibited speaking to the Prophet ﷺ in a loud voice, just as one speaks loudly to another in a way that offends him. Instead, they were required to speak to him in terms of respect, honor and calmness. This is why Allah the Exalted and Most Honored said,\nوَلَا تَجْهَرُوا لَهُ بِالْقَوْلِ كَجَهْرِ بَعْضِكُمْ لِبَعْضٍ\n(nor speak aloud to him in talk as you speak aloud to one another,) just as He said in another Ayah,\nلَا تَجْعَلُوا دُعَاءَ الرَّسُولِ بَيْنَكُمْ كَدُعَاءِ بَعْضِكُمْ بَعْضًا ۚ\n(Make not the calling of the Messenger among you as your calling one of another.)(24:63) Allah's statement,\nأَنْ تَحْبَطَ أَعْمَالُكُمْ وَأَنْتُمْ لَا تَشْعُرُونَ\n(lest your deeds should be thwarted while you perceive not.) means, 'We ordered you to refrain from raising your voices to the Prophet ﷺ, so that he will not get angry with you, because in doing so, you will also anger Allah.' The good deeds of he who caused the Prophet's anger will become useless without him even knowing. In the Sahih, there is a Hadith that states,\nإِنَّ الرَّجُلَ لَيَتَكَلَّمُ بِالْكَلِمَةِ مِنْ رِضْوَانِ اللهِ تَعَالَىٰ لَا يُلْقِي لَهَا بَالًا، يُكْتَبُ لَهُ بِهَا الْجَنَّةُ، وَإِنَّ الرَّجُلَ لَيَتَكَلَّمُ بِالْكَلِمَةِ مِنْ سَخَطِ اللهِ تَعَالَىٰ لَا يُلْقِي لَهَا بَالًا، يَهْوِي بِهَا فِي النَّارِ أَبْعَدَ مَا بَيْنَ السَّمَاءِ وَالْأَرْضِ\n(Verily, a man might utter a word that pleases Allah the Exalted, even though he does not recognize the significance of his word, and on its account Paradise is written for him. Verily, a man might utter a word carelessly that angers Allah the Exalted, and on its account, he is cast in the Fire farther than the distance between the heavens and earth.)\nAllah then ordains lowering one's voice before the Messenger and encourages, directs and recommends this better behavior.\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَغُضُّونَ أَصْوَاتَهُمْ عِنْدَ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ أُولَٰئِكَ الَّذِينَ امْتَحَنَ اللَّهُ قُلُوبَهُمْ لِلتَّقْوَىٰ ۚ\n(Verily, those who lower their voices in the presence of Allah's Messenger, they are the ones whose hearts Allah has tested for Taqwa.) whose hearts have been purified by Allah and made as a residence and dwelling for the Taqwa,\nلَهُمْ مَغْفِرَةٌ وَأَجْرٌ عَظِيمٌ\n(For them is forgiveness and a great reward.) Imam Ahmad recorded in the Book of Az-Zuhd that Mujahid said, \"Someone wrote to 'Umar, 'O Leader of the faithful! Who is better, a man who does not feel the desire to commit a sin and does not commit it, or a man who feels desire to commit a sin, but does not commit it?' 'Umar replied, 'He who feels desire to commit a sin, but does not commit it,\nأُولَٰئِكَ الَّذِينَ امْتَحَنَ اللَّهُ قُلُوبَهُمْ لِلتَّقْوَىٰ ۚ لَهُمْ مَغْفِرَةٌ وَأَجْرٌ عَظِيمٌ\n(they are the ones whose hearts Allah has tested for Taqwa. For them is forgiveness and a great reward.)'\"","href":"/tafsir/49?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:49:4","title":"Ibn Kathir · 49:4–6","text":"Verily, those who call you from behind the dwellings, most of them have no sense (4)And if they had patience till you could come out to them, it would have been better for them. And Allah is Forgiving, Most Merciful (5)\nAdmonishing Those Who call the Prophet (ٰٰٰﷺ) from behind Dwellings\nAllah the Exalted and Most Blessed admonished those, such as the uncivilized bedouins, who used to call to the Prophet ﷺ from behind the dwellings which belong to his wives,\nأَكْثَرُهُمْ لَا يَعْقِلُونَ\n(most of them have no sense.) Allah the Exalted and Most Honored then ordains the better behavior in this regard,\nوَلَوْ أَنَّهُمْ صَبَرُوا حَتَّىٰ تَخْرُجَ إِلَيْهِمْ لَكَانَ خَيْرًا لَهُمْ ۚ\n(And if they had patience till you could come out to them, it would have been better for them.) it would have earned them the better benefit of this life and the Hereafter. Allah, Worthy of all praise, then encourages them to turn to Him in repentance.\nوَاللَّهُ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ\n(And Allah is Forgiving, Most Merciful.) It was reported that this Ayah was revealed about Al-Aqra' bin Habis At-Tamimi, may Allah be pleased with him, according to more than one source. Imam Ahmad recorded that Al-Aqra' bin Habis said that he called the Messenger of Allah ﷺ from behind his dwellings, saying, \"O Muhammad! O Muhammad!\" \"O Allah's Messenger!\" according to another narration, but the Messenger ﷺ did not answer him, Al-Aqra' said, \"O Allah's Messenger.My praise (of others) is worthwhile and my admonishment (of others) is degrading.\" The Prophet ﷺ replied,\nذَاكَ اللّٰه عزَّ وَجَلَّ\n(It is Allah the Exalted (Who is worthy of this description).)\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِنْ جَاءَكُمْ فَاسِقٌ بِنَبَإٍ فَتَبَيَّنُوا أَنْ تُصِيبُوا قَوْمًا بِجَهَالَةٍ فَتُصْبِحُوا عَلَىٰ مَا فَعَلْتُمْ نَادِمِينَ - وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّ فِيكُمْ رَسُولَ اللَّهِ ۚ لَوْ يُطِيعُكُمْ فِي كَثِيرٍ مِنَ الْأَمْرِ لَعَنِتُّمْ وَلَٰكِنَّ اللَّهَ حَبَّبَ إِلَيْكُمُ الْإِيمَانَ وَزَيَّنَهُ فِي قُلُوبِكُمْ وَكَرَّهَ إِلَيْكُمُ الْكُفْرَ وَالْفُسُوقَ وَالْعِصْيَانَ ۚ أُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الرَّاشِدُونَ - فَضْلًا مِّنَ اللَّهِ وَنِعْمَةً ۚ وَاللَّهُ عَلِيمٌ حَكِيمٌ\n(6. O you who believe! If a Fasiq comes  to you with any news, verify it, lest you should harm people in ignorance, and afterwards you become regretful for what you have done). (7.And know that among you there is the Messenger of Allah. If he were to obey you in much of the matter, you would surely be in trouble. But Allah has endeared the Faith to you and has beautified it in your hearts, and has made disbelief, Fusuq and Isyan hateful to you. such are they who are the rightly guided). (8.(This is) a grace from Allah and His favor. And Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.)\nInvestigating the Reliability of the News conveyed by Wicked People\nAllah the Exalted ordered investigating the news that sinners and the wicked bring, to make sure of its authenticity. Otherwise, if the sinner's word is taken for granted and a decision is based on it, regardless of whether the information is true or not, the authorities will be taking the lead of the sinners. Allah the Exalted and Most Honored forbade taking the path of the corrupted and sinners. This is why groups of the scholars of Hadith refuse to accept narrations from narrators whose reliability is unknown, for they might be from among the wicked people, in reality.\nThe Prophet's Decision is Better\nAllah said,\nوَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّ فِيكُمْ رَسُولَ اللَّهِ ۚ\n(7. And know that among you there is the Messenger of Allah.) 'know that among you is the Messenger of Allah ﷺ. Therefore, honor and respect him, be polite with him and obey his orders. For he is more knowledgeable about what benefits you and is more concerned with you than you yourselves are. His opinions in such matters are more complete than your own.' Allah the Exalted and Most Blessed said in another Ayah,\nالنَّبِيُّ أَوْلَىٰ بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ مِنْ أَنْفُسِهِمْ ۖ\n(The Prophet is closer to the believers than themselves)(33:6). Then He clarifies that they fall short in overseeing their own benefit;\nلَوْ يُطِيعُكُمْ فِي كَثِيرٍ مِنَ الْأَمْرِ لَعَنِتُّمْ\n(If he were to obey you in much of the matter, you would surely be in trouble.) 'if he obeys all of your opinions and desires, you will earn trouble and hardship.' Allah the Exalted and Most Honored said,\nوَلَوِ اتَّبَعَ الْحَقُّ أَهْوَاءَهُمْ لَفَسَدَتِ السَّمَاوَاتُ وَالْأَرْضُ وَمَنْ فِيهِنَّ ۚ بَلْ أَتَيْنَاهُمْ بِذِكْرِهِمْ فَهُمْ عَنْ ذِكْرِهِمْ مُعْرِضُونَ\n(And if the truth had been in accordance with their desires, verily, the heavens and the earth, and whosoever is therein would have been corrupted! Nay, We have brought them their reminder, but they turn away from their reminder.)(23:71) Allah's statement,\nوَلَٰكِنَّ اللَّهَ حَبَّبَ إِلَيْكُمُ الْإِيمَانَ وَزَيَّنَهُ فِي قُلُوبِكُمْ\n(But Allah has endeared the faith to you and has beautified it in your hearts,) 'made faith dear to your souls and beautified it in your hearts.' Allah said,\nوَكَرَّهَ إِلَيْكُمُ الْكُفْرَ وَالْفُسُوقَ وَالْعِصْيَانَ\n(and has made disbelief, Fusuq and 'Isyan hateful to you.) 'He has made disbelief, sins, whether major or minor, and 'Isyan – all types of sins, hateful to you.' This statement transfers us from one level to a better level, to perfect Allah's bounty. Allah's statement next,\nأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الرَّاشِدُونَ\n(Such are they who are the rightly guided.) those who have these qualities are the rightly guided ones whom Allah has granted guidance and correctness.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Abu Rifa'ah Az-Zuraqi said that his father said, \"During the battle of Uhud, when the idolators retreated, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nاسْتَوُوا حَتّٰى أُثْنِيَ عَلَىٰ رَبِّي عَزَّ وَجَلَّ\n(Stay in straight lines so that I praise my Lord, the Exalted and Most Honored.) They stood behind him in lines and he ﷺ said,\nاللّٰهُمَّ لَكَ الْحَمْدُ كُلُّهُ، اللّٰهُمَّ لَا قَابِضَ لِمَا بَسَطْتَ وَلَا بَاسِطَ لِمَا قَبَضْتَ، وَلَا هَادِيَ لِمَنْ أَضْلَلْتَ، وَلَا مُضِلَّ لِمَنْ هَدَيْتَ، وَلَا مُعْطِيَ لِمَا مَنَعْتَ وَلَا مَانِعَ لِمَا أَعْطَيْتَ، وَلَا مُقَرِّبَ لِمَا بَاعَدْتَ، وَلَا مُبَاعِدَ لِمَا قَرَّبْتَ. اللّٰهُمَّ ابْسُطْ عَلَيْنَا مِنْ بَرَكَاتِكَ وَرَحْمَتِكَ وَفَضْلِكَ وَرِزْقِكَ، اللّٰهُمَّ إِنِّي أَسْأَلُكَ النَّعِيمَ الْمُقِيمَ الَّذِي لَا يَحُولُ وَلَا يَزُولُ. اللّٰهُمَّ إِنِّي أَسْأَلُكَ النَّعِيمَ يَوْمَ الْعَيْلَةِ وَالْأَمْنَ يَوْمَ الْخَوْفِ. اللّٰهُمَّ إِنِّي عَائِذٌ بِكَ مِنْ شَرِّ مَا أَعْطَيْتَنَا وَمِنْ شَرِّ مَا مَنَعْتَنَا. اللّٰهُمَّ حَبِّبْ إِلَيْنَا الْإيمَانَ وَزَيِّنْهُ فِي قُلُوبِنَا وَكَرِّهْ إِلَيْنَا الْكُفْرَ وَالْفُسُوقَ وَالْعِصْيَانَ وَاجْعَلْنَا مِنَ الرَّاشِدِينَ. اللّٰهُمَّ تَوَفَّنَا مُسْلِمِينَ وَأَحْيِنَا مُسْلِمِينَ وَأَلْحِقْنَا بِالصَّالِحِينَ غَيْرَ خَزَايَا وَلَا مَفْتُونِينَ، اللّٰهُمَّ قَاتِلِ الْكَفَرَةَ الَّذِينَ يُكَذِّبُونَ رُسُلَكَ وَيَصُدُّونَ عَنْ سَبِيلِكَ وَاجْعَلْ عَلَيْهِمْ رِجْزَكَ وَعَذَابَكَ، اللّٰهُمَّ قَاتِلِ الْكَفَرَةَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ إِلٰهَ الْحَقِّ\n(O Allah! Your is the praise. O Allah! There is none who can withhold what You send, or send what You withhold, or guide whom You send astray, or misguide whomever You guide, or give what You deprive, or deprive whom You give, or draw closer whom You cast or cast whom You draw closer. O Allah! Bestow on us from Your blessings, mercy, grace and provisions. O Allah! I ask You for the eternal delight that never ends or fades away. O Allah! I ask You for provisions on the Day of deprivation and safety on the Day of fear. O Allah! I seek refuge with You from the evil repercussions of what You have given us and from the evil of what You have deprived us of. O Allah! Make faith dear to us and beatify it in our hearts and make disbelief, Fusuq and 'Isyan hateful to us, and make us among the rightly guided. O Allah! Allow us to die as Muslims, live as Muslims and join us with the ranks of the righteous ones, without tasting humiliation or turmoil. O Allah! Fight the disbelievers who deny Your Messengers and hinder others from Your path; send on them Your torment and punishment. O Allah! Fight the disbelievers who were given the Scriptures, the True God.)\" An-Nasa'i collected this Hadith in 'Amal Al-Yawm wal-Laylah.\nAllah said,\nفَضْلًا مِنَ اللَّهِ وَنِعْمَةً ۚ\n(This is) a grace from Allah and His favor.) meaning, this favor that He has bestowed on you is a favor and a bounty from Him to you,\nوَاللَّهُ عَلِيمٌ حَكِيمٌ\n(And Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.) All-Knower in those who deserve guidance and those who deserve misguidance, All-Wise in His statements, actions, legislation and the destiny He appoints.","href":"/tafsir/49?verse=4","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:49:7","title":"Ibn Kathir · 49:7–8","text":"النَّبِىُّ أَوْلَى بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ مِنْ أَنْفُسِهِمْ\n\n(The Prophet is closer to the believers than themselves) (33:6). Then He clarifies that they fall short in overseeing their own benefit;\n\nلَوْ يُطِيعُكُمْ فِى كَثِيرٍ مِّنَ الاٌّمْرِ لَعَنِتُّمْ\n\n(7 cont. - If he were to obey you in much of the matter, you would surely be in trouble.) `if he obeys all of your opinions and desires, you will earn trouble and hardship.' Allah the Exalted and Most Honored said,\n\nوَلَوِ اتَّبَعَ الْحَقُّ أَهْوَآءَهُمْ لَفَسَدَتِ السَّمَـوَتُ وَالاٌّرْضُ وَمَن فِيهِنَّ بَلْ أَتَيْنَـهُمْ بِذِكْرِهِمْ فَهُمْ عَن ذِكْرِهِمْ مُّعْرِضُونَ\n\n(And if the truth had been in accordance with their desires, verily, the heavens and the earth, and whosoever is therein would have been corrupted! Nay, We have brought them their reminder, but they turn away from their reminder.) (23:71) Allah's statement,\n\nوَلَـكِنَّ اللَّهَ حَبَّبَ إِلَيْكُمُ الايمَـنَ وَزَيَّنَهُ فِى قُلُوبِكُمْ\n\n(7 cont. - But Allah has endeared the faith to you and has beautified it in your hearts,) `made faith dear to your souls and beautified it in your hearts.' Allah said,\n\nوَكَرَّهَ إِلَيْكُمُ الْكُفْرَ وَالْفُسُوقَ وَالْعِصْيَانَ\n\n(7 cont. - and has made disbelief, Fusuq and `Isyan hateful to you.) `He has made disbelief, sins, whether major or minor, and `Isyan -- all types of sins, hateful to you.' This statement transfers us from one level to a better level, to perfect Allah's bounty. Allah's statement next,\n\nأُوْلَـئِكَ هُمُ الرَشِدُونَ\n\n(7 cont. - Such are they who are the rightly guided.) those who have these qualities are the rightly guided ones whom Allah has granted guidance and correctness. Imam Ahmad recorded that Abu Rifa`ah Az-Zuraqi said that his father said, \"During the battle of Uhud, when the idolators retreated, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\n\n«اسْتَوُوا حَتْى أُثْنِيَ عَلَى رَبِّي عَزَّ وَجَل»\n\n(Stay in straight lines so that I praise my Lord, the Exalted and Most Honored.) They stood behind him in lines and he said,\n\n«اللْهُمَّ لَكَ الْحَمْدُ كُلُّهُ، اللْهُمَّ لَا قَابِضَ لِمَا بَسَطْتَ وَلَا بَاسِطَ لِمَا قَبَضْتَ، وَلَا هَادِيَ لِمَنْ أَضْلَلْتَ، وَلَا مُضِلَّ لِمَنْ هَدَيْتَ، وَلَا مُعْطِيَ لِمَا مَنَعْتَ وَلَا مَانِعَ لِمَا أَعْطَيْتَ، وَلَا مُقَرِّبَ لِمَا بَاعَدْتَ، وَلَا مُبَاعِدَ لِمَا قَرَّبْتَ. اللْهُمَّ ابْسُطْ عَلَيْنَا مِنْ بَرَكَاتِكَ وَرَحْمَتِكَ وَفَضْلِكَ وَرِزْقِكَ، اللْهُمَّ إِنِّي أَسْأَلُكَ النَّعِيمَ الْمُقِيمَ الَّذِي لَا يَحُولُ وَلَا يَزُولُ. اللْهُمَّ إِنِّي أَسْأَلُكَ النَّعِيمَ يَوْمَ الْعَيْلَةِ وَالْأَمْنَ يَوْمَ الْخَوْفِ. اللْهُمَّ إِنِّي عَائِذٌ بِكَ مِنْ شَرِّ مَا أَعْطَيْتَنَا وَمِنْ شَرِّ مَا مَنَعْتَنَا. اللْهُمَّ حَبِّبْ إِلَيْنَا الْإيمَانَ وَزَيِّنْهُ فِي قُلُوبِنَا وَكَرِّهْ إِلَيْنَا الْكُفْرَ وَالْفُسُوقَ وَالْعِصْيَانَ وَاجْعَلْنَا مِنَ الرَّاشِدِينَ. اللْهُمَّ تَوَفَّنَا مُسْلِمِينَ وَأَحْيِنَا مُسْلِمِينَ وَأَلْحِقْنَا بِالصَّالِحِينَ غَيْرَ خَزَايَا وَلَا مَفْتُونِينَ، اللْهُمَّ قَاتِلِ الْكَفَرَةَ الَّذِينَ يُكَذِّبُونَ رُسُلَكَ وَيَصُدُّونَ عَنْ سَبِيلِكَ وَاجْعَلْ عَلَيْهِمْ رِجْزَكَ وَعَذَابَكَ، اللْهُمَّ قَاتِلِ الْكَفَرَةَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ إِلهَ الْحَق»\n\n(O Allah! Your is the praise. O Allah! There is none who can withhold what You send, or send what You withhold, or guide whom You send astray, or misguide whomever You guide, or give what You deprive, or deprive whom You give, or draw closer whom You cast or cast whom You draw closer. O Allah! Bestow on us from Your blessings, mercy, grace and provisions. O Allah! I ask You for the eternal delight that never ends or fades away. O Allah! I ask You for provisions on the Day of deprivation and safety on the Day of fear. O Allah! I seek refuge with You from the evil repercussions of what You have given us and from the evil of what You have deprived us of. O Allah! Make faith dear to us and beatify it in our hearts and make disbelief, Fusuq and `Isyan hateful to us, and make us among the rightly guided. O Allah! Allow us to die as Muslims, live as Muslims and join us with the ranks of the righteous ones, without tasting humiliation or turmoil. O Allah! Fight the disbelievers who deny Your Messengers and hinder others from Your path; send on them Your torment and punishment. O Allah! Fight the disbelievers who were given the Scriptures, the True God.)\" An-Nasa'i collected this Hadith in `Amal Al-Yawm wal-Laylah. Allah said,\n\nوَاللَّهُ عَلِيمٌ حَكِيمٌ\n\n(8 cont. And Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.) All-Knower in those who deserve guidance and those who deserve misguidance, All-Wise in His statements, actions, legislation and the destiny He appoints.","href":"/tafsir/49?verse=7","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:49:9","title":"Ibn Kathir · 49:9–10","text":"And if two parties among the believers fall to fighting, then make peace between them both. But if one of them outrages against the other, then fight you (all) against the one that which outrages till it complies with the command of Allah. Then if it complies, then make reconciliation between them justly, and be equitable. Verily, Allah loves those who are the equitable (9)The believers are but a brotherhood. So make reconciliation between your brothers, and have Taqwa of Allah that you may receive mercy (10)\nMaking Peace between Disputing Muslims\nAllah commands making peace between Muslims that fight each other,\nوَإِنْ طَائِفَتَانِ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ اقْتَتَلُوا فَأَصْلِحُوا بَيْنَهُمَا ۖ\n(And if two parties among the believers fall to fighting, then make peace between them both.) Therefore, Allah calls both opposing groups among Muslims, believers, although they are fighting each other. Al-Bukhari and other scholars relied on this Hadith as evidence that committing a sin does not nullify faith, no matter how major the sin is. This creed contradicts the creed of the Khawarij sect and those who accepted their idea, such as the Mu'tazilah sect. Al-Bukhari narrated that Al-Hasan said that Abu Bakrah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ gave a speech on the Minbar while Al-Hasan bin 'Ali was with him. He was repeatedly looking at Al-Hasan and then at the people; then said,\nإِنَّ ابْنِي هٰذَا سَيِّدٌ وَلَعَلَّ اللهَ تَعَالَىٰ أَنْ يُصْلِحَ بِهِ بَيْنَ فِئَتَيْنِ عَظِيمَتَيْنِ مِنَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ\n(Verily, this son of mine is a Sayyid (chief or master), and may Allah make peace between two great groups of Muslims through him.) What the Prophet ﷺ said, occurred. Al-Hasan brought peace between the people of Ash-Sham and 'Iraq, after they fought tremendous wars and frightening battles. Allah's statement,\nفَإِنْ بَغَتْ إِحْدَاهُمَا عَلَى الْأُخْرَىٰ فَقَاتِلُوا الَّتِي تَبْغِي حَتَّىٰ تَفِيءَ إِلَىٰ أَمْرِ اللَّهِ ۚ\n(But if one of them outrages against the other, then fight you (all) against the one that which outrages till it complies with the command of Allah.) means, until the rebellious group refers to the commands of Allah and His Messenger ﷺ for judgement and they listen to and obey the truth. There is a Hadith in the Sahih in which Anas states that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nانْصُرْ أَخَاكَ ظَالِمًا أَوْ مَظْلُومًا\n(Help your brother, whether he is an oppressor or he is oppressed.) \"I asked, 'O Allah's Messenger! It is right that I help him if he is oppressed, but how should I help him if he is an oppressor?' He ﷺ said,\nتَمْنَعُهُ مِنَ الظُّلْمِ فَذَاكَ نَصْرُكَ إِيَّاهُ\n(By preventing him from oppressing others; this is how you help him in this case.)\"\nSa'id bin Jubayr said that tribes of Aws and Khazraj once got in a scuffle using date tree branches and slippers. Allah revealed this honorable Ayah commanding them to make peace between them.\nAs-Suddi said, \"A man from Al-Ansar, whose name was 'Imran, had a wife called Umm Zayd. She wanted to visit her family, but her husband prevented her from visiting them by locking her in an upper room. So, none of her family could visit or see her. She sent someone to her family. They came, took her down from the room and wanted to take her away. Her husband was absent at the time, so his family called on their people. Their cousins came to help prevent the wife from going with her family. A push and shove situation occurred that led to them fighting using slippers. This Ayah was then revealed in their case, and the Messenger of Allah ﷺ sent someone to bring peace between them, and they both agreed to resort to the decision of Allah the Exalted.\" The statement of Allah the Exalted, next,\nفَإِنْ فَاءَتْ فَأَصْلِحُوا بَيْنَهُمَا بِالْعَدْلِ وَأَقْسِطُوا ۖ إِنَّ اللَّهَ يُحِبُّ الْمُقْسِطِينَ\n(Then if it complies, then make reconciliation between them justly, and be equitable. Verily, Allah loves those who are the equitable.) means, be fair in your judgement regarding the dispute that occurred between them,\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ يُحِبُّ الْمُقْسِطِينَ\n(Verily, Allah loves those who are the equitable.) Ibn Abi Hatim recorded, that 'Abdullah bin 'Amr said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ الْمُقْسِطِينَ فِي الدُّنْيَا عَلَىٰ مَنَابِرَ مِنْ لُؤْلُؤٍ بَيْنَ يَدَيِ الرَّحْمٰنِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ بِمَا أَقْسَطُوا فِي الدُّنْيَا\n(Verily, those who are equitable in this life, will be on podiums made of pearls before Ar-Rahman, the Exalted and Most Honored, on account of their fairness in this life.) An-Nasa'i collected this Hadith. Allah's statement,\nإِنَّمَا الْمُؤْمِنُونَ إِخْوَةٌ\n(The believers are but a brotherhood.) means, all of them are brothers in Islam. The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nالْمُسْلِمُ أَخُو الْمُسْلِمِ لَا يَظْلِمُهُ وَلَا يُسْلِمُهُ\n(The Muslim is the brother of the Muslim, he is not unjust with him nor does he forsake him.) In the Sahih,\nوَاللهُ فِي عَوْنِ الْعَبْدِ مَا كَانَ الْعَبْدُ فِي عَوْنِ أَخِيهِ\n(Allah helps the servant as long as the servant helps his brother.) Also in the Sahih:\nإِذَا دَعَا الْمُسْلِمُ لِأَخِيهِ بِظَهْرِ الْغَيْبِ قَالَ الْمَلَكُ: آمِينَ وَلَكَ بِمِثْلِهِ\n(If the Muslim invokes Allah for the benefit of his absent brother, the angel says afterwards, \"Amin, and for you the same.\") There are many Hadiths with this meaning, such as, in the Sahih,\nمَثَلُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ فِي تَوَادِّهِمْ وَتَرَاحُمِهِمْ وَتَوَاصُلِهِمْ كَمَثَلِ الْجَسَدِ الْوَاحِدِ، إِذَا اشْتَكَىٰ مِنْهُ عُضْوٌ تَدَاعَىٰ لَهُ سَائِرُ الْجَسَدِ بِالْحُمَّىٰ وَالسَّهَرِ\n(The parable of the believers in relation to the kindness, mercy and compassion they have for each other, is that of the body: when an organ of it falls ill, the rest of the body responds with fever and sleeplessness.) And also in Sahih.\nالْمُؤْمِنُ لِلْمُؤْمِنِ كَالْبُنْيَانِ يَشُدُّ بَعْضُهُ بَعْضًا\n(A believer to another believer is like a building whose different parts enforce each other.) The Prophet ﷺ then clasped his hands with the fingers interlaced.\nAllah's statement,\nفَأَصْلِحُوا بَيْنَ أَخَوَيْكُمْ ۚ\n(So make reconciliation between your brothers,) refers to the two groups that fight each other,\nوَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ\n(and have Taqwa of Allah) in all of your affairs,\nلَعَلَّكُمْ تُرْحَمُونَ\n(that you may receive mercy.) and this is a promise from Allah that He will grant mercy to those who fear and obey Him.","href":"/tafsir/49?verse=9","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:49:11","title":"Ibn Kathir · 49:11","text":"O you who believe! Let not a group scoff at another group, it may be that the latter are better than the former. Nor let (some) women scoff at other women, it may be that the latter are better than the former. Nor defame yourselves, nor insult one another by nicknames. Evil is the name of wickedness after faith. And whosoever does not repent, then such are indeed wrongdoers (11)\nThe Prohibition of mocking and ridiculing One Another\nAllah the Exalted forbids scoffing at people, which implies humiliating and belittling them. In the Sahih, it is recorded that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nالْكِبْرُ بَطَرُ الْحَقِّ وَغَمْصُ النَّاسِ\n(Arrogance is refusing the truth and belittling people.) And in another Version\nغَمْطُ النَّاسِ\n(And despising people) It is forbidden to scoff at and belittle people, for the injured party could be more honored and dearer to Allah the Exalted than those who ridicule and belittle them. This is why Allah the Exalted said,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا يَسْخَرْ قَوْمٌ مِنْ قَوْمٍ عَسَىٰ أَنْ يَكُونُوا خَيْرًا مِنْهُمْ وَلَا نِسَاءٌ مِنْ نِسَاءٍ عَسَىٰ أَنْ يَكُنَّ خَيْرًا مِنْهُنَّ ۖ\n(O you who believe! Let not a group scoff at another group, it may be that the latter are better than the former. Nor let (some) women scoff at other women, it may be that the latter are better than the former.) thus, stating this prohibition for men and then women. The statement of Allah the Exalted,\nوَلَا تَلْمِزُوا أَنْفُسَكُمْ\n(Nor defame yourselves,) forbids defaming each other. He among men who is a slanderer, and a backbiter, is cursed and condemned as Allah states\nوَيْلٌ لِكُلِّ هُمَزَةٍ لُمَزَةٍ\n(Woe to every Humazah, Lumazah)(104:1) Hamz is defamation by action, while Lamz is by words. Allah the Exalted and Most Honored said,\nهَمَّازٍ مَشَّاءٍ بِنَمِيمٍ\n(Hammaz (defaming), going about with slander.)(68:11) meaning, he belittles and defames people, transgressing and spreading slander among them, which is the Lamz that uses words as its tool. Allah's statement here,\nوَلَا تَلْمِزُوا أَنْفُسَكُمْ\n(Nor defame yourselves,) just as He said in another Ayah,\nوَلَا تَقْتُلُوا أَنْفُسَكُمْ ۚ\n(Nor kill yourselves)(4:29), meaning, nor kill one another. 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas, Mujahid, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Qatadah and Muqatil bin Hayyan said that the Ayah,\nوَلَا تَلْمِزُوا أَنْفُسَكُمْ\n(Nor defame yourselves,) means, none of you should defame each other,' while,\nوَلَا تَنَابَزُوا بِالْأَلْقَابِ\n(nor insult one another by nicknames.) means, 'you should not address people by nick names that people dislike.' Imam Ahmad recorded that Abu Jabirah bin Ad-Dahhak said, \"This Ayah was revealed about us, Banu Salamah;\nوَلَا تَنَابَزُوا بِالْأَلْقَابِ\n(nor insult one another by nicknames.) When the Messenger of Allah ﷺ migrated to Al-Madinah, every man among us had two or three nicknames. When the Prophet ﷺ called a man by one of these nicknames, people would say, 'O Allah's Messenger! He hates that nickname.' Then this Ayah,\nوَلَا تَنَابَزُوا بِالْأَلْقَابِ\n(nor insult one another by nicknames.) was revealed.\" Abu Dawud also collected this Hadith. The statement of Allah the Exalted and Most Honored,\nبِئْسَ الِاسْمُ الْفُسُوقُ بَعْدَ الْإِيمَانِ\n(Evil is the name of wickedness after faith), means, the names and descriptions of wickedness are evil; meaning, 'to use the nicknames that were used by the people of Jahiliyyah, after you embraced Islam and understood it,'\nوَمَنْ لَمْ يَتُبْ\n(And whosoever does not repent,) means, from this sin,\nفَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الظَّالِمُونَ\n(then such are indeed wrongdoers.)","href":"/tafsir/49?verse=11","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:49:12","title":"Ibn Kathir · 49:12","text":"O you who believe! Avoid much suspicion; indeed some suspicion is sin. And spy not, neither backbite one another. Would one of you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother? You would hate it. And have Taqwa of Allah. Verily, Allah is the One Who forgives and accepts repentance, Most Merciful (12)\nThe Prohibition of Unfounded Suspicion\nAllah the Exalted forbids His faithful servants from being suspicious, which includes having doubts and suspicions about the conduct of one's family, relatives and other people in general. Therefore, Muslims are to avoid suspicion without foundation. The Leader of the faithful 'Umar bin Al-Khattab said, \"Never think ill of the word that comes out of your believing brother's mouth, as long as you can find a good excuse for it.\"\nMalik recorded that Abu Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him, said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said,\nإِيَّاكُمْ وَالظَّنَّ فَإِنَّ الظَّنَّ أَكْذَبُ الْحَدِيثِ، وَلَا تَجَسَّسُوا وَلَا تَحَسَّسُوا، وَلَا تَنَافَسُوا وَلَا تَحَاسَدُوا، وَلَا تَبَاغَضُوا وَلَا تَدَابَرُوا، وَكُونُوا عِبَادَ اللهِ إِخْوَانًا\n(Beware of suspicion, for suspicion is the worst of false tales; do not spy on one another; do not look for other's faults; do not be jealous of one another; do not envy one another; do not hate one another; and do not desert (shun) one another. And O Allah's servants! Be brothers!) The Two Sahihs and Abu Dawud recorded this Hadith.\nAnas said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nلَا تَقَاطَعُوا وَلَا تَدَابَرُوا وَلَا تَبَاغَضُوا وَلَا تَحَاسَدُوا، وَكُونُوا عِبَادَ اللهِ إِخْوَانًا، وَلَا يَحِلُّ لِمُسْلِمٍ أَنْ يَهْجُرَ أَخَاهُ فَوْقَ ثَلَاثَةِ أَيَّامٍ\n(Do not shun each other; do not ignore one another; do not hate one another, and do not envy one another, and be brothers, O servants of Allah. No Muslim is allowed to shun his brother for more than three days.) Muslim and At-Tirmidhi collected this Hadith, who considered it Sahih. Allah said,\nوَلَا تَجَسَّسُوا\n(And spy not), on each other. Tajassus, usually harbors ill intentions, and the spy is called a Jasus. As for Tahassus (inquiring) it is usually done for a good reason. Allah the Exalted and Most Honored said that Prophet Ya'qub said,\nيَا بَنِيَّ اذْهَبُوا فَتَحَسَّسُوا مِنْ يُوسُفَ وَأَخِيهِ وَلَا تَيْأَسُوا مِنْ رَوْحِ اللَّهِ ۖ\n(\"O my sons! Go you and inquire (Tahassasu) about Yusuf and his brother, and never give up hope of Allah's mercy.\")(12:87)\nBoth of these terms, 'Tajassus' and 'Tahassus' could have evil connotations. In the Sahih it is recorded that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nلَا تَجَسَّسُوا وَلَا تَحَسَّسُوا، وَلَا تَبَاغَضُوا وَلَا تَدَابَرُوا، وَكُونُوا عِبَادَ اللهِ إِخْوَانًا\n(Neither commit Tajassus nor Tahassus nor hate each other nor commit Tadabur. And be brothers, O servants of Allah.) Al-Awza'i said, \"Tajassus means, to search for something, while Tahassus means, listening to people when they are talking without their permission, or eavesdropping at their doors. Tadabur refers to shunning each other. \" Ibn Abi Hatim recorded this statement. Allah the Exalted said about backbiting;\nوَلَا يَغْتَبْ بَعْضُكُمْ بَعْضًا\n(neither backbite one another), thus prohibiting it, which was explained in a Hadith collected by Abu Dawud that Abu Hurayrah said, \"It was asked, 'O Allah's Messenger! What is backbiting?' He ﷺ said,\nذِكْرُكَ أَخَاكَ بِمَا يَكْرَهُ\n(Mentioning about your brother in a manner that he dislikes.) He was asked, 'What if my brother was as I mentioned?' He ﷺ said,\nإِنْ كَانَ فِيهِ مَا تَقُولُ فَقَدِ اغْتَبْتَهُ، وَإِنْ لَمْ يَكُنْ فِيهِ مَا تَقُولُ فَقَدْ بَهَتَّهُ\n(If he was as you mentioned, you will have committed backbiting. But if he was not as you say about him, you will have falsely accused him.)\"\nAt-Tirmidhi collected this Hadith and said \"Hasan Sahih.\" Backbiting was sternly warned against, and this is why Allah the Exalted and Most Blessed compared it to eating the flesh of a dead human being,\nأَيُحِبُّ أَحَدُكُمْ أَنْ يَأْكُلَ لَحْمَ أَخِيهِ مَيْتًا فَكَرِهْتُمُوهُ ۚ\n(Would one of you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother? You would hate it.) Just as you hate eating the flesh of a dead person, on account of your nature; so hate backbiting, on account of your religion. The latter carries a punishment that is worse than the former. This Ayah seeks to discourage people from backbiting and warns against it. The Prophet ﷺ used these words to discourage taking back a gift that one gives to someone,\nكَالْكَلْبِ يَقِيءُ ثُمَّ يَرْجِعُ فِي قَيْئِهِ\n(He is just like the dog that eats its vomit.) after saying,\nلَيْسَ لَنَا مَثَلُ السَّوْءِ\n(Ours is not an evil parable.) Using various chains of narration, the Sahihs and Musnads record that the Prophet ﷺ said during the Farewell Hajj:\nإِنَّ دِمَاءَكُمْ وَأَمْوَالَكُمْ وَأَعْرَاضَكُمْ عَلَيْكُمْ حَرَامٌ كَحُرْمَةِ يَوْمِكُمْ هٰذَا، فِي شَهْرِكُمْ هٰذَا، فِي بَلَدِكُمْ هٰذَا\n(Verily, your blood, wealth and honor are as sacred among you as the sanctity of this day of yours, in this month of yours, in this town of yours.)\nAbu Dawud recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nكُلُّ الْمُسْلِمِ عَلَى الْمُسْلِمِ حَرَامٌ مَالُهُ وَعِرْضُهُ وَدَمُهُ، حَسْبُ امْرِىءٍ مِنَ الشَّرِّ أَنْ يَحْقِرَ أَخَاهُ الْمُسْلِمَ\n(All of the Muslim is sacred to the Muslim, his wealth, honor and his blood. It is evil enough for someone to belittle his Muslim brother.)\nAt-Tirmidhi collected this Hadith and said \"Hasan Gharib.\"\nAl-Hafiz Abu Ya'la recorded that a cousin of Abu Hurayrah said, \"Ma'iz came to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and said, 'O Allah's Messenger! I have committed adultery,' and the Messenger ﷺ turned away from him until Ma'iz repeated his statement four times. The fifth time, the Prophet ﷺ asked him,\nزَنَيْتَ؟\n(Have you committed adultery?) Ma'iz said, 'Yes.' The Prophet ﷺ asked,\nوَتَدْرِي مَا الزِّنَا؟\n(Do you know what adultery means?) Ma'iz said, 'Yes. I have illegally done with her what a husband legally does with his wife.' The Prophet ﷺ said,\nمَا تُرِيدُ إِلَىٰ هٰذَا الْقَوْلِ؟\n(What do you seek to accomplish by this statement?) Ma'iz said, 'I intend that you purify me.' The Prophet ﷺ asked,\nأَدْخَلْتَ ذٰلِكَ مِنْكَ فِي ذٰلِكَ مِنْهَا كَمَا يَغِيبُ الْمِيلُ فِي الْمُكْحُلَةِ وَالرِّشَا فِي الْبِئْرِ؟\n(Have you gone into her just as the stick goes into the kohl container and the rope goes into the well?) Ma'iz said, 'Yes, O Allah's Messenger!' The Prophet ﷺ commanded that Ma'iz be stoned to death and his order was carried out. The Prophet ﷺ heard two men saying to one another, 'Have you not seen the man who had Allah cover his secret, but his heart could not let him rest until he was stoned to death, just as the dog is stoned?' The Prophet ﷺ continued on and when he passed by the corpse of a donkey, he asked,\nأَيْنَ فُلَانٌ وَفُلَانٌ؟ انْزِلَا فَكُلَا مِنْ جِيفَةِ هٰذَا الْحِمَارِ\n(Where are so-and-so? Dismount and eat from this donkey.) They said, 'May Allah forgive you, O Allah's Messenger! Would anyone eat this meat?' The Prophet ﷺ said;\nفَمَا نِلْتُمَا مِنْ أَخِيكُمَا آنِفًا أَشَدُّ أَكْلًا مِنْهُ، وَالَّذِي نَفْسِي بِيَدِهِ! إِنَّهُ الْآنَ لَفِي أَنْهَارِ الْجَنَّةِ يَنْغَمِسُ فِيهَا\n(The backbiting you committed against your brother is worse as a meal than this meal. By He in Whose Hand is my soul! He is now swimming in the rivers of Paradise.)\" This Hadith has an authentic chain of narration. Imam Ahmad recorded that Jabir bin 'Abdullah said, \"We were with the Messenger of Allah ﷺ when a rotten odor was carried by the wind. The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nأَتَدْرُونَ مَا هٰذِهِ الرِّيحُ؟ هَذِهِ رِيحُ الَّذِينَ يَغْتَابُونَ النَّاسَ\n(Do you know what this odor is? It is the odor of those who backbite people.)\"\nAccepted Repentance from Backbiting and Slander\nAllah the Exalted and Most Honored said,\nوَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ ۚ\n(And have Taqwa of Allah), that is, regarding what He has commanded you and forbidden for you. Fear Him and beware of Him,\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ تَوَّابٌ رَحِيمٌ\n(Verily, Allah is the One Who forgives and accepts repentance, Most Merciful.)\nHe forgives those who repent to Him, is merciful with those who go back to Him and trust in Him. The majority of scholars have stated that repentance for committing the sin of backbiting is that one refrains from backbiting intending not to repeat it again. There is a difference of opinion if whether feeling remorse is required in this case, and also if one should apologize to those who he has backbitten. Some scholars stated that it is not necessary for one to ask those whom he has backbitten to forgive him, because if they knew what was said about them, they could be hurt more than if they were not told about it. It is better, they said, that one should praise those whom he has backbitten in audiences in which he has committed the act. It is also better if one defends the injured party against any further backbiting, as much as one can, as recompense for his earlier backbiting.","href":"/tafsir/49?verse=12","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:49:13","title":"Ibn Kathir · 49:13","text":"O mankind! We have created you from a male and a female, and made you into nations and tribes that you may know one another. Verily, the most honorable of you with Allah is that (believer) who has At-Taqwa. Verily, Allah is All-Knowing, All-Aware (13)\nAll of Mankind are the Children of 'Adam and Hawwa'\nAllah the Exalted declares to mankind that He has created them all from a single person, 'Adam, and from that person He created his mate, Hawwa'. From their offspring He made nations, comprised of tribe, which include subtribes of all sizes. It was also said that 'nations refers to non-Arabs, while 'tribes refers to Arabs. Various statements about this were collected in an individual introduction from the book, Al-Inbah, by Abu 'Amr Ibn 'Abdul-Barr, and from the book, Al-Qasad wal-Amam fi Ma'rifah Ansab Al-Arab wal-'Ajam.\nTherefore, all people are the descendants of 'Adam and Hawwa' and share this honor equally. The only difference between them is in the religion that revolves around their obedience to Allah the Exalted and their following of His Messenger ﷺ. After He forbade backbiting and belittling other people, alerting mankind that they are all equal in their humanity. Allah said,\nيَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ مِنْ ذَكَرٍ وَأُنْثَىٰ وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ شُعُوبًا وَقَبَائِلَ لِتَعَارَفُوا ۚ\n(O mankind! We have created you from a male and a female, and made you into nations and tribes that you may know one another.) so that they get to know each other by their nation or tribe. Mujahid said that Allah's statement,\nلِتَعَارَفُوا\n(that you may know one another.) refers to one's saying, \"So-and-so the son of so-and-so, from the tribe of so-and-so.\" Sufyan Ath-Thawri said, \"The Himyar (who resided in Yemen) dealt with each other according to their provinces, while the Arabs in the Hijaz (Western Arabia) dealt with each other according to their tribes.\"\nHonor is earned through Taqwa of Allah\nAllah the Exalted said,\nإِنَّ أَكْرَمَكُمْ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ ۚ\n(Verily, the most honorable of you with Allah is that (believer) who has At-Taqwa.) meaning, 'you earn honor with Allah the Exalted on account of Taqwa, not family lineage.' There are many Hadiths from the Prophet ﷺ that support this meaning. Al-Bukhari narrated that Abu Hurayrah said, \"Some people asked the Prophet ﷺ, 'Who is the most honorable among people?' He replied,\nأَكْرَمُهُمْ عِنْدَ اللهِ أَتْقَاهُمْ\n(The most honorable among them with Allah is the one who has the most Taqwa.) They said, 'We did not ask you about this.' He said,\nفَأَكْرَمُ النَّاسِ يُوسُفُ نَبِيُّ اللهِ، ابْنُ نَبِيِّ اللهِ، ابْنِ نَبِيِّ اللهِ ابْنِ خَلِيلِ اللهِ\n(Then the most honorable person is Yusuf, Allah's Prophet, the son of Allah's Prophet, the son of Allah's Prophet, the son of Allah's Khalil.) They said, 'We did not ask you about this.' He said,\nفَعَنْ مَعَادِنِ الْعَرَبِ تَسْأَلُونِّي؟\n(Then you want to ask me about the Arab lineage?) They said, 'Yes.' He said,\nفَخِيَارُكُمْ فِي الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ خِيَارُكُمْ فِي الْإِسْلَامِ إِذَا فَقُهُوا\n(Those among you who were best in Jahiliyyah, are the best among you in Islam, if they attain religious understanding.)\"\nAl-Bukhari collected this Hadith in several places of his Sahih, An-Nasa'i did as well in the Tafsir section of his Sunan. Muslim recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ اللهَ لَا يَنْظُرُ إِلَىٰ صُوَرِكُمْ وَأَمْوَالِكُمْ وَلٰكِنْ يَنْظُرُ إِلَى قُلُوبِكُمْ وَأَعْمَالِكُمْ\n(Verily, Allah does not look at your shapes or wealth, but he looks at your hearts and actions.) Ibn Majah also collected this Hadith.\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that 'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, \"On the day Makkah was conquered, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ performed Tawaf around the Ka'bah while riding his camel, Al-Qaswa', and was touching the corners with a stick he had in his hand. He did not find a place in the Masjid where his camel could sit and had to dismount on men's hands. He led his camel to the bottom of the valley, where he had her sit down. The Messenger of Allah ﷺ later gave a speech while riding Al-Qaswa' and said, after thanking Allah the Exalted and praising Him as He should be praised,\nيَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ! إِنَّ اللهَ تَعَالَىٰ قَدْ أَذْهَبَ عَنْكُمْ عُبِّيَّةَ الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ وَتَعَظُّمَهَا بِآبَائِهَا، فَالنَّاسُ رَجُلَانِ: رَجُلٌ بَرٌّ تَقِيٌّ كَرِيمٌ عَلَى اللهِ تَعَالَىٰ، وَرَجُلٌ فَاجِرٌ شَقِيٌّ هَيِّنٌ عَلَى اللهِ تَعَالَىٰ، إِنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ يَقُولُ:\nيَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ مِنْ ذَكَرٍ وَأُنْثَىٰ وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ شُعُوبًا وَقَبَائِلَ لِتَعَارَفُوا ۚ إِنَّ أَكْرَمَكُمْ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلِيمٌ خَبِيرٌ\n(O people! Allah the Exalted has removed from you the slogans of Jahiliyyah and its tradition of honoring forefathers. Men are of two types, a man who is righteous, fearful of Allah and honorable to Allah, or a man who is vicious, miserable and little to Allah the Exalted. Verily, Allah the Exalted and Most Honored said, (O mankind! We have created you from a male and a female, and made you into nations and tribes, that you may know one another. Verily, the most honorable of you with Allah is that (believer) who has At-Taqwa. Verily, Allah is All-Knowing, All-Aware.)) The Prophet ﷺ said,\nأَقُولُ قَوْلِي هٰذَا وَأَسْتَغْفِرُ اللهَ لِي وَلَكُمْ\n(I say this and invoke Allah for forgiveness for me and for you.)\" This was recorded by 'Abd bin Humayd. Allah the Exalted said,\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلِيمٌ خَبِيرٌ\n(Verily, Allah is All-Knowing, All-Aware.) means, 'He is All-Knowing of you and All-Aware of all of your affairs.' Allah guides whom He wills, misguides whom He wills, grants mercy to whom He wills, torments whom He wills, elevates whom He wills above whom He wills. He is the All-Wise, the All-Knowing, the All-Aware in all this.\nSeveral scholars relied on this honorable Ayah and the honorable Hadiths we mentioned as evidence that compatibility in marriage is not a condition of marriage contracts. They said that the only condition required in this regard is the adherence to the religion, as in the statement of Allah, the Exalted,\nإِنَّ أَكْرَمَكُمْ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ ۚ\n(Verily, the most honorable of you with Allah is the one with the most Taqwa.)","href":"/tafsir/49?verse=13","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:49:14","title":"Ibn Kathir · 49:14–18","text":"The bedouins say: \"We believe.\" Say: \"You do not believe. But say, 'We have submitted,' for Faith has not yet entered your hearts. But if you obey Allah and His Messenger, He will not decrease anything in reward for your deeds. Verily, Allah is Forgiving, Most Merciful. (14)Only those are the believers who have believed in Allah and His Messenger, and afterward doubt not but strive with their wealth and their lives for the cause of Allah. Those! They are the truthful (15)Say: \"Will you inform Allah of your religion while Allah knows all that is in the heavens and all that is on the earth, and Allah is All-Aware of everything. (16)They regard as a favor to you that they have embraced Islam. Say: \"Do not count your Islam as a favor to me. Nay, but Allah has conferred a favor upon you that He has guided you to the Faith if you indeed are true. (17)\"Verily, Allah knows the Unseen of the heavens and the earth. And Allah is the All-Seer of what you do. (18)\nThere is a Difference between a Believer and a Muslim\nAllah chastises the bedouins who, when they embraced Islam, claimed for themselves the grade of faithful believers. However, Faith had not yet firmly entered their hearts,\nقَالَتِ الْأَعْرَابُ آمَنَّا ۖ قُلْ لَمْ تُؤْمِنُوا وَلَٰكِنْ قُولُوا أَسْلَمْنَا وَلَمَّا يَدْخُلِ الْإِيمَانُ فِي قُلُوبِكُمْ ۖ\n(The bedouins say: \"We believe.\" Say: \"You do not believe, but say, 'We have submitted,' for Faith has not yet entered your hearts...\")\nThis honorable Ayah provides proof that Faith is a higher grade than Islam, according to the scholars of the Ahl us-Sunnah wal-Jama'ah. This is also demostrated in the Hadith of Jibril, peace be upon him, when he questioned the Prophet ﷺ about Islam, then Iman then Ihsan. Thus moving the general matter to one more specific, then even more specific.\nImam Ahmad recorded that 'Amir bin Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ gave (something to) some men and did not give one of them. Sa'd said, 'O Allah's Messenger, you gave to so-and-so and so-and-so. However, you gave nothing to so-and-so, even though he is a believer.' The Prophet ﷺ said,\nأَوْ مُسْلِمٌ؟\n(Or say, a Muslim.) Sa'd repeated his statement thrice each time the Prophet ﷺ answered,\nأَوْ مُسْلِمٌ؟\n(Or say, a Muslim.) The Prophet ﷺ then said,\nإِنِّي لَأُعْطِي رِجَالًا وَأَدَعُ مَنْ هُوَ أَحَبَّ إِلَيَّ مِنْهُمْ،فَلَمْ أُعْطِهِ شَيْئًا مَخَافَةَ أَنْ يُكَبُّوا فِي النَّارِ عَلَىٰ وُجُوهِهِمْ\n(I might give some men and give nothing to others, even though the latter are dearer to me than the former. I do not give them things for fear that they might be thrown on their faces in the Fire.)\"\nThis Hadith is recorded in the Two Sahihs. Therefore, the Prophet ﷺ made a distinction between the grade of believer and the grade of Muslim, indicating that Iman is a more exclusive grade than Islam. I mentioned this subject in detail supported by evidence, in the beginning of the explanation of the chapter on Iman in Sahih Al-Bukhari, all praise is due to Allah and all the favors are from Him.\nSo this proves that the bedouins whom the Ayah mentioned were not hypocrites, rather they were Muslims in whose hearts Faith was not yet firmly established. They claimed a higher grade for themselves than the grade that they earned, and they were taught a lesson as a consequence. This meaning agrees with the meaning given by Ibn 'Abbas, Ibrahim An-Nakha'i, Qatadah and that preferred by Ibn Jarir. These bedouins were taught a lesson,\nقُلْ لَمْ تُؤْمِنُوا وَلَٰكِنْ قُولُوا أَسْلَمْنَا وَلَمَّا يَدْخُلِ الْإِيمَانُ فِي قُلُوبِكُمْ ۖ\n(Say: \"You do not believe, but say 'We are Muslims,' for Faith has not yet entered your hearts...\") meaning, 'you have not yet achieved the reality of Faith.' Allah the Exalted said,\nوَإِنْ تُطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ لَا يَلِتْكُمْ مِنْ أَعْمَالِكُمْ شَيْئًا ۚ\n(But if you obey Allah and His Messenger, He will not decrease anything in reward for your deeds...) 'He will not decrease any of your rewards,' as Allah said;\nوَمَا أَلَتْنَاهُمْ مِنْ عَمَلِهِمْ مِنْ شَيْءٍ\n(We shall not decrease the reward of their deeds in anything.)(52:21) Allah said:\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ\n(Verily, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.) for those who repent and return to Him. Allah's statement,\nإِنَّمَا الْمُؤْمِنُونَ\n(Only those are the believers), who have perfect Faith,\nالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا بِاللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ ثُمَّ لَمْ يَرْتَابُوا\n(who have believed in Allah and His Messenger, and afterward doubt not) They do not have doubts and their Faith was not shaken. Rather, their Faith remained on conviction,\nوَجَاهَدُوا بِأَمْوَالِهِمْ وَأَنْفُسِهِمْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ\n(but strive for the cause of Allah with their wealth and their lives) meaning, they gladly gave away their life and the most precious of their wealth in obedience to Allah as a means of seeking His pleasure,\nأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الصَّادِقُونَ\n(Those! They are the truthful.) 'in their statement if they say that they are believers, unlike some bedouins who are faithful only by words outwardly!' Allah said,\nقُلْ أَتُعَلِّمُونَ اللَّهَ بِدِينِكُمْ\n(Say: \"Will you inform Allah of your religion...\") 'will you inform Allah of what is in your hearts,'\nوَاللَّهُ يَعْلَمُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ\n(while Allah knows all that is in the heavens and all that is on the earth,) Nothing in the heavens and earth, even the weight of a speck of dust, all that is bigger or smaller, ever escapes His observation,\nوَاللَّهُ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ عَلِيمٌ\n(and Allah is All-Aware of everything.) Allah said,\nيَمُنُّونَ عَلَيْكَ أَنْ أَسْلَمُوا ۖ قُلْ لَا تَمُنُّوا عَلَيَّ إِسْلَامَكُمْ ۖ\n(They regard as a favor to you that they have embraced Islam. Say: \"Do not count your Islam as a favor to me...\") meaning the bedouins who considered embracing Islam, following and supporting the Messenger ﷺ as a favor to him. Allah the Exalted refuted their false statement,\nقُلْ لَا تَمُنُّوا عَلَيَّ إِسْلَامَكُمْ ۖ\n(Say: \"Do not count your Islam as a favor to me...\") 'for the benefit of your Islam will only be yours, and this is a favor from Allah to you,'\nبَلِ اللَّهُ يَمُنُّ عَلَيْكُمْ أَنْ هَدَاكُمْ لِلْإِيمَانِ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ صَادِقِينَ\n(Nay, but Allah has conferred a favor upon you that He has guided you to the Faith if you indeed are true.) 'in your claim that you are believers.' The Prophet ﷺ said to the Ansar on the day of the battle of Hunayn,\nيَا مَعْشَرَ الْأَنْصَارِ! أَلَمْ أَجِدْكُمْ ضُلَّالًا فَهَدَاكُمُ اللهُ بِي؟ وَكُنْتُمْ مُتَفَرِّقِينَ فَأَلَّفَكُمُ اللهُ بِي؟ وَكُنْتُمْ عَالَةً فَأَغْنَاكُمُ اللهُ بِي؟\n(O Ansar! Have I not found you astray and Allah guided you through me? Were you not divided and Allah united you around me? Were you not poor and Allah gave you riches through me?)\nWhenever the Prophet ﷺ asked them any of these questions, they would reply, \"Allah and His Messenger have most favored us.\"\nAl-Hafiz Abu Bakr Al-Bazzar recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Banu Asad came to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and said, 'O Allah's Messenger! We embraced Islam, and before that, the Arabs fought against you, yet we did not fight against you.' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ فِقْهَهُمْ قَلِيلٌ وَإِنَّ الشَّيْطَانَ يَنْطِقُ عَلَىٰ أَلْسِنَتِهِمْ\n(Verily, they understand but little and the Shaytan speaks through their words.) This Ayah was later revealed,\nيَمُنُّونَ عَلَيْكَ أَنْ أَسْلَمُوا ۖ قُلْ لَا تَمُنُّوا عَلَيَّ إِسْلَامَكُمْ ۖ بَلِ اللَّهُ يَمُنُّ عَلَيْكُمْ أَنْ هَدَاكُمْ لِلْإِيمَانِ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ صَادِقِينَ\n(They regard as a favor to you that they have embraced Islam. Say: \"Do not count your Islam as a favor to me.\" Nay, but Allah has conferred a favor upon you that He has guided you to the Faith if you indeed are true.\")\" Then Allah reminds that He has complete knowledge of all creations and that He sees them all;\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ يَعْلَمُ غَيْبَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ ۚ وَاللَّهُ بَصِيرٌ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ\n(Verily, Allah knows the Unseen of the heavens and the earth. And Allah is the All-Seer of what you do.)\nThis is the end of the Tafsir of Surat Al-Hujurat. Verily, all praise is due to Allah, all the favors are from Him, and from Him comes the success and protection from error.","href":"/tafsir/49?verse=14","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:50:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 50:1–5","text":"The Beginning of Muffasal Section of the Qur'an\nThis Surah is the first Surah in the Mufassal section of the Qur'an, according to the correct view. It is said that the Mufassal starts with Surat Al-Hujurat. Some common people say that the Mufassal starts with Surah 'Amma An-Naba, (chapter 78), however, this is not true because none of the respected scholars ever supported this opinion.\nAws (bin Hudhayfah) said; \"I asked the Companions of Allah's Messenger ﷺ how they divided the Qur'an. They said; 'Three, five, seven, nine, eleven, thirteen, and the Mufassal section as one.'\"\nThis was recorded by Ibn Majah and Imam Ahmad.\nIf one counts forty-eight Surahs, the next Surah will be Surah Qaf. The details are as follows: The [first] three Surahs are Al-Baqarah (chapter 2), Al 'Imran (3), then An-Nisa' (4). The five are Al-Ma'idah (5), Al-An'am (6), Al-A'raf (7), Al-Anfal (8) and Bara'ah (or At-Tawbah)(9). The seven next Surahs are Surah Yunus (10), Hud (11), Yusuf (12), Ar-Ra'd (13), Ibrahim (14), Al-Hijr (15) and An-Nahl (16). The nine next Surahs are, Subhan (or Al-Isra' (17)], Al-Kahf (18), Maryam (19), Ta Ha (20), Al-Anbiya' (21), Al-Hajj (22), Al-Mu'minun (23), An-Nur (24) and Al-Furqan (25). The next eleven Surahs are Surat Ash-Shu'ara (26), An-Naml (27), Al-Qasas (28), Al-'Ankabut (29), Ar-Rum (30), Luqman (31), Alif Lam Mim As-Sajdah (32), Al-Ahzab (33), Saba' (34), Fatir (35) and Ya Sin (36). The next thirteen are Surat As-Saffat (37), Sad (38), Az-Zumar (39), Ghafir (40), Ha Mim As-Sajdah (or Fussilat)(41), Ash-Shura (42), Az-Zukhruf (43), Ad-Dukhan (44), Al-Jathiyah (45), Al-Ahqaf (46), Al-Qital (or Muhammad)(47), Al-Fath (48) and Al-Hujurat (49).\nAfter that comes the Mufassal section, according to the Companions, may Allah be pleased with them all.\nTherefore, Surah Qaf (chapter 50) is the first of the Mufassal, just as we stated, and all praise is due to Allah and all favors are from Him.\nThe Virtues of Surah Qaf\nImam Ahmad recorded that 'Umar bin Al-Khattab asked Abu Waqid Al-Laythi, \"What did the Prophet ﷺ recite during the 'Id Prayer?\" Abu Waqid said, \"Surah Qaf and Surat Iqtarabat [i.e. Surat Al-Qamar (54)].\" Muslim and the Four Collectors of the Sunan collected this Hadith.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Umm Hisham bint Harithah said, \"For around two years, or a year and a part of another year, our oven and the oven of the Prophet ﷺ was one and the same. I memorized Surah,\nق ۚ وَالْقُرْآنِ الْمَجِيدِ\n(Qaf. By the Glorious Qur'an.) from the tongue of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ who used to recite it every Friday while standing on the Minbar delivering the Friday sermon to the people.\" Muslim collected this Hadith.\nAbu Dawud also recorded that the daughter of Al-Harith bin An-Nu'man said, \"I only memorized Surah Qaf from the mouth of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ who used to recite it in every Friday Khutbah. Our oven and the oven of the Messenger ﷺ was one and the same.\" Muslim and An-Nasa'i collected this Hadith.\nTherefore, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to recite this Surah during large gatherings such as the 'Ids and during Friday sermons. He did so because this Surah contains news of the beginning of creation, Resurrection, the Return, Standing (before Allah), the Reckoning, Paradise, the Fire, Allah's reward and punishment, lessons of encouragement, and lessons of discouragement. Allah knows best.\nبِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nIn the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\nق ۚ وَالْقُرْآنِ الْمَجِيدِ - بَلْ عَجِبُوا أَنْ جَاءَهُمْ مُنْذِرٌ مِنْهُمْ فَقَالَ الْكَافِرُونَ هَٰذَا شَيْءٌ عَجِيبٌ - أَإِذَا مِتْنَا وَكُنَّا تُرَابًا ۖ ذَٰلِكَ رَجْعٌ بَعِيدٌ - قَدْ عَلِمْنَا مَا تَنْقُصُ الْأَرْضُ مِنْهُمْ ۖ وَعِنْدَنَا كِتَابٌ حَفِيظٌ - بَلْ كَذَّبُوا بِالْحَقِّ لَمَّا جَاءَهُمْ فَهُمْ فِي أَمْرٍ مَرِيجٍ\n(1. Qaf. By the Glorious Qur'an.)(2. Nay, they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves. So the disbelievers say: \"This is a strange thing!\")(3. \"When we are dead and have become dust. (Shall we be resurrected?) That is a far return.\")(4. We know that which the earth takes of them, and with Us is a Book preserved.)(5. Nay, but they have denied the truth when it has come to them, so they are in a Marij state.)\nق ۚ\n(Qaf.) which is one of the letters of the alphabet that are mentioned in the beginning of some Surahs, such as,\nص ۚ\n(Sad.)(38:1)\nن ۚ\n(Nun.)(68:1)\nالم\n(Alif Lam Mim.)(2:1),\nحم\n(Ha Mim.)(40:1), and\nطس\n(Ta Sin Mim.)(28:1) and etc., Mujahid and several others said this. We also discussed this in the beginning of the explanation of Surat Al-Baqarah, and therefore, it is not necessary to repeat it here.\nThe Disbelievers wonder at the Message and Resurrection\nAllah said,\nوَالْقُرْآنِ الْمَجِيدِ\n(By the Glorious Qur'an.) means by the Honorable and Great Qur'an, which,\nلَا يَأْتِيهِ الْبَاطِلُ مِنْ بَيْنِ يَدَيْهِ وَلَا مِنْ خَلْفِهِ ۖ تَنْزِيلٌ مِنْ حَكِيمٍ حَمِيدٍ\n(Falsehood cannot come to it from before it or behind it: (it is) sent down by the All-Wise, Worthy of all praise.)(41:42)\nThe subject of the oath contained in this Ayah is specified afterwards, even though it does not appear by word, emphasizing prophethood, resurrection and affirming that they are true. There are similar kinds of oaths in the Qur'an, whose subject is included in the meaning but not by word, such as,\nص ۚ وَالْقُرْآنِ ذِي الذِّكْرِ - بَلِ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا فِي عِزَّةٍ وَشِقَاقٍ\n(Sad. By the Qur'an full of reminding. Nay, those who disbelieve are in false pride and opposition.)(38:1-2) Allah said here,\nق ۚ وَالْقُرْآنِ الْمَجِيدِ - بَلْ عَجِبُوا أَنْ جَاءَهُمْ مُنْذِرٌ مِنْهُمْ فَقَالَ الْكَافِرُونَ هَٰذَا شَيْءٌ عَجِيبٌ\n(Qaf. By the Glorious Qur'an. Nay, they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves. So the disbelievers say: \"This is a strange thing!\")\nThey wondered at the wisdom behind sending a Messenger who is a human being. Allah the Exalted and Most Honored said in another Ayah\nأَكَانَ لِلنَّاسِ عَجَبًا أَنْ أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَىٰ رَجُلٍ مِنْهُمْ أَنْ أَنْذِرِ النَّاسَ\n(Is it a wonder for mankind that We have sent Our revelation to a man from among themselves (saying): \"Warn mankind.\")(10:2), meaning, this is not strange, for Allah chooses Messengers from angels and humans.\nAllah the Exalted and Most Honored mentioned that the disbelievers also wondered about the Resurrection and discounted its coming,\nأَإِذَا مِتْنَا وَكُنَّا تُرَابًا ۖ ذَٰلِكَ رَجْعٌ بَعِيدٌ\n(When we are dead and have become dust. That is a far return.) They said, 'after we die, disintegrate, with our organs torn apart and we become dust, how can we be brought back to our original shape and bodies,'\nذَٰلِكَ رَجْعٌ بَعِيدٌ\n(That is a far return.) 'it is not likely that it will ever occur.' They thought that Resurrection was far from happening and will never occur. Allah the Exalted responded to their statement by saying,\nقَدْ عَلِمْنَا مَا تَنْقُصُ الْأَرْضُ مِنْهُمْ ۖ\n(We know that which the earth takes of them.) meaning, 'We know what the earth consumes of their dead bodies.' Where and how the bodies disintegrated, what they turned into and how they have become, all of this is never absent from Allah's knowledge.\nوَعِنْدَنَا كِتَابٌ حَفِيظٌ\n(and with Us is a Book preserved,) 'that keeps all records. Therefore, Our knowledge is encompassing and the Book of decrees has everything precisely recorded in it. Al-'Awfi narrated that 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas commented on the statement of Allah the Exalted,\nقَدْ عَلِمْنَا مَا تَنْقُصُ الْأَرْضُ مِنْهُمْ ۖ\n(We know that which the earth takes of them,) \"It refers to what the earth consumes of their flesh, skin, bones and hair.\" A similar view was recorded from Mujahid, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak and several others. Allah, the Exalted and Most Honored, explained the reason behind their disbelief, rebellion and discounting the possibility of what is truly possible,\nبَلْ كَذَّبُوا بِالْحَقِّ لَمَّا جَاءَهُمْ فَهُمْ فِي أَمْرٍ مَرِيجٍ\n(Nay, but they have denied the truth when it has come to them, so they are in a Marij state.) This is the state of all those who defy the Truth: whatever they say and utter after denying the Truth, is utterly false. Marij means, in disarray, in a confused state and defying the characteristics of the Truth. Allah the Exalted said in another Ayah,\nإِنَّكُمْ لَفِي قَوْلٍ مُخْتَلِفٍ - يُؤْفَكُ عَنْهُ مَنْ أُفِكَ\n(Certainly, you have different ideas. Turned aside therefrom is he who is turned aside.)(51:8-9)","href":"/tafsir/50?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:50:6","title":"Ibn Kathir · 50:6–11","text":"Have they not looked at the heaven above them, how We have made it and adorned it, and there are no Furuj in it (6)And the earth! We have spread it out, and set thereon Rawasi standing firm, and We planted in it every lovely (Bahij) pair (7)An insight and a Reminder for every servant who turns to Allah in repentance (8)And We send down blessed water (rain) from the sky, then We produce therewith Jannat and grain that are reaped (9)And date palms Basiqat, with arranged clusters (10)A provision for the servants. And We give life therewith to a dead land. Thus will be the Resurrection (11)\nAllah's Power and Ability over what is Greater than Resurrection\nAllah the Exalted notifies the servants of His infinite power, which He demonstrated by creating what is bigger than that which they wondered about and whose possibility they discount,\nأَفَلَمْ يَنْظُرُوا إِلَى السَّمَاءِ فَوْقَهُمْ كَيْفَ بَنَيْنَاهَا وَزَيَّنَّاهَا\n(Have they not looked at the heaven above them, how We have made it and adorned it,) with lamps;\nوَمَا لَهَا مِنْ فُرُوجٍ\n(and there are no Furuj in it?) i.e., clefts, according to Mujahid. Others said that Furuj means, rifts, or cracks. All these meanings are close to one another. Allah the Exalted and Most Honored said,\nالَّذِي خَلَقَ سَبْعَ سَمَاوَاتٍ طِبَاقًا ۖ مَا تَرَىٰ فِي خَلْقِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ مِنْ تَفَاوُتٍ ۖ فَارْجِعِ الْبَصَرَ هَلْ تَرَىٰ مِنْ فُطُورٍ - ثُمَّ ارْجِعِ الْبَصَرَ كَرَّتَيْنِ يَنْقَلِبْ إِلَيْكَ الْبَصَرُ خَاسِئًا وَهُوَ حَسِيرٌ\n(Who has created the seven heavens one above another; you can see no fault in the creation of the Most Gracious. Then look again: \"Can you see any rifts?\" Then look again and yet again, your sight will return to you in a state of humiliation and worn out.)(67:3-4) fatigued, unable to discover any imperfection or shortcomings. The statement of Allah the Exalted, the Blessed,\nوَالْأَرْضَ مَدَدْنَاهَا\n(And the earth! We have spread it out,) means, 'We made it spacious and spread it out,'\nوَأَلْقَيْنَا فِيهَا رَوَاسِيَ\n(and set thereon Rawasi standing firm.) which are the mountains to save the earth from shaking along with its inhabitants,\nوَأَنْبَتْنَا فِيهَا مِنْ كُلِّ زَوْجٍ بَهِيجٍ\n(and We planted in it every lovely (Bahij) pair.) every kind and species of plant, fruit and vegetation,\nوَمِنْ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ خَلَقْنَا زَوْجَيْنِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَذَكَّرُونَ\n(And of everything We have created pairs that you may reflect.)(51:49) Allah's saying 'Bahij', meaning a beautiful scene,\nتَبْصِرَةً وَذِكْرَىٰ لِكُلِّ عَبْدٍ مُنِيبٍ\n(An insight and a Reminder for every servant who turns to Allah in repentance.) Allah says that observing the creation of the heavens and earth and all the great things that He has placed in them provides insight, proof and a lesson for every penitent servant who submits in humbleness and repentance to Allah feeling fear, in awe of Him. Allah the Exalted said,\nوَنَزَّلْنَا مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مَاءً مُبَارَكًا\n(And We send down blessed water from the sky,) meaning beneficial,\nفَأَنْبَتْنَا بِهِ جَنَّاتٍ\n(then We produce therewith Jannat), means special and public parks, gardens, etc.\nوَحَبَّ الْحَصِيدِ\n(and grain that are reaped) grains that are harvested for food and for storage for later use,\nوَالنَّخْلَ بَاسِقَاتٍ\n(And date palms Basiqat,) meaning, tall and high, according to the explanation reported from Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Al-Hasan, Qatadah and As-Suddi. Allah said,\nلَهَا طَلْعٌ نَضِيدٌ\n(with arrranged clusters.) producing fruits arranged in clusters,\nرِزْقًا لِلْعِبَادِ ۖ\n(A provision for (Allah's) servants.) for (Allah's) creation,\nوَأَحْيَيْنَا بِهِ بَلْدَةً مَيْتًا ۚ\n(And We give life therewith to a dead land.) this is the land that was barren. However, when rain falls upon it, it is stirred to life; it swells and produces all of the lovely pairs such as flowers and the like – amazing on account of their beauty. All of this comes into existence after the land was without greenery, yet it was stirred back to life and became green. Indeed, this should provide proof of Resurrection after death and disintegration; thus Allah resurrects the dead. This sign of Allah's ability that is seen and witnessed is greater than the denial of those who discount the possibility of Resurrection. Allah the Exalted and Most Honored said in other Ayat,\nلَخَلْقُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ أَكْبَرُ مِنْ خَلْقِ النَّاسِ\n(The creation of the heavens and the earth is indeed greater than the creation of mankind;)(40:57),\nأَوَلَمْ يَرَوْا أَنَّ اللَّهَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ وَلَمْ يَعْيَ بِخَلْقِهِنَّ بِقَادِرٍ عَلَىٰ أَنْ يُحْيِيَ الْمَوْتَىٰ ۚ بَلَىٰ إِنَّهُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ\n(Do they not see that Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth, and was not wearied by their creation, is able to give life to the dead? Yes, He surely is Able to do all things.)(46:33) and,\nوَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ أَنَّكَ تَرَى الْأَرْضَ خَاشِعَةً فَإِذَا أَنْزَلْنَا عَلَيْهَا الْمَاءَ اهْتَزَّتْ وَرَبَتْ ۚ إِنَّ الَّذِي أَحْيَاهَا لَمُحْيِي الْمَوْتَىٰ ۚ إِنَّهُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ\n(And among His signs (is this), that you see the earth barren; but when We send down water to it, it is stirred to life and growth. Verily, He Who gives it life, surely is able to give life to the dead. Indeed He is Able to do all things.)(41:39)","href":"/tafsir/50?verse=6","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:50:12","title":"Ibn Kathir · 50:12–15","text":"Denied before them the people of Nuh, and the Dwellers of Rass, and Thamud (12)And 'Ad, and Fir'awn, and the brethren of Lut (13)And the Dwellers of Al-Aykah, and the people of Tubba'. Everyone of them denied (their) Messengers, so My threat took effect (14)Were We then tired with the first creation? Nay, they are in confused doubt about a new creation (15)\nReminding the Quraysh of the Destruction of earlier Disbelieving Nations\nAllah the Exalted warns the disbelievers of Quraysh and reminds them of the punishment and painful torment that He sent in this life on their likes, who disbelieved before them. For instance, Allah the Exalted punished the people of Nuh by drowning them in the encompassing flood that touched all the people of earth. There is also the end that struck the people of Ar-Rass, and we mentioned their story before in Surat Al-Furqan,\nوَثَمُودُ - وَعَادٌ وَفِرْعَوْنُ وَإِخْوَانُ لُوطٍ\n(...and Thamud, and 'Ad, and Fir'awn, and the brethren of Lut,) the people of Sadum (Sodom) and the surrounding areas, to whom Lut was sent. Allah the Exalted shook the earth beneath them and turned their area into a reeking lake, as stinking as the disbelief, tyranny and defiance of the Truth that they had,\nوَأَصْحَابُ الْأَيْكَةِ\n(And the Dwellers of Al-Aykah), they are the nation of Shu'ayb, peace be upon him,\nوَقَوْمُ تُبَّعٍ\n(and the people of Tubba'), King of Yemen; we explained his story in the Tafsir of Surat Ad-Dukhan, and therefore, we do not need to repeat it here. All praise is due to Allah.\nكُلٌّ كَذَّبَ الرُّسُلَ\n(Everyone of them denied (their) Messengers,) means, all of these nations and their generations belied their respective Messenger, and whoever denies even one Messenger, is as if he has denied all Messengers. Allah the Exalted and Most Honored said,\nكَذَّبَتْ قَوْمُ نُوحٍ الْمُرْسَلِينَ\n(The people of Nuh denied the Messengers.)(26:105) even though only one Messenger was sent to them, and indeed, if all the Messengers were sent to them, they would have disbelieved in them as well. Allah said,\nفَحَقَّ وَعِيدِ\n(so My threat took effect.) meaning, the promise of torment and punishment that Allah delivered to them on account of their denial took effect. Therefore, all those who fear suffering the same end should be warned, especially since the latter have denied their Messenger, just as the former denied their Messenger.\nRepeating the Creation is Easier than originating It\nAllah the Exalted said,\nأَفَعَيِينَا بِالْخَلْقِ الْأَوَّلِ ۚ\n(Were We then tired with the first creation?) meaning, 'did starting the creation bring fatigue to Us, so as to cause doubt in them that repeating the creation was not possible?'\nبَلْ هُمْ فِي لَبْسٍ مِنْ خَلْقٍ جَدِيدٍ\n(Nay, they are in confused doubt about a new creation.) meaning, 'starting the creation did not tire Us, and repeating it is even easier.' Allah the Exalted and Most Honored said,\nوَهُوَ الَّذِي يَبْدَأُ الْخَلْقَ ثُمَّ يُعِيدُهُ وَهُوَ أَهْوَنُ عَلَيْهِ ۚ\n(And He it is Who originates the creation, then He will repeat it; and this is easier for Him.)(30:27), and,\nوَضَرَبَ لَنَا مَثَلًا وَنَسِيَ خَلْقَهُ ۖ قَالَ مَنْ يُحْيِي الْعِظَامَ وَهِيَ رَمِيمٌ - قُلْ يُحْيِيهَا الَّذِي أَنْشَأَهَا أَوَّلَ مَرَّةٍ ۖ وَهُوَ بِكُلِّ خَلْقٍ عَلِيمٌ\n(And he puts forth for Us a parable, and forgets his own creation. He says: \"Who will give life to these bones after they are rotten and have become dust?\" Say: \"He will give life to them Who created them for the first time! And He is the All-Knower of every creation!\")(36:78-79)\nWe mentioned earlier a Hadith collected in the Sahih,\nيَقُولُ اللهُ تَعَالَىٰ يُؤْذِينِي ابْنُ آدَمَ يَقُولُ: لَنْ يُعِيدَنِي كَمَا بَدَأَنِي. وَلَيْسَ أَوَّلُ الْخَلْقِ بِأَهْوَنَ عَلَيَّ مِنْ إِعَادَتِهِ\n(Allah the Exalted said, \"Son of 'Adam insults Me when he says, 'He will not resurrect me as He created me before!' But surely, originating creation is not easier for Me than reproducing it again.\")","href":"/tafsir/50?verse=12","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:50:16","title":"Ibn Kathir · 50:16–22","text":"And indeed We have created man, and We know what his self whispers to him. And We are nearer to him than his jugular vein (16)(Remember) that the two receivers (recording angels) receive (each human being), one sitting on the right and one on the left (17)Not a word does he (or she) utter but there is a watcher by him ready (to record it)(18)And the stupor of death will come in truth: \"This is what you have been avoiding! (19)And the Trumpet will be blown – that will be the Day of the threat (20)And every person will come forth along with a Sa'iq and a Shahid (21)(It will be said to the sinners): \"Indeed you were heedless of this. Now We have removed from you, your covering, and sharp is your sight this Day! (22)\nAllah encompasses and watches all of Man's Activity\nAllah the Exalted affirms His absolute dominance over mankind, being their Creator and the Knower of everything about them. Allah the Exalted has complete knowledge of all thoughts that cross the mind of man, be they good or evil. In the Sahih, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ اللهَ تَعَالَىٰ تَجَاوَزَ لِأُمَّتِي مَا حَدَّثَتْ بِهِ أَنْفُسَهَا مَا لَمْ تَقُلْ أَوْ تَعْمَلْ\n(Verily, Allah the Exalted has forgiven my Ummah (Muslims) for what they talk (think) to themselves about, as long as they do not utter or implement it.) The statement of Allah the Exalted,\nوَنَحْنُ أَقْرَبُ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ حَبْلِ الْوَرِيدِ\n(And We are nearer to him than his jugular vein.) means, His angels are nearer to man than his jugular vein. Those who explained 'We' in the Ayah to mean 'Our knowledge,' have done so to avoid falling into the idea of incarnation or indwelling; but these two creeds are false according to the consensus of Muslims. Allah is praised and glorified, He is far hallowed beyond what they ascribe to Him. The words of this Ayah do not need this explanation (that 'We' refers to 'Allah's knowledge'), for Allah did not say, 'and I am closer to him than his jugular vein.' Rather, He said,\nوَنَحْنُ أَقْرَبُ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ حَبْلِ الْوَرِيدِ\n(And We are nearer to him than his jugular vein.) just as He said in the case of dying persons,\nوَنَحْنُ أَقْرَبُ إِلَيْهِ مِنْكُمْ وَلَٰكِنْ لَا تُبْصِرُونَ\n(But We are nearer to him than you, but you see not.)(56:85), in reference to His angels (who take the souls). Allah the Exalted the Blessed said,\nإِنَّا نَحْنُ نَزَّلْنَا الذِّكْرَ وَإِنَّا لَهُ لَحَافِظُونَ\n(Verily, We, it is We Who have sent down the Dhikr and surely, We will guard it.)(15:9) Therefore, the angels brought down the revelation, the Qur'an, by the leave of Allah, the Exalted, the Most Honored. Thus, the angels are closer to man than his own jugular vein, by the power and leave of Allah. Consequently, the angel touches mankind, just as the devil touches them, for the devil is as close to them as the blood that runs in their veins; just as Allah's Prophet ﷺ, who is truthful and was told the truth, told us. Allah's statement here,\nإِذْ يَتَلَقَّى الْمُتَلَقِّيَانِ\n((Remember) that the two receivers receive,) in reference to the two angels who receive and record the deeds of mankind.\nعَنِ الْيَمِينِ وَعَنِ الشِّمَالِ قَعِيدٌ\n(one sitting on the right and one on the left.) means ready to note,\nمَا يَلْفِظُ\n(whatever he utters), in reference to the human,\nمِنْ قَوْلٍ\n(of a word), means any word that he or she speaks,\nإِلَّا لَدَيْهِ رَقِيبٌ عَتِيدٌ\n(but there is a watcher by him ready.) means, but there is a scribe whose job is to record it, leaving no word or movement unrecorded. Allah the Exalted said,\nوَإِنَّ عَلَيْكُمْ لَحَافِظِينَ - كِرَامًا كَاتِبِينَ - يَعْلَمُونَ مَا تَفْعَلُونَ\n(But verily, over you (are appointed angels) to watch you, Kiraman (honorable) Katibin writing down (your deeds), they know all that you do.)(82:10-12)\nTherefore, the scribe records every word that is spoken, according to the explanation of Al-Hasan and Qatadah. This is also the apparent meaning of this Ayah.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Bilal bin Al-Harith Al-Muzani said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ الرَّجُلَ لَيَتَكَلَّمُ بِالْكَلِمَةِ مِنْ رِضْوَانِ اللهِ تَعَالَىٰ مَا يَظُنُّ أَنْ تَبْلُغَ مَا بَلَغَتْ يَكْتُبُ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ لَهُ بِهَا رِضْوَانَهُ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ يَلْقَاهُ، وَإِنَّ الرَّجُلَ لَيَتَكَلَّمُ بِالْكَلِمَةِ مِنْ سَخَطِ اللهِ تَعَالَىٰ مَا يَظُنُّ أَنْ تَبْلُغَ مَا بَلَغَتْ، يَكْتُبُ اللهُ تَعَالَىٰ عَلَيْهِ بِهَا سَخَطَهُ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ يَلْقَاهُ\n(Verily, a man might utter a word that pleases Allah the Exalted, unaware of how highly it will be regarded, and on its account Allah the Exalted and Most Honored decrees His pleasure of him until the Day he meets Him. A man might indeed utter a word that angers Allah the Exalted, unaware of how dreadful it will be and on its account Allah the Exalted decrees for him His anger until the Day he meets Him.)\"\nAlqamah used to say, \"How many words did I not utter because of the Hadith that Bilal bin Al-Harith narrated.\" At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa'i and Ibn Majah collected this Hadith. At-Tirmidhi said, \"Hasan Sahih.\" There is a Hadith similar to this in the Sahih.\nReminding Mankind of the Stupor of Death, the Blast of the Trumpet and the Day of Gathering\nAllah the Exalted and Most High said,\nوَجَاءَتْ سَكْرَةُ الْمَوْتِ بِالْحَقِّ ۖ ذَٰلِكَ مَا كُنْتَ مِنْهُ تَحِيدُ\n(And the stupor of death will come in truth: \"This is what you have been avoiding!\") Allah the Exalted and Most Honored says, 'O mankind! This is the stupor of death that has come in truth; now, I have brought forth to you the certainty that you were disputing,'\nذَٰلِكَ مَا كُنْتَ مِنْهُ تَحِيدُ\n(This is what you have been avoiding!), means, 'this is the end that you were trying to escape; it has come to you! Therefore, you will have neither a shelter nor a refuge nor a sanctuary nor an asylum from it.'\nIn the Sahih, the Prophet ﷺ said, while wiping sweat from his face when the stupor of death overcame him,\nسُبْحَانَ اللهِ! إِنَّ لِلْمَوْتِ لَسَكَرَاتٍ\n(Glory be to Allah! Verily, death has its stupor.) The Ayah,\nذَٰلِكَ مَا كُنْتَ مِنْهُ تَحِيدُ\n(This is what you have been avoiding!) has two possible meanings. One of them is this: 'what you have been trying to avert, escape and flee from has come to you and resided in your home!' The second meaning is, 'you had no way of escaping or averting this end. ' At-Tabarani collected a Hadith in Al-Mu'jam Al-Kabir from Samurah who said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَثَلُ الَّذِي يَفِرُّ مِنَ الْمَوْتِ مَثَلُ الثَّعْلَبِ تَطْلُبُهُ الْأَرْضُ بِدَيْنٍ، فَجَاءَ يَسْعَىٰ حَتّٰى إِذَا أُعْيِيَ وَأُسْهِرَ دَخَلَ جُحْرَهُ وَقَالَتْ لَهُ الْأَرْضُ: يَا ثَعْلَبُ، دَيْنِي. فَخَرَجَ وَلَهُ حُصَاصٌ، فَلَمْ يَزَلْ كَذٰلِكَ حَتَّى تَقَطَّعَتْ عُنُقُهُ وَمَاتَ\n(The parable of whoever tries to avoid death is that of a fox that had a debt to pay to the earth. The fox went away and when he became tired and the time to sleep overtook him, he entered his den. The earth said to him, 'O fox! Pay my debt!' The fox went out howling and continued until his neck was cutoff, (i.e.,) he died.)\nThis parable indicates that just as the fox had no way of escaping or avoiding the earth, likewise, man has no way of avoiding death. Allah the Exalted the Blessed said,\nوَنُفِخَ فِي الصُّورِ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ يَوْمُ الْوَعِيدِ\n(And the Trumpet will be blown – that will be the Day of the threat.) Earlier we discussed the information about the blowing of the Trumpet, the fear that follows it, the death of everything and then resurrection, all this will occur on the Day of Resurrection. We also mentioned that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said in a Hadith,\nكَيْفَ أَنْعَمُ وَصَاحِبُ الْقَرْنِ قَدِ الْتَقَمَ الْقَرْنَ، وَحَنَىٰ جَبْهَتَهُ، وَانْتَظَرَ أَنْ يُؤْذَنَ لَهُ\n(How can I feel comfort while the angel responsible for the Trumpet has placed the Trumpet to his mouth and lowered his forehead awaiting when he will be commanded (by Allah to blow in it)?)\nThey said, \"O Allah's Messenger, what should we say?\" He ﷺ said,\nقُولُوا حَسْبُنَا اللهُ وَنِعْمَ الْوَكِيلُ\n(Say, \"Allah is sufficient for us, and He is the best disposer of affairs.)\" The Companions repeated this invocation, saying, \"Allah is sufficient for us, and He is the best disposer of affairs (for us).\" Allah said,\nوَجَاءَتْ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَعَهَا سَائِقٌ وَشَهِيدٌ\n(And every person will come forth along with a Sa'iq and a Shahid.) meaning, an angel to drive him to the gathering place and an angel to bear witness against him with regards to his deeds. This is the apparent meaning of this honorable Ayah and it is the meaning that Ibn Jarir preferred. It was narrated from Yahya bin Rafi', the freed servant of Thaqif, that he heard 'Uthman bin 'Affan, may Allah be pleased with him, giving a speech in which he recited this Ayah,\nوَجَاءَتْ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَعَهَا سَائِقٌ وَشَهِيدٌ\n(And every person will come forth along with a Sa'iq and a Shahid.) and then said, \"A Sa'iq to drive every person to Allah the Exalted, and a Shahid to witness against him what he has done.\" The statement of Allah the Exalted,\nلَقَدْ كُنْتَ فِي غَفْلَةٍ مِنْ هَٰذَا فَكَشَفْنَا عَنْكَ غِطَاءَكَ فَبَصَرُكَ الْيَوْمَ حَدِيدٌ\n(Indeed you were heedless of this. Now We have removed from you, your covering, and sharp is your sight this Day!) is directed at humanity. Allah said,\nلَقَدْ كُنْتَ فِي غَفْلَةٍ مِنْ هَٰذَا\n(Indeed you were heedless of this.), of this Day,\nفَكَشَفْنَا عَنْكَ غِطَاءَكَ فَبَصَرُكَ الْيَوْمَ حَدِيدٌ\n(Now We have removed from you, your covering, and sharp is your sight this Day!) 'your sight is now clear and strong.' Everyone, including the disbelievers, will have clear sight on the Day of Resurrection. However, having sight will not be helpful to the disbelievers on that Day, for Allah the Exalted said,\nأَسْمِعْ بِهِمْ وَأَبْصِرْ يَوْمَ يَأْتُونَنَا ۖ\n(How clearly will they (disbelievers) see and hear, the Day when they will appear before Us!)(19:38), and,\nوَلَوْ تَرَىٰ إِذِ الْمُجْرِمُونَ نَاكِسُو رُءُوسِهِمْ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِمْ رَبَّنَا أَبْصَرْنَا وَسَمِعْنَا فَارْجِعْنَا نَعْمَلْ صَالِحًا إِنَّا مُوقِنُونَ\n(And if you only could see when the criminals hang their heads before their Lord (saying): \"Our Lord! We have now seen and heard, so send us back (to the world), that we will do righteous good deeds. Verily, we now believe with certainty.)(32:12)","href":"/tafsir/50?verse=16","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:50:23","title":"Ibn Kathir · 50:23–29","text":"And his companion (angel) will say: \"Here is (his record) ready with me! (23)(Allah will say to the angels:) \"Both of you throw into Hell every stubborn disbeliever (24)\"Hinderer of good, transgressor, doubter, (25)\"Who set up another god with Allah. Then both of you cast him in the severe torment. (26)His companion (devil) will say: \"Our Lord! I did not push him to transgression, but he was himself in error far astray. (27)(Allah) will say: \"Dispute not in front of Me, I had already in advance sent you the threat. (28)\"The sentence that comes from Me cannot be changed, and I am not unjust to the servants. (29)\nThe Angel will bear Witness; Allah commands that the Disbeliever be thrown into the Fire\nAllah the Exalted states that the scribe angel, who is entrusted with recording the deeds of mankind, will testify against him or her about the deeds he or she did on the Day of Resurrection. He will say,\nهَٰذَا مَا لَدَيَّ عَتِيدٌ\n(\"Here is (his record) ready with me!\"), here it is prepared and completed without addition or deletion. This is when Allah the Exalted will judge the creation with fairness, saying,\nأَلْقِيَا فِي جَهَنَّمَ كُلَّ كَفَّارٍ عَنِيدٍ\n(Both of you throw into Hell every stubborn disbeliever.) It appears that Allah will say these words to the Sa'iq and Shahid angels; the Sa'iq drove him to the grounds where Reckoning is held and the Shahid testified. Allah the Exalted will order them to throw him in the fire of Jahannam, and worse it is as a destination,\nأَلْقِيَا فِي جَهَنَّمَ كُلَّ كَفَّارٍ عَنِيدٍ\n(Both of you throw into Hell every stubborn disbeliever.) meaning, whose disbelief and denial of truth was horrendous, who used to stubbornly reject the truth, knowingly contradicting it with falsehood,\nمَنَّاعٍ لِلْخَيْرِ\n(Hinderer of good,) meaning for he did not fulfill the duties he was ordered, nor was he dutiful, keeping ties to kith and kin nor giving charity,\nمُعْتَدٍ\n(transgressor,) meaning, he transgresses the limits in spending. Qatadah commented, \"He is a transgressor in his speech, behavior and affairs.\" Allah said,\nمُرِيبٍ\n(doubter,) meaning, he doubts and raises doubts in those who scrutinize his behavior,\nالَّذِي جَعَلَ مَعَ اللَّهِ إِلَٰهًا آخَرَ\n(who set up another god with Allah.) meaning, he associated others with Allah and worshipped others besides Him,\nفَأَلْقِيَاهُ فِي الْعَذَابِ الشَّدِيدِ\n(Then both of you cast him in the severe torment.) Imam Ahmad recorded that Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri said that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nيَخْرُجُ عُنُقٌ مِنَ النَّارِ يَتَكَلَّمُ يَقُولُ: وُكِّلْتُ الْيَوْمَ بِثَلَاثَةٍ: بِكُلِّ جَبَّارٍ عَنِيدٍ، وَمَنْ جَعَلَ مَعَ اللهِ إِلٰهًا آخَرَ، وَمَنْ قَتَلَ نَفْسًا بِغَيْرِ نَفْسٍ، فَتَنْطَوِي عَلَيْهِمْ فَتَقْذِفُهُمْ فِي غَمَرَاتِ جَهَنَّمَ\n(A neck from the Fire will appear and will speak saying, \"Today, I have been entrusted with three: Every obstinate tyrant, everyone who ascribed another god with Allah, and he who took a life without right.\" The neck will then close in on them and throw them in the midst of Jahannam.)\"\nMan and Devil dispute before Allah\nAllah's saying;\nقَالَ قَرِينُهُ\n(His companion will say), refers to the devil who is entrusted to every man, according to 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas, Mujahid, Qatadah and several othes. He will say,\nرَبَّنَا مَا أَطْغَيْتُهُ\n(Our Lord! I did not push him to transgression,) meaning, the devil will say this about the human who came on the Day of Resurrection as a disbeliever. The devil will disown him, saying,\nرَبَّنَا مَا أَطْغَيْتُهُ\n(Our Lord! I did not push him to transgression) meaning, \"I did not lead him astray,\"\nوَلَٰكِنْ كَانَ فِي ضَلَالٍ بَعِيدٍ\n(but he was himself in error far astray.) meaning, he himself was misguided, accepting falsehood and stubborn to the truth. Allah the Exalted and Most Honored said in another Ayah,\nوَقَالَ الشَّيْطَانُ لَمَّا قُضِيَ الْأَمْرُ إِنَّ اللَّهَ وَعَدَكُمْ وَعْدَ الْحَقِّ وَوَعَدْتُكُمْ فَأَخْلَفْتُكُمْ ۖ وَمَا كَانَ لِيَ عَلَيْكُمْ مِنْ سُلْطَانٍ إِلَّا أَنْ دَعَوْتُكُمْ فَاسْتَجَبْتُمْ لِي ۖ فَلَا تَلُومُونِي وَلُومُوا أَنْفُسَكُمْ ۖ مَا أَنَا بِمُصْرِخِكُمْ وَمَا أَنْتُمْ بِمُصْرِخِيَّ ۖ إِنِّي كَفَرْتُ بِمَا أَشْرَكْتُمُونِ مِنْ قَبْلُ ۗ إِنَّ الظَّالِمِينَ لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ\n(And Shaytan will say when the matter has been decided: \"Verily, Allah promised you a promise of truth. And I too promised you, but I betrayed you. I had no authority over you except that I called you, and you responded to me. So blame me not, but blame yourselves. I cannot help you, nor can you help me. I deny your former act in associating me as a partner with Allah. Verily, there is a painful torment for the wrongdoers.\")(14:22) Allah the Exalted said,\nقَالَ لَا تَخْتَصِمُوا لَدَيَّ\n((Allah) will say: \"Dispute not in front of Me.\") The Lord, the Exalted and Most Honored will say this to the man and his devil companion, who will be disputing before Him. The man will say, \"O, Lord! This devil has misguided me away from the Remembrance after it came to me,\" while the devil will declare,\nرَبَّنَا مَا أَطْغَيْتُهُ وَلَٰكِنْ كَانَ فِي ضَلَالٍ بَعِيدٍ\n(Our Lord! I did not push him to transgression, but he was himself in error far astray.) from the path of truth. The Lord, the Exalted and Most Honored will say to them,\nلَا تَخْتَصِمُوا لَدَيَّ\n(Dispute not in front of Me,) or 'before Me,'\nوَقَدْ قَدَّمْتُ إِلَيْكُمْ بِالْوَعِيدِ\n(I had already in advance sent you the threat.) 'I have given you sufficient proof by the words of the Messengers, and I have sent down the Divine Books; the evidences, signs and proofs have thus been established against you,'\nمَا يُبَدَّلُ الْقَوْلُ لَدَيَّ\n(The Sentence that comes from Me cannot be changed,) \"I have made My decision,\" according to the explanation of Mujahid,\nوَمَا أَنَا بِظَلَّامٍ لِلْعَبِيدِ\n(And I am not unjust to the servants.) 'I will not punish anyone, except on account of their sins after the proof has been established against them.'","href":"/tafsir/50?verse=23","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:50:30","title":"Ibn Kathir · 50:30–35","text":"On the Day when We will say to Hell: \"Are you filled?\" It will say: \"Are there any more? (30)And Paradise will be Uzlifat to those who had Taqwa, not far off (31)(It will be said): \"This is what you were promised – (it is) for those returning in sincere repentance, and Hafiz. (32)\"Who feared Ar-Rahman unseen and brought a heart turned in repentance. (33)\"Enter you therein in peace and security – this is a Day of eternal life! (34)There they will have all that they desire – and We have more (35)\nJahannam and Paradise and their Dwellers\nAllah states that He will say to Jahannam on the Day of Resurrection, \"Have you had your fill?\" Allah the Most Honored has promised Hell that it will have its fill from the Jinns and mankind. He, the Exalted and Most Honored, will decide who will be thrown into the Fire and she will keep saying, \"Are there any more,\" or, 'Are there any more whom You will provide me with?' This is the apparent meaning of this Ayah which is supported by several Hadiths.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Anas said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nلَا تَزَالُ جَهَنَّمُ يُلْقَىٰ فِيهَا وَتَقُولُ: هَلْ مِنْ مَزِيدٍ؟ حَتّٰى يَضَعَ رَبُّ الْعِزَّةِ قَدَمَهُ فِيهَا، فَيَنْزَوِي بَعْضُهَا إِلَىٰ بَعْضٍ وَتَقُولُ: قَطْ قَطْ وَعِزَّتِكَ وَكَرَمِكَ. وَلَا يَزَالُ فِي الْجَنَّةِ فَضْلٌ حَتّٰى يُنْشِىءَ اللهُ لَهَا خَلْقًا آخَرَ فَيُسْكِنَهُمُ اللهُ تَعَالَىٰ فِي فُضُولِ الْجَنَّةِ\n(The people will be thrown into Jahannam and it will say, 'Are there any more?' Until the Mighty Lord puts His Foot over it and its corners will be collected together and it will say, \"Enough, enough by Your grace and compassion!' There will be sufficient empty space in Paradise until Allah creates another creation and He, the Exalted, makes them dwell in the empty parts of Paradise.)\" Muslim also collected this Hadith.\nAl-Bukhari recorded that Abu Hurayrah narrated that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nيُقَالُ لِجَهَنَّمَ هَلِ امْتَلَأْتِ؟ وَتَقُولُ: هَلْ مِنْ مَزِيدٍ؟ فَيَضَعُ الرَّبُّ تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَىٰ قَدَمَهُ عَلَيْهَا فَتَقُولُ: قَطْ قَطْ\n(Jahannam will be asked, \"Are you full?\" and it will say, \"Are there any more?\" Until the Lord, the Blessed and Most Honored, puts His Foot over it and it will say: \"Enough! Enough!\") Al-Bukhari recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nتَحَاجَّتِ الْجَنَّةُ وَالنَّارُ فَقَالَتِ النَّارُ: أُوثِرْتُ بِالْمُتَكَبِّرِينَ وَالْمُتَجَبِّرِينَ. وَقَالَتِ الْجَنَّةُ: مَالِي لَا يَدْخُلُنِي إِلَّا ضُعَفَاءُ النَّاسِ وَسَقَطُهُمْ. قَالَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ لِلْجَنَّةِ: أَنْتِ رَحْمَتِي أَرْحَمُ بِكِ مَنْ أَشَاءُ مِنْ عِبَادِي . وَقَالَ لِلنَّارِ: إِنَّمَا أَنْتِ عَذَابِي أُعَذِّبُ بِكِ مَنْ أَشَاءُ مِنْ عِبَادِي وَلِكُلِّ وَاحِدَةٍ مِنْكُمَا مِلْؤُهَا، فَأَمَّا النَّارُ فَلَا تَمْتَلِىءُ حَتّٰى يَضَعَ رِجْلَهُ فِيهَا فَتَقُولُ: قَطْ قَطْ، فَهُنَالِكَ تَمْتَلِىءُ وَيَنْزَوِي بَعْضُهَا إِلَىٰ بَعْضٍ وَلَا يَظْلِمُ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ مِنْ خَلْقِهِ أَحَدًا، وَأَمَّا الْجَنَّةُ فَإِنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ يُنْشِىءُ لَهَا خَلْقًا آخَرَ\n(Paradise and the Fire quarreled. The Fire said, \"I have been favored with the arrogant people and tyrants.\" Paradise said, \"What is wrong with me that only the poor and humble people enter me?\" Allah the Exalted and Most Honored said to Paradise, \"You are My mercy, with which I grant mercy to those whom I will among My servants.\" He said to Hell, \"You are My punishment which I inflict upon whom I wish from My servants, and I shall fill both of you.\" As for Hellfire, it will not have its fill until Allah puts His Foot over it and she will say, \"Enough! Enough!\" She will become full and its sides will come close to each other. Allah the Exalted and Most Honored shall not be unjust to any one of His creatures. As for Paradise, Allah the Exalted and Most Honored will create another creation to fill it.) Allah the Exalted said,\nوَأُزْلِفَتِ الْجَنَّةُ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ غَيْرَ بَعِيدٍ\n(And Paradise will be Uzlifat to those who had Taqwa, not far off.) meaning, Paradise will be brought close and near to the pious, according to Qatadah, Abu Malik and As-Suddi,\nغَيْرَ بَعِيدٍ\n(not far off), and this will occur on the Day of Resurrection, which is not far off. Surely that Day will come to pass and all that is bound to come, is near,\nهَٰذَا مَا تُوعَدُونَ لِكُلِّ أَوَّابٍ\n(This is what you were promised – (it is) for those returning) who go back to Allah in sincere repentance intending not to repeat sin,\nحَفِيظٍ\n(Hafiz), who preserve their covenant with Allah and do not break or betray it,\nمَنْ خَشِيَ الرَّحْمَٰنَ بِالْغَيْبِ\n(Who feared Ar-Rahman unseen) who feared Allah in secret when only Allah the Exalted and Most Honored could see him. The Prophet ﷺ said,\nوَرَجُلٌ ذَكَرَ اللهَ تَعَالَىٰ خَالِيًا، فَفَاضَتْ عَيْنَاهُ\n(And a man who remembered Allah the Exalted while alone, and his eyes became tearful.) Allah said,\nوَجَاءَ بِقَلْبٍ مُنِيبٍ\n(and brought a heart turned in repentance.) meaning, he will meet Allah, the Exalted and Most Honored, on the Day of Resurrection with a heart turned in repentance to Him and absolutely free (of Shirk) and humbled to Him,\nادْخُلُوهَا\n(Enter you therein), meaning Paradise,\nبِسَلَامٍ\n(in peace and security), they will earn security from the torment of Allah, the Exalted and Most Honored, and the angels of Allah will greet them with the Salam, according to the explanation of Qatadah. The statement of Allah the Exalted and Most Honored:\nذَٰلِكَ يَوْمُ الْخُلُودِ\n(this is a Day of eternal life!), meaning, they will reside in Paradise forever and will never die, neither be transferred from it nor wish to be transferred from it. The statement of Allah the All-Mighty,\nلَهُمْ مَا يَشَاءُونَ فِيهَا\n(There they will have all that they desire), means, whatever delights they wish and desire, they will find it brought before them. Allah's statement,\nوَلَدَيْنَا مَزِيدٌ\n(and We have more.) is similar to His other statement,\nلِلَّذِينَ أَحْسَنُوا الْحُسْنَىٰ وَزِيَادَةٌ ۖ\n(For those who have done good is the best and even more.)(10:26) In the Sahih, Muslim recorded that Suhayb bin Sinan Ar-Rumi said that 'more' refers to looking at the Most Honorable Face of Allah.","href":"/tafsir/50?verse=30","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:50:36","title":"Ibn Kathir · 50:36–40","text":"And how many a generation We have destroyed before them who were stronger in power than they. And they went about the land! Could they find any place of refuge (36)Verily, therein is indeed a reminder for him who has a heart or gives ear while he is heedful (37)And indeed We created the heavens and the earth and all between them in six Days and nothing of fatigue touched Us (38)So bear with patience all that they say, and glorify the praises of your Lord, before the rising of the sun and before (its) setting (39)And during a part of the night (also) glorify His praises and (so likewise) after the prostrations (40)\nWarning the Disbelievers of the imminent Torment; commanding the Prophet (ٰﷺ) to pray and have Patience\nAllah the Exalted asks, 'how many We have destroyed before these denying disbelievers?'\nمِنْ قَرْنٍ هُمْ أَشَدُّ مِنْهُمْ بَطْشًا\n(a generation who were stronger in power than they.) they were more numerous, mightier than they and who constructed on the earth and built on it more than they. The statement of Allah the Exalted,\nفَنَقَّبُوا فِي الْبِلَادِ هَلْ مِنْ مَحِيصٍ\n(And they went about the land! Could they find any place of refuge?) Ibn 'Abbas commented, \"They left the traces throughout the land,\" Qatadah said, \"They traveled throughout the land seeking provisions through trade and business, more than you have.\" Allah's statement,\nهَلْ مِنْ مَحِيصٍ\n(Could they find any place of refuge?) means, 'could they find a shelter from Allah's decision and appointed destiny? Have what they collected benefited them or averted Allah's torment when it came to them on account of their denial of the Messengers? Likewise, you will never be able to avert, avoid, or find refuge or shelter (from His torment).' Allah the Exalted and Most Honored said,\nإِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَذِكْرَىٰ\n(Verily, therein is indeed a reminder) and a lesson,\nلِمَنْ كَانَ لَهُ قَلْبٌ\n(for him who has a heart) meaning, a sound understanding with which he comprehends, or, a good mind, according to Mujahid,\nأَوْ أَلْقَى السَّمْعَ وَهُوَ شَهِيدٌ\n(or gives ear while he is heedful.) meaning, he hears the speech, comprehends and understands it in his mind and grasps its indications with his intellect. Mujahid said that,\nأَوْ أَلْقَى السَّمْعَ\n(or gives ear), means, he does not talk to himself but listens with an attentive heart. Ad-Dahhak commented, \"The Arabs would say that someone has given ear when he hears with his ears, while his heart is present and not absent.\" Ath-Thawri and several others said similarly. The statement of Allah the Exalted and Most Honored;\nوَلَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا فِي سِتَّةِ أَيَّامٍ وَمَا مَسَّنَا مِنْ لُغُوبٍ\n(And indeed We created the heavens and the earth and all that between them in six Days and nothing of fatigue touched Us.) is emphasis on the Resurrection because He Who is able to create the heavens and earth without fatigue, then surely He is able to resurrect the dead. Qatadah said, \"The Jews, may Allah's curses descend on them, said that Allah created the heavens and earth in six days and then rested on the seventh day, which was the Sabbath. This is why they call it a holiday. Allah the Exalted then sent down denial of their statement and false opinion.\" Allah said,\nوَمَا مَسَّنَا مِنْ لُغُوبٍ\n(and nothing of fatigue touched Us.) indicating that no sleep, exhaustion or weariness affects Him. Allah the Exalted the Blessed said in other Ayat,\nأَوَلَمْ يَرَوْا أَنَّ اللَّهَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ وَلَمْ يَعْيَ بِخَلْقِهِنَّ بِقَادِرٍ عَلَىٰ أَنْ يُحْيِيَ الْمَوْتَىٰ ۚ بَلَىٰ إِنَّهُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ\n(Do they not see that Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth, and was not wearied by their creation, is able to give life to the dead? Yes, He surely is Able to do all things.)(46:33),\nلَخَلْقُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ أَكْبَرُ مِنْ خَلْقِ النَّاسِ\n(The creation of the heavens and the earth is indeed greater than the creation of mankind.)(40:57) and,\nأَأَنْتُمْ أَشَدُّ خَلْقًا أَمِ السَّمَاءُ ۚ بَنَاهَا\n(Are you more difficult to create or is the heaven that He constructed?)(79:27) Allah the Exalted and Most Honored said,\nفَاصْبِرْ عَلَىٰ مَا يَقُولُونَ\n(So bear with patience all that they say,) in reference to those who deny the Prophet ﷺ, ordering him to be patient with them and turn away from them in a good way,\nوَسَبِّحْ بِحَمْدِ رَبِّكَ قَبْلَ طُلُوعِ الشَّمْسِ وَقَبْلَ الْغُرُوبِ\n(and glorify the praises of your Lord, before the rising of the sun and before (its) setting.) There were two ordained prayers prior to the Isra' journey. One before the rising of the sun at dawn and the other before sunset in the evening. Qiyam Al-Layl, prayer at night, was a command for the Prophet ﷺ and his followers for sometime but it was later abrogated for the Ummah. Later, during the Isra' journey, Allah abrogated all of the previous orders for prayer by ordaining five daily prayers, including the prayers of Fajr before sunrise, and 'Asr in the late afternoon. Imam Ahmad recorded that Jarir bin 'Abdullah said, \"When we were sitting with the Prophet ﷺ, he looked at the full moon and said,\nأَمَا إِنَّكُمْ سَتُعْرَضُونَ عَلَىٰ رَبِّكُمْ فَتَرَوْنَهُ كَمَا تَرَوْنَ هٰذَا الْقَمَرَ لَا تُضَامُّونَ فِيهِ، فَإِنِ اسْتَطَعْتُمْ أَنْ لَا تُغْلَبُوا عَلَىٰ صَلَاةٍ قَبْلَ طُلُوعِ الشَّمْسِ وَقَبْلَ غُرُوبِهَا فَافْعَلُوا\n(Certainly you will be brought before your Lord and will see Him as you see this moon, and you will have no trouble in seeing Him. So, if you can avoid missing the prayer before the sunrise and the prayer before sunset, you must do so.) He then recited Allah's statement,\nوَسَبِّحْ بِحَمْدِ رَبِّكَ قَبْلَ طُلُوعِ الشَّمْسِ وَقَبْلَ الْغُرُوبِ\n(and glorify the praises of your Lord, before the rising of the sun and before (its) setting.)\" The Two Sahihs and the rest of the Group collected this Hadith through the chain of Isma'il. Allah the Exalted said,\nوَمِنَ اللَّيْلِ فَسَبِّحْهُ\n(And during a part of the night glorify His praises), meaning pray to Him. Allah said Ayah,\nوَمِنَ اللَّيْلِ فَتَهَجَّدْ بِهِ نَافِلَةً لَكَ عَسَىٰ أَنْ يَبْعَثَكَ رَبُّكَ مَقَامًا مَحْمُودًا\n(And in some parts of the night offer the Salah with it, as an additional prayer for you. It may be that your Lord will raise you to Maqam Mahmud.)(17:79) Ibn Abi Najih reported that Mujahid said that Ibn 'Abbas said that,\nوَأَدْبَارَ السُّجُودِ\n(and after the prostrations.) refers to Tasbih, i.e. glorifying Allah's praises, after the prayers. There is a Hadith collected in the Two Sahihs that supports this meaning. Abu Hurayrah said, \"Some poor migrants came and said, 'O Allah's Messenger! The wealthy people will get higher grades and will have 