f the Hereafter. Allah said:\nفَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَن يَقُولُ رَبَّنَا آتِنَا فِي الدُّنْيَا وَمَا لَهُ فِي الْآخِرَةِ مِنْ خَلَاقٍ\n(But of mankind there are some who say: \"Our Lord! Give us (Your bounties) in this world!\" and for such there will be no portion in the Hereafter.) meaning, they have no share in the Hereafter. This criticism serves to discourage other people from imitating those mentioned.\nSa'id bin Jubayr said that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Some bedouins used to come to the standing area ('Arafat) and supplicate saying, 'O Allah! Make it a rainy year, a fertile year and a year of good child bearing.' They would not mention any of the affairs of the Hereafter. Thus, Allah revealed about them:\nفَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَن يَقُولُ رَبَّنَا آتِنَا فِي الدُّنْيَا وَمَا لَهُ فِي الْآخِرَةِ مِنْ خَلَاقٍ\n(But of mankind there are some who say: \"Our Lord! Give us (Your bounties) in this world!\" and for such there will be no portion in the Hereafter.)\nThe believers who came after them used to say:\nرَبَّنَا آتِنَا فِي الدُّنْيَا حَسَنَةً وَفِي الْآخِرَةِ حَسَنَةً وَقِنَا عَذَابَ النَّارِ\n(Our Lord! Give us in this world that which is good and in the Hereafter that which is good, and save us from the torment of the Fire!\")\nNext, Allah revealed:\nأُولَٰئِكَ لَهُمْ نَصِيبٌ مِّمَّا كَسَبُوا وَاللَّهُ سَرِيعُ الْحِسَابِ\n(For them there will be alloted a share for what they have earned. And Allah is swift at reckoning.)\nHence, Allah praised those who ask for the affairs of both this life and the Hereafter. He said:\nوَمِنْهُم مَّن يَقُولُ رَبَّنَا آتِنَا فِي الدُّنْيَا حَسَنَةً وَفِي الْآخِرَةِ حَسَنَةً وَقِنَا عَذَابَ النَّارِ\n(And of them there are some who say: \"Our Lord! Give us in this world that which is good and in the Hereafter that which is good, and save us from the torment of the Fire!\")\nThe supplication mentioned and praised in the Ayah includes all good aspects of this life and seeks refuge from all types of evil. The good of this life concerns every material request of well-being, spacious dwelling, pleasing mates, sufficient provision, beneficial knowledge, good profession or deeds, comfortable means of transportation and good praise, all of which the scholars of Tafsir have mentioned regarding this subject. All of these are but a part of the good that is sought in this life.\nAs for the good of the Hereafter, the best of this includes acquiring Paradise, which also means acquiring safety from the greatest horror at the gathering place. It also refers to being questioned lightly and the other favors in the Hereafter.\nAs for acquiring safety from the Fire, it includes being directed to what leads to this good end in this world, such as avoiding the prohibitions, sins of all kinds and doubtful matters.\nAl-Qasim bin 'Abdur-Rahman said, \"Whoever is gifted with a grateful heart, a remembering tongue and a patient body, will have been endowed with a good deed in this life, a good deed in the Hereafter and saved from the torment of the Fire.\"\nThis is why the Sunnah encourages reciting this Du'a' (i.e., in the Ayah about gaining a good deed in this life and the Hereafter). Al-Bukhari reported that Anas bin Malik narrated that the Prophet ﷺ used to say:\nاللَّهُمَّ رَبَّنَا آتِنَا فِي الدُّنْيَا حَسَنَةً، وَفِي الآخِرَةِ حَسَنَــةً، وَقِنَا عَذَابَ النَّارِ\n(O Allah, our Lord! Give us that which is good in this life, that which is good in the Hereafter and save us from the torment of the Fire.)\nImam Ahmad reported that Anas said, \"Allah's Messenger ﷺ visited a Muslim man who had become as weak as a sick small bird. Allah's Messenger ﷺ said to him, 'Were you asking or supplicating to Allah about something?' He said, 'Yes. I used to say: O Allah! Whatever punishment you saved for me in the Hereafter, give it to me in this life.' Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nسُبْحَانَ اللهِ لَا تُطِيقُهُ أَوْ لَا تَسْتَطِيعُهُ، فَهَلَّا قُلْتَ:\nرَبَّنَآ ءَاتِنَا فِى الدُّنْيَا حَسَنَةً وَفِي الآخِرَةِ حَسَنَةً وَقِنَا عَذَابَ النَّارِ\n(All praise is due to Allah! You cannot bear it -or stand it-. You should have said: (Our Lord! Give us in this world that which is good and in the Hereafter that which is good, and save us from the torment of the Fire!))\nThe man began reciting this Du'a and he was cured.\" Muslim also recorded it.\nAl-Hakim reported that Sa'id bin Jubayr said, \"A man came to Ibn 'Abbas and said, 'I worked for some people and settled for a part of my compensation in return for their taking me to perform Hajj with them. Is this acceptable?' Ibn 'Abbas said, 'You are among those whom Allah described:\nأُولَٰئِكَ لَهُمْ نَصِيبٌ مِّمَّا كَسَبُوا وَاللَّهُ سَرِيعُ الْحِسَابِ\n(For them there will be alloted a share for what they have earned. And Allah is swift at reckoning.)\nAl-Hakim then commented; \"This Hadith is authentic according to the criteria of the Two Shaykhs (Al-Bukhari and Muslim) although they did not record it.\"","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=200","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:203","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:203","text":"And remember Allah during the Appointed Days. But whosoever hastens to leave in two days, there is no sin on him and whosoever stays on, there is no sin on him, if his aim is to do good and obey Allah (fear Him), and know that you will surely be gathered unto Him (203)\n\n## Remembering Allah during the Days of Tashriq - Days of Eating and Drinking\n\nIbn 'Abbas said, 'The Appointed Days are the Days of Tashriq (11-12-13th of Dhul-Hijjah) while the Known Days are the (first) ten (days of Dhul-Hijjah).\" 'Ikrimah said that:\nوَاذْكُرُوا اللَّهَ فِي أَيَّامٍ مَّعْدُودَاتٍ\n(And remember Allah during the Appointed Days.) means reciting the Takbir – Allahu Akbar, Allahu Akbar, during the days of Tashriq after the compulsory prayers.\nImam Ahmad reported that 'Uqbah bin 'Amr said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nيَوْمُ عَرَفَةَ، وَيَوْمُ النَّحْرِ، وَأَيَّامُ التَّشْرِيقِ، عِيدُنَا أَهْلَ الْإسْلَامِ، وَهِيَ أَيَّامُ أَكْلٍ وَشُرْبٍ\n(The day of 'Arafah (9th of Dhul-Hijjah), the day of the Sacrifice (10th) and the days of the Tashriq (11-12-13th) are our 'Id (festival) for we people of Islam. These are days of eating and drinking.)\nImam Ahmad reported that Nubayshah Al-Hudhali said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nأَيَّامُ التَّشْرِيقِ أَيَّامُ أَكْلٍ وشُرْبٍ وَذِكْر اللهِ\n(The days of Tashriq are days of eating, drinking and Dhikr (remembering) of Allah.)\nMuslim also recorded this Haith\nWe also mentioned the Hadith of Jubayr bin Mut'im:\nعَرَفَةُ كُلُّهَا مَوْقِفٌ، وَأيَّامُ التَّشْرِيقِ كُلُّهَا ذَبْحٌ\n(All of 'Arafat is a standing place and all of the days of Tashriq are days of Sacrifice.)\nWe also mentioned the Hadith by 'Abdur-Rahman bin Ya'mar Ad-Diyli:\nوَأَيَّامُ مِنىً ثَلَاثَةٌ فَمَنْ تَعَجَّلَ فِي يَوْمَيْنِ فَلَا إثْمَ عَلَيْهِ وَمَنْ تَأَخَّرَ فَلَا إِثْمَ عَلَيْهِ\n(The days of Mina (Tashriq) are three. Those who hasten in two days then there is no sin in it, and those who delay (i.e., remain in Mina for a third day) then there is no sin in it.)\nIbn Jarir reported that Abu Hurayrah narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nأَيَّامُ التَّشْرِيقِ أيَّامُ طُعْمٍ وَذِكْرِ اللهِ\n(The days of Tashriq are days of eating and remembering Allah.)\nIbn Jarir reported that Abu Hurayrah narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ sent 'Abdullah bin Hudhafah to Mina proclaiming:\nلَا تَصُومُوا هذِه الْأَيَّامَ، فَإنَّهَا أَيَّامُ أَكْلٍ وَشُرْبٍ وَذِكْرِ اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ\n(Do not fast these days (i.e., Tashriq days), for they are days of eating, drinking and remembering Allah the Exalted and Most Honored.)\n\n## The Appointed Days\n\nMiqsam said that Ibn 'Abbas said that the Appointed Days are the days of Tashriq, four days: the day of the Sacrifice (10th of Dhul-Hijjah) and three days after that.\nThis opinion was also reported of Ibn 'Umar, Ibn Az-Zubayr, Abu Musa, 'Ata', Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Abu Malik, Ibrahim An-Nakha'i, Yahya bin Abu Kathir, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, As-Suddi, Az-Zuhri, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, Ad-Dahhak, Muqatil bin Hayyan, 'Ata' Al-Khurasani, Malik bin Anas, and others. In addition, the apparent meaning of the following Ayah supports this opinion:\nفَمَن تَعَجَّلَ فِى يَوْمَيْنِ فَلاَ إِثْمَ عَلَيْهِ وَمَن تَأَخَّرَ فَلا إِثْمَ عَلَيْهِ\n(But whosoever hastens to leave in two days, there is no sin on him and whosoever stays on, there is no sin on him.)\nSo the Ayah hints to the three days after the day of Sacrifice.\nAllah's statement:\nوَاذْكُرُوا اللَّهَ فِي أَيَّامٍ مَّعْدُودَاتٍ\n(And remember Allah during the Appointed Days) directs remembering Allah upon slaughtering the animals, after the prayers, and by Dhikr (supplication) in general. It also includes Takbir and remembering Allah while throwing the pebbles every day during the Tashriq days. A Hadith that Abu Dawud and several others collected states:\nإِنَّمَا جُعِلَ الطَّوَافُ بِالْبَيْتِ وَالسَّعْيُ بَيْنَ الصَّفَا وَالْمَرْوَةِ وَرَمْيُ الْجِمَارِ لإِقَامَةِ ذِكْرِ اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ\n(Tawaf around the House, Sa'i between As-Safa and Al-Marwah and throwing the pebbles were legislated so that Allah is remembered in Dhikr.)\nWhen mentioning the first procession (refer to 2:199) and the second procession of the people upon the end of the Hajj season, when they start to return to their areas, after they had gathered during the rituals and at the standing places, Allah said,\nوَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّكُمْ إِلَيْهِ تُحْشَرُونَ\n(and obey Allah (fear Him), and know that you will surely be gathered unto Him.)\nSimilarly, Allah said:\nوَهُوَ الَّذِي ذَرَأَكُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَإِلَيْهِ تُحْشَرُونَ\n(And it is He Who has created you on the earth, and to Him you shall be gathered back.)(23:79)","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=203","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:204","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:204–207","text":"And of mankind there is he whose speech may please you (O Muhammad ﷺ), in this worldly life, and he calls Allah to witness as to that which is in his heart, yet he is the most quarrelsome of the opponents (204)And when he turns away (from you O Muhammad ), his effort in the land is to make mischief therein and to destroy the crops and the cattle, and Allah likes not mischief (205)And when it is said to him, \"Fear Allah\", he is led by arrogance to (more) crime. So enough for him is Hell, and worst indeed is that place to rest (206)And of mankind is he who would sell himself, seeking the pleasure of Allah. And Allah is full of kindness to (His) servants (207)\n\n## The Characteristics of the Hypocrites\n\nAs-Suddi said that these Ayat were revealed about Al-Akhnas bin Shariq Ath-Thaqafi who came to Allah's Messenger ﷺ and announced his Islam although his heart concealed otherwise.\nIbn 'Abbas narrated that these Ayat were revealed about some of the hypocrites who criticized Khubayb and his companions who were killed during the Raji' incident. Thereafter, Allah sent down His condemnation of the hypocrites and His praise for Khubayb and his companions:\nوَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَن يَشْرِي نَفْسَهُ ابْتِغَاءَ مَرْضَاتِ اللَّهِ\n(And of mankind is he who would sell himself, seeking the pleasure of Allah.)\nIt was also said that they refer to the hypocrites and the believers in general. This is the opinion of Qatadah, Mujahid, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas and several others, and it is correct.\nIbn Jarir related that Al-Qurazi said that Nawf Al-Bikali, who used to read (previous Divine) Books said, \"I find the description of some members of this Ummah in the previously revealed Books of Allah: they (hypocrites) are people who use the religion to gain material benefit. Their tongues are sweeter than honey, but their hearts are more bitter than Sabir (a bitter plant, aloe). They show the people the appearance of sheep while their hearts hide the viciousness of wolves. Allah said, 'They dare challenge Me, but they are deceived by Me. I swear by Myself that I will send a Fitnah (trial, calamity) on them that will make the wise man bewildered.' I contemplated about these statements and found them in the Qur'an describing the hypocrites:\nوَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَن يُعْجِبُكَ قَوْلُهُ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَيُشْهِدُ اللَّهَ عَلَىٰ مَا فِي قَلْبِهِ\n(And of mankind there is he whose speech may please you (O Muhammad ﷺ), in this worldly life, and he calls Allah to witness as to that which is in his heart,)\nThis statement by Al-Qurazi is Hasan Sahih. Allah said:\nوَيُشْهِدُ اللَّهَ عَلَىٰ مَا فِي قَلْبِهِ\n(...and he calls Allah to witness as to that which is in his heart,)\nThis Ayah indicates that such people pretend to be Muslims, but defy Allah by the disbelief and hypocrisy that their hearts conceal. Similarly Allah said:\nيَسْتَخْفُونَ مِنَ النَّاسِ وَلَا يَسْتَخْفُونَ مِنَ اللَّهِ\n(They may hide (their crimes) from men, but they cannot hide (them) from Allah.)(4:108)\nThis Tafsir was reported from Ibn 'Abbas by Ibn Ishaq. It was also said that the Ayah means that when such people announce their Islam, they swear by Allah that what is in their hearts is the same of what their tongues are pronouncing. This is also a correct meaning for the Ayah that was chosen by 'Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam. It is also the choice of Ibn Jarir who related it to Ibn 'Abbas and Mujahid. Allah knows best.\nAllah said:\nوَهُوَ أَلَدُّ الْخِصَامِ\n(Yet he is the most Aladd of the opponents.)(2:204) lThe Ayah used the word Aladd here, which literally means 'wicked' (here it means 'quarrelsome'). A variation of the word Ludda was also used in another Ayah:\nوَتُنذِرَ بِهِ قَوْمًا لُّدًّا\n(So that you (Muhammad) warn with it (the Qur'an) a Ludda people.)(19:97)\nHence, a hypocrite lies, alters the truth when he quarrels and does not care for the truth. Rather, he deviates from the truth, deceives and becomes most quarrelsome. It is reported in Sahih that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nآيَةُ الْمُنَافِقِ ثَلاثٌ: إِذَا حَدَّثَ كَذَبَ، وَإذَا عَاهَدَ غَدَرَ، وَإِذَا خَاصَمَ فَجَرَ\n(The signs of a hypocrite are three: Whenever he speaks, he tells a lie. Whenever he promises, he always breaks it (his promise). If you have a dispute with him, he is most quarrelsome.)\nImam Bukhari reported that 'A'ishah narrated that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nإِنَّ أَبْغَضَ الرِّجَالِ إلَى اللهِ الْألَدُّ الْخَصِمُ\n(The most hated person to Allah is he who is Aladd and Khasim (meaning most quarrelsome).)\nAllah then said:\nوَإِذَا تَوَلَّىٰ سَعَىٰ فِي الْأَرْضِ لِيُفْسِدَ فِيهَا وَيُهْلِكَ الْحَرْثَ وَالنَّسْلَ وَاللَّهُ لَا يُحِبُّ الْفَسَادَ\n(And when he turns away (from you O Muhammad), he struggles in the land to make mischief therein and to destroy the crops and the cattle, and Allah likes not mischief.)\nThis Ayah indicates that such persons are deviant in the tongue, evil in the deeds, their words are fabricated, their belief is wicked and their works are immoral. The Ayah used the (Arabic word) Sa'a (literally, 'tries' or 'intends'). This word was also used to describe Pharaoh:\nثُمَّ أَدْبَرَ يَسْعَىٰ - فَحَشَرَ فَنَادَىٰ - فَقَالَ أَنَا رَبُّكُمُ الْأَعْلَىٰ - فَأَخَذَهُ اللَّهُ نَكَالَ الْآخِرَةِ وَالْأُولَىٰ - إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَعِبْرَةً لِّمَن يَخْشَىٰ\n(Then he turned his back, Yas'a (striving hard against Allah). Then he gathered (his people) and cried aloud saying, 'I am your lord, most high.' So Allah, seized him with a punishing example for his last and first transgression. Verily, in this is an instructive admonition for whosoever fears Allah.)(79:22-26)\n[Sa'a was also used in the Ayah]:\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِذَا نُودِيَ لِلصَّلَاةِ مِن يَوْمِ الْجُمُعَةِ فَاسْعَوْا إِلَىٰ ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ\n(O you who believe (Muslims)! When the call is proclaimed for the Salah (prayer) on the day of Friday (Jumu'ah prayer), As'aw come to the remembrance of Allah.)(62:9)\nThis Ayah means, '(when the call to the Friday prayer is announced) intend and then proceed to attend the Friday prayer.' We should mention that hastening to the mosque is condemed by the Sunnah (as this is another meaning for the word Sa'a):\nإذَا أَتَيْتُمُ الصَّلَاةَ فَلَا تَأْتُوهَا وَأَنْتُمْ تَسْعَوْنَ، وَأْتُوهَا وَعَلَيْكُمُ السَّكِينَةُ والْوَقَارُ\n(When you come to attend the prayer, do not come in a Sa'i (haste). Rather, come to it while walking at ease and in peace (or grace).)\nThe hypocrite has no motive in this life but to cause mischief and to destroy the crops and the offspring, including what the animals produce and what the people depend on for their livelihood. Mujahid said, \"If the hypocrite strives for mischief in the land, Allah prevents the rain from falling and thus the crops and the offspring perish.\" The Ayah continues:\nوَاللَّهُ لَا يُحِبُّ الْفَسَادَ\n(...and Allah likes not mischief.) that is, Allah does not like those who possess these characteristics, or those who act like this.\n\n## Rejecting Advice is Characteristic of the Hypocrites\n\nAllah said:\nوَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُ اتَّقِ اللَّهَ أَخَذَتْهُ الْعِزَّةُ بِالْإِثْمِ\n(And when it is said to him, \"Fear Allah\", he is led by arrogance to (more) crime.)\nThis Ayah indicates that when the hypocrite, who deviates in his speech and deeds, is advised and commanded to fear Allah, refrain from his evil deeds and adhere to the truth, he refuses and becomes angry and outraged, as he is used to doing evil. This Ayah is similar to what Allah said:\nوَإِذَا تُتْلَىٰ عَلَيْهِمْ آيَاتُنَا بَيِّنَاتٍ تَعْرِفُ فِي وُجُوهِ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا الْمُنكَرَ يَكَادُونَ يَسْطُونَ بِالَّذِينَ يَتْلُونَ عَلَيْهِمْ آيَاتِنَا قُلْ أَفَأُنَبِّئُكُم بِشَرٍّ مِّن ذَٰلِكُمُ النَّارُ وَعَدَهَا اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَبِئْسَ الْمَصِيرُ\n(And when Our clear verses are recited to them, you will notice a denial on the faces of the disbelievers! They are nearly ready to attack with violence those who recite Our verses to them. Say: \"Shall I tell you of something worse than that? The Fire (of Hell) which Allah has promised to those who disbelieved, and worst indeed is that destination!)(22:72)\nThis is why in this Ayah, Allah said:\nفَحَسْبُهُ جَهَنَّمُ وَلَبِئْسَ الْمِهَادُ\n(So enough for him is Hell, and worst indeed is that place to rest) meaning, the Fire is enough punishment for the hypocrite.\n\n## The Sincere Believer prefers pleasing Allah\n\nAllah said:\nوَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَن يَشْرِي نَفْسَهُ ابْتِغَاءَ مَرْضَاتِ اللَّهِ\n(And of mankind is he who would sell himself, seeking the pleasure of Allah.)\nAfter Allah described the evil characteristics of the hypocrites, He mentioned the good qualities of the believers. Allah said:\nوَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَن يَشْرِي نَفْسَهُ ابْتِغَاءَ مَرْضَاتِ اللَّهِ\n(And of mankind is he who would sell himself, seeking the pleasure of Allah.)\nIbn 'Abbas, Anas, Sa'id bin Musayyib, Abu 'Uthman An-Nahdi, 'Ikrimah and several other scholars said that this Ayah was revealed about Suhayb bin Sinan Ar-Rumi. When Suhayb became a Muslim in Makkah and intended to migrate (to Al-Madinah), the people (Quraysh) prevented him from migrating with his money. They said that if he forfeits his property, he is free to migrate. He abandoned his money and preferred to migrate, and Allah revealed this Ayah about him. 'Umar bin Khattab and several other Companions met Suhayb close to the outskirts of Al-Madinah at Al-Harrah (flat lands with black stones). They said to him, \"The trade has indeed been successful.\" He answered them, \"You too, may Allah never allow your trade to fail. What is the matter?\" 'Umar told him that Allah has revealed this Ayah (2:207) about him. It was also reported that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said, \"The trade has been successful, O Suhayb!\"\nThe meaning of the Ayah (2:207) includes every Mujahid in the way of Allah. Allah said in another Ayah:\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ اشْتَرَىٰ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَنفُسَهُمْ وَأَمْوَالَهُم بِأَنَّ لَهُمُ الْجَنَّةَ يُقَاتِلُونَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ فَيَقْتُلُونَ وَيُقْتَلُونَ وَعْدًا عَلَيْهِ حَقًّا فِي التَّوْرَاةِ وَالْإِنجِيلِ وَالْقُرْآنِ وَمَنْ أَوْفَىٰ بِعَهْدِهِ مِنَ اللَّهِ فَاسْتَبْشِرُوا بِبَيْعِكُمُ الَّذِي بَايَعْتُم بِهِ وَذَٰلِكَ هُوَ الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ\n(Verily, Allah has purchased of the believers their lives and their properties for (the price) that theirs shall be the Paradise. They fight in Allah's cause, so they kill (others) and are killed. It is a promise in truth which is binding on Him in the Tawrah and the Injil and the Qur'an. And who is truer to his covenant than Allah? Then rejoice in the bargain which you have concluded. That is the supreme success.)(9:111)\nWhen Hisham bin 'Amr penetrated the lines of the enemy, some people criticized him. 'Umar bin Al-Khattab and Abu Hurayrah refuted them and recited this Ayah:\nوَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَن يَشْرِي نَفْسَهُ ابْتِغَاءَ مَرْضَاتِ اللَّهِ وَاللَّهُ رَءُوفٌ بِالْعِبَادِ\n(And of mankind is he who would sell himself, seeking the pleasure of Allah. And Allah is full of kindness to (His) servants.)","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=204","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:208","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:208–209","text":"O you who believe! Enter Silm perfectly, and follow not the footsteps of Shaytan (Satan). Verily, he is to you a plain enemy (208)Then if you slide back after the clear signs (Prophet Muhammad ﷺ, and this Qur'an and Islam) have come to you, then know that Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise (209)\n\n## Entering Islam in its Entirety is obligated\n\nAllah commands His servants who believe in Him and have faith in His Messenger ﷺ to implement all of Islam's legislation and law, to adhere to all of its commandments, as much as they can, and to refrain from all of its prohibitions. 'Al-'Awfi said that Ibn 'Abbas said, and also Mujahid, Tawus, Ad-Dahhak, 'Ikrimah, Qatadah, As-Suddi and Ibn Zayd said that Allah's statement:\nادْخُلُوا فِي السِّلْمِ\n(Enter Silm) means Islam. Allah's statement:\nكَآفَّةً\n(...perfectly) means, in its entirety. This is the Tafsir of Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, Abu Al-'Aliyah, 'Ikrimah, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, As-Suddi, Muqatil bin Hayyan, Qatadah and Ad-Dahhak. Mujahid said that the Ayah means, 'Perform all the good works and the various pious deeds, this is especially addressed to those from among the People of the Scripture who embraced the faith.'\nIbn Abu Hatim reported that Ibn 'Abbas said that:\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا ادْخُلُوا فِي السِّلْمِ كَافَّةً\n(O you who believe! Enter Silm perfectly) refers to the believers among the People of the Scripture. This is because they believed in Allah, some of them still followed some parts of the Tawrah and the previous revelations. So Allah said:\nادْخُلُوا فِي السِّلْمِ كَافَّةً\n(Enter Islam perfectly.) Allah thus commanded them to embrace the legislation of the religion of Muhammad ﷺ in its entirety and to avoid abandoning any part of it. They should no longer adhere to the Tawrah.\nAllah then said:\nوَلَا تَتَّبِعُوا خُطُوَاتِ الشَّيْطَانِ\n(...and follow not the footsteps of Shaytan) meaning, perform the acts of worship and avoid what Satan commands you to do. This is because:\nإِنَّمَا يَأْمُرُكُم بِالسُّوءِ وَالْفَحْشَاءِ وَأَن تَقُولُوا عَلَى اللَّهِ مَا لَا تَعْلَمُونَ\n(He (Shaytan) commands you only what is evil and Fahsha' (sinful), and that you should say about Allah what you know not.)(2:169) and:\nإِنَّمَا يَدْعُو حِزْبَهُ لِيَكُونُوا مِنْ أَصْحَابِ السَّعِيرِ\n(He only invites his Hizb (followers) that they may become the dwellers of the blazing Fire.)(35:6) Hence, Allah said:\nإِنَّهُ لَكُمْ عَدُوٌّ مُّبِينٌ\n(Verily, he is to you an open enemy.)\nAllah said:\nفَإِن زَلَلْتُم مِّن بَعْدِ مَا جَاءَتْكُمُ الْبَيِّنَاتُ\n(Then if you slide back after the clear signs have come to you) meaning, if you deviate from the Truth after clear proofs have been established against you,\nفَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ عَزِيزٌ\n(...then know that Allah is All-Mighty) in His punishment, and no one can escape His vengeance or defeat Him.\nحَكِيمٌ\n(All-Wise) in His decisions, actions and rulings. Hence Abu Al-'Aliyah, Qatadah and Ar-Rabi' bin Anas said, \"He is Mighty in His vengeance, Wise in His decision.\"","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=208","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:210","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:210","text":"Do they then wait for anything other than that Allah should come to them over the shadows of the clouds and the angels? (Then) the case would be already judged. And to Allah return all matters (for decision)(210)\n\n## Do not delay embracing the Faith\n\nهَلْ يَنظُرُونَ إِلَّا أَن يَأْتِيَهُمُ اللَّهُ فِي ظُلَلٍ مِّنَ الْغَمَامِ وَالْمَلَائِكَةُ\n(Do they then wait for anything other than that Allah should come to them over the shadows of the clouds and the angels?) on the Day of Resurrection to judge the early and the latter creations. Allah shall then reward each according to his or her deeds; and whoever does good shall see it, and whoever does evil shall see it. This is why Allah said:\nوَقُضِيَ الْأَمْرُ وَإِلَى اللَّهِ تُرْجَعُ الْأُمُورُ\n((Then) the case would be already judged. And to Allah return all matters (for decision).)\nSimilarly, Allah said:\nكَلَّا إِذَا دُكَّتِ الْأَرْضُ دَكًّا دَكًّا - وَجَاءَ رَبُّكَ وَالْمَلَكُ صَفًّا صَفًّا - وَجِيءَ يَوْمَئِذٍ بِجَهَنَّمَ يَوْمَئِذٍ يَتَذَكَّرُ الْإِنسَانُ وَأَنَّىٰ لَهُ الذِّكْرَىٰ\n(Nay! When the earth is ground to powder. And your Lord comes with the angels in rows. And Hell will be brought near that Day. On that Day will man remember, but how will that remembrance (then) avail him?)(89:21-23) and:\nهَلْ يَنظُرُونَ إِلَّا أَن تَأْتِيَهُمُ الْمَلَائِكَةُ أَوْ يَأْتِيَ رَبُّكَ أَوْ يَأْتِيَ بَعْضُ آيَاتِ رَبِّكَ\n(Do they then wait for anything other than that the angels should come to them, or that your Lord (Allah) should come, or that some of the signs of your Lord should come (i. e., portents of the Hour, e.g., rising of the sun from the west)!)(6:158)\nAbu Ja'far Razi reported that Abu Al-'Aliyah narrated that:\nهَلْ يَنظُرُونَ إِلَّا أَن يَأْتِيَهُمُ اللَّهُ فِي ظُلَلٍ مِّنَ الْغَمَامِ وَالْمَلَائِكَةُ\n(Do they then wait for anything other than that Allah should come to them over the shadows of the clouds and the angels?) means, the angels will descend on the shadows of clouds, while Allah comes as He wills. Some of the reciters read it,\nهَلْ يَنظُرُونَ إِلَّا أَن يَأْتِيَهُمُ اللَّهُ فِي ظُلَلٍ مِّنَ الْغَمَامِ\nDo they then wait for anything other than that Allah should come to them and also the angels over the shadows of the clouds. This is similar to Allah's other statement:\nوَيَوْمَ تَشَقَّقُ السَّمَاءُ بِالْغَمَامِ وَنُزِّلَ الْمَلَائِكَةُ تَنزِيلًا\n(And (remember) the Day when the heaven shall be rent asunder with clouds, and the angels will be sent down, with a grand descending.)(25:25)","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=210","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:211","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:211–212","text":"Ask the Children of Israel how many clear Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) We gave them. And whoever changes Allah's favor after it has come to him, [e.g., renounces the religion of Allah (Islam) and accepts Kufr (disbelief)] then surely, Allah is severe in punishment (211)Beautified is the life of this world for those who disbelieve, and they mock at those who believe. But those who have Taqwa, will be above them on the Day of Resurrection. And Allah gives (of His bounty, blessings, favors, and honors on the Day of Resurrection) to whom He wills without limit (212)\n\n## The Punishment for changing Allah's Favor and mocking the Believers\n\nAllah mentioned that the Children of Israel, were witnesses to many clear signs that attest to the truth of Moses regarding what he was sent with for them. They witnessed his hand (when it became lit with light), his parting the sea, his striking the rock (and water flowed from the rock), the clouds that shaded them during the intense heat, the manna and the quails, and so forth. These signs attested to the existence of the Creator and the truth of Moses by whose hand these signs appeared. Yet, so many among them changed Allah's favor, by preferring disbelief to faith and by ignoring Allah's favors,\nوَمَن يُبَدِّلْ نِعْمَةَ اللَّهِ مِن بَعْدِ مَا جَاءَتْهُ فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ شَدِيدُ الْعِقَابِ\n(And whoever changes Allah's favor after it had come to him, then surely, Allah is severe in punishment.)\nSimilarly, Allah said about the disbelievers of Quraysh:\nأَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ بَدَّلُوا نِعْمَتَ اللَّهِ كُفْرًا وَأَحَلُّوا قَوْمَهُمْ دَارَ الْبَوَارِ - جَهَنَّمَ يَصْلَوْنَهَا وَبِئْسَ الْقَرَارُ\n(Have you not seen those who have changed the blessings of Allah into disbelief, and caused their people to dwell in the house of destruction? Hell, in which they will burn, ـ and what an evil place to settle in!)(14:28-29)\nThen Allah states that He has made the life of this world beautiful for the disbelievers who are satisfied with it, who collect wealth, but refrain from spending it on what they have been commanded, which could earn them Allah's pleasure. Instead, they ridicule the believers who ignore this life and who spend whatever they earn on what pleases their Lord. The believers spend seeking Allah's Face, and this is why they have gained the ultimate happiness and the best share on the Day of the Return. Therefore, they will be exalted above the disbelievers at the Gathering Place, when they are gathered, during the resurrection and in their final destination. The believers will reside in the highest grades in the utmost highs, while the disbelievers will reside in the lowest of lows (in the Fire).\nThis is why Allah said:\nوَاللَّهُ يَرْزُقُ مَن يَشَاءُ بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ\n(And Allah gives to whom He wills without limit.)\nThis Ayah indicates that Allah gives sustenance to whomever He wills of His servants without count or limit in this and the Hereafter. A Hadith has stated (that Allah said):\nابْنَ آدَمَ أَنْفِقْ أُنْفِقْ عَلَيْكَ\n(O son of Adam! Spend (in Allah's cause) and I (Allah) will spend on you.)\nThe Prophet ﷺ said:\nأَنْفِقْ بِلَالُ وَلَا تَخْشَ مِنْ ذِي الْعَرْشِ إِقْلَالًا\n(O Bilal! Spend and do not fear deprivation from the Owner of the Throne.)\nAllah said:\nوَمَا أَنفَقْتُم مِّن شَيْءٍ فَهُوَ يُخْلِفُهُ\n(...and whatsoever you spend of anything (in Allah's cause), He will replace it.)(34:39) In addition, it is reported in the Sahih (that the Prophet ﷺ said):\nأَنَّ مَلَكَيْنِ يَنْزِلَانِ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ صَبِيحَةَ كُلِّ يَوْمٍ فَيَقُولُ أحَدُهُمَا: اللَّهُمَّ أَعْطِ مُنْفِقًا خَلَفًا، وَيَقُولُ الآخَرُ: اللَّهُمَّ أعْطِ مُمْسِكًا تَلَفًا\n(Every day two angels come down from heavens and one of them says, 'O Allah! Compensate every person who spends in Your cause,' and the other (angel) says, 'O Allah! Destroy every miser.') Also in the Sahih:\nيَقُولُ ابْنُ آدَمَ: مَالِي مَالِي. وَهَلْ لَكَ مِنْ مَالِكَ إِلَّا مَا أَكَلْتَ فَأَفْنَيْتَ، وَمَا لَبِسْتَ فَأَبْلَيْتَ، وَمَا تَصَدَّقْتَ فَأَمْضَيْتَ، وَمَا سِوَى ذلِكَ فَذَاهِبٌ وَتَارِكُهُ لِلنَّاسِ\n(The son of Adam says, 'My money, my money!' Yet, what is your money except that which you eat and use up, wear and tear, and spend in charity and thus keep (in your record). Other than that, it will go away and will be left for the people (the inheritors).)\nIn addition, Imam Ahmad reported that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nالدُّنْيَا دَارُ مَنْ لَا دَارَ لَهُ، وَمَالُ مَنْ لَا مَالَ لَهُ، وَلَهَا يَجْمَعُ مَنْ لَا عَقْلَ لَهُ\n(The Dunya (life of this world) is the residence of those who have no residence, the wealth of those who have no wealth, and it is harvested by those who have no sense of reason.)","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=211","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:213","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:213","text":"Mankind was one community and Allah sent Prophets with glad tidings and warnings, and with them He sent down the Scripture in truth to judge between people in matters wherein they differed. And only those to whom (the Scripture) was given differed concerning it, after clear proofs had come unto them, through hatred, one to another. Then Allah by His leave guided those who believed to the truth of that wherein they differed. And Allah guides whom He wills to the straight path (213)\n\n## Disputing, after the Clear Signs have come, indicates Deviation\n\nIbn Jarir reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"There were ten generations between Adam and Nuh, all of them on the religion of Truth. They later disputed so Allah sent the Prophets as warners and bringers of glad tidings.\" He then said that this is how 'Abdullah read the Ayah:\nكَانَ النَّاسُ أُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً فَاخْتَلَفُوا\nThe people were one Ummah and they then disputed.\nAl-Hakim recorded this in his Mustadrak and said, \"Its chain of narrators is Sahih, but they (Al-Bukhari and Muslim) did not record it.\" Abu Ja'far Razi reported that Abu Al-'Aliyah said that Ubayy bin Ka'b read the Ayah as:\nكَانَ النَّاسُ أُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً فَاخْتَلَفُوا فَبَعَثَ اللهُ النَّبِيِّينَ مُبَشِّرِينَ وُمُنْذِرِينَ\nThe people were one Ummah and they then disputed and Allah sent the Prophets as warners and bringers of glad tidings.\nAbdur-Razzaq said that Ma'mar said that Qatadah said that Allah's statement:\nكَانَ النَّاسُ أُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً\n(Mankind was one community) means; \"They all had the guidance. Then:\nفَاخْتَلَفُوا فَبَعَثَ اللَّهُ النَّبِيِّينَ\nThey disputed and Allah sent Prophets.\nThe first to be sent was Nuh.\"\nAbdur-Razzaq reported that Abu Hurayrah commented on:\nفَهَدَى اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لِمَا اخْتَلَفُوا فِيهِ مِنَ الْحَقِّ بِإِذْنِهِ\n(Then Allah by His leave guided those who believed to the truth of that wherein they differed.) saying that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nنَحْنُ الآخِرُونَ الْأَوَّلُونَ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ، نَحْنُ أَوَّلُ النَّاسِ دُخُولًا الْجَنَّــةَ، بَيْدَ أَنَّهُم أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ مِنْ قَبْلِنا وأُوتِينَاهُ مِن بَعْدِهِمْ، فَهَدانا اللهُ لِمَا اخْتَلَفُوا فِيهِ مِنَ الْحَقَّ بِإِذْنِهِ، فَهَذَا الْيَوْمُ الَّذِي اخْتَلَفُوا فِيهِ فَهَدَانَا اللهُ لَهُ، فَالنَّاسُ لَنَا فِيهِ تَبَعٌ، فَغدًا لِلْيَهُودِ، وَبَعْدَ غَدٍ لِلنَّصَارَىٰ\n(We are the last (nation), but the first (foremost) on the Day of Resurrection. We are the first people to enter Paradise, although they (Jews and Christians) have been given the Book before us and we after them. Allah has guided us to the truth wherever they disputed over it. This is the day (Friday) that they disputed about, Allah guided us to it. So, the people follow us, as tomorrow is for the Jews and the day after is for the Christians.)\nIbn Wahb related that 'Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam said that his father said about the Ayah:\nفَهَدَى اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لِمَا اخْتَلَفُوا فِيهِ مِنَ الْحَقِّ بِإِذْنِهِ\n(Then Allah by His leave guided those who believed to the truth of that wherein they differed.)\nThey disputed about the day of Congregation (Friday). The Jews made it Saturday while the Christians chose Sunday. Allah guided the Ummah of Muhammad ﷺ to Friday. They also disputed about the true Qiblah. The Christians faced the east while the Jews faced Bayt Al-Maqdis. Allah guided the Ummah of Muhammad ﷺ to the true Qiblah (Ka'bah in Makkah). They also disputed about the prayer, as some of them bow down, but do not prostrate, while others prostrate, but do not bow down. Some of them pray while talking and some while walking. Allah guided the Ummah of Muhammad ﷺ to the truth. They also disputed about the fast; some of them fast during a part of the day, while others fast from certain types of foods. Allah guided the Ummah of Muhammad ﷺ to the truth. They also disputed about Ibrahim. The Jews said, 'He was a Jew,' while the Christians considered him Christian. Allah has made him a Haniyfan Musliman. Allah has guided the Ummah of Muhammad ﷺ to the truth.\nThey also disputed about 'Isa. The Jews rejected him and accused his mother of a grave sin, while the Christians made him a god and the son of God. Allah made him by His Word and a spirit from (those He created) Him. Allah guided the Ummah of Muhammad ﷺ to the truth.\"\nAllah then said:\nبِإِذْنِهِ\n(...by His leave) meaning, 'By His knowledge of them and by what He has directed and guided them to,' according to Ibn Jarir. Also:\nوَاللَّهُ يَهْدِي مَن يَشَاءُ\n(And Allah guides whom He wills) means from among His creation. (Allah said:)\nإِلَىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُّسْتَقِيمٍ\n(...to the straight way) meaning, He commands the decision and the clear proof. Al-Bukhari and Muslim reported that 'A'ishah narrated that when Allah's Messenger ﷺ used to wake up at night to pray, he would say:\nاللَّهُمَّ ربَّ جِبْرَائِيلَ وَمِيكَائِيلَ وَإِسْرَافِيلَ، فَاطِرَ السَّمٰوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ، عَالِمَ الْغَيْبِ وَالشَّهَادَةِ، أَنْتَ تَحْكُمُ بيْنَ عِبَادِكَ فِيمَا كَانُوا فِيهِ يَخْتَلِفُونَ، اهْدِنِي لِمَا اخْتُلِفَ فِيهِ مِنَ الْحَقِّ بِإِذْنِكَ، إِنَّكَ تَهْدِي مَنْ تَشَاءُ إِلى صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ\n(O Allah, the Lord of (angels) Jibril, Mika'il and Israfil, Creator of the heavens and earth and Knower of the seen and the unseen. You judge between Your servants regarding what they have disputed in, so guide me to what have been the subject of dispute of the truth by Your leave. Indeed, You guide whom You will to the straight path.)\nA Du'a reads:\nاللَّهُمَّ أَرِنَا الْحَقَّ حَقًّا، وَارْزُقْنَا اتِّبَاعَهُ، وَأَرِنَا الْبَاطِلَ بَاطِلًا، وَارْزُقْنَا اجْتنِاَبَهُ، وَلَا تَجْعَلْهُ مُلْتَبِسًا عَلَيْنَا فَنَضِلَّ، وَاجْعَلْنَا لِلْمُتَّقِينَ إِمَامًا\n(O Allah! Show us the truth as truth, and bestow adherence to it on us. Show us the evil as evil, and make us stay away from it, and do not confuse us regarding the reality of evil so that we will not be led astray by it, and make us leaders for the believers.)","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=213","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:214","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:214","text":"Or think you that you will enter Paradise without such (trials) as came to those who passed away before you? They were afflicted with severe poverty and ailments and were so shaken that even the Messenger and those who believed along with him said, \"When (will come) the help of Allah\" Yes! Certainly, the help of Allah is near (214)\n\n## Victory only comes after succeeding in the Trials\n\nAllah said:\nأَمْ حَسِبْتُمْ أَن تَدْخُلُوا الْجَنَّةَ\n(Or think you that you will enter Paradise) before you are tested and tried just like the nations that came before you? This is why Allah said:\nوَلَمَّا يَأْتِكُم مَّثَلُ الَّذِينَ خَلَوْا مِن قَبْلِكُم مَّسَّتْهُمُ الْبَأْسَاءُ وَالضَّرَّاءُ\n(...without such (trials) as came to those who passed away before you They were afflicted with severe poverty and ailments) meaning, illnesses, pain, disasters and hardships. Ibn Mas'ud, Ibn 'Abbas, Abu Al-'Aliyah, Mujahid, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Murrah Al-Hamdani, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak, Ar-Rabi', As-Suddi and Muqatil bin Hayyan said that\nالْبَأْسَآءِ\n(Al-Ba'sa') means poverty. Ibn 'Abbas said that\nوَالضَّرَّآءِ\n(...and Ad-Darra') means ailments.\nوَزُلْزِلُواْ\n(and were so shaken) for fear of the enemy, and were tested, and put to a tremendous trial. An authentic Hadith narrated that Khabbab bin Al-Aratt said, \"We said, 'O Messenger of Allah! Why do you not invoke Allah to support us? Why do you not supplicate to Allah for us?' He said:\nإِنَّ مَنْ كَانَ قَبْلَكُمْ كَانَ أَحَدُهُمْ يُوضَعُ الْمِنْشَارُ عَلى مَفْرَقِ رَأْسِهِ فَيَخْلُصُ إِلى قَدَمَيْهِ لَا يَصْرِفُهُ ذَلِكَ عَنْ دِينِهِ، وَيُمْشَطُ بِأَمْشَاطِ الْحَدِيدِ مَا بَيْنَ لَحْمِهِ وَعَظْمِهِ، لَا يَصْرِفُهُ ذلِكَ عَنْ دِينِهِ.\n(The saw would be placed on the middle of the head of one of those who were before you (believers) and he would be sawn until his feet, and he would be combed with iron combs between his skin and bones, yet that would not make him change his religion.)\nHe then said:\nوَاللهِ لَيُتِمَّنَّ اللهُ هَذَا الْأَمْرَ حَتَّى يَسِيرَ الرَّاكِبُ مِنْ صَنْعَاءَ إلى حَضْرَمَوْتَ، لَا يَخَافُ إِلَّا اللهَ وَالذِّئْبَ عَلى غَنَمِهِ، وَلَكِنَّــكُمْ قَوْمٌ تَسْتَعْجِلُونَ\n(By Allah! This matter (religion) will spread (or expand) by Allah until the traveler leaves San'a' to Hadramawt (both in Yemen, but at a great distance from each other) fearing only Allah and then the wolf for the sake of his sheep. You are just a hasty people.)\nAnd Allah said:\nالم - أَحَسِبَ النَّاسُ أَن يُتْرَكُوا أَن يَقُولُوا آمَنَّا وَهُمْ لَا يُفْتَنُونَ - وَلَقَدْ فَتَنَّا الَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِهِمْ فَلَيَعْلَمَنَّ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ صَدَقُوا وَلَيَعْلَمَنَّ الْكَاذِبِينَ\n(Alif-Lam-Mim. Do people think that they will be left alone because they say: \"We believe,\" and will not be tested? And We indeed tested those who were before them. And Allah will certainly make (it) known (the truth of) those who are true, and will certainly make (it) known (the falsehood of) those who are liars.)(29:1-3)\nThe Companions experienced tremendous trials during the battle of Al-Ahzab (the Confederates). Allah said:\nإِذْ جَاءُوكُم مِّن فَوْقِكُمْ وَمِنْ أَسْفَلَ مِنكُمْ وَإِذْ زَاغَتِ الْأَبْصَارُ وَبَلَغَتِ الْقُلُوبُ الْحَنَاجِرَ وَتَظُنُّونَ بِاللَّهِ الظُّنُونَا - هُنَالِكَ ابْتُلِيَ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ وَزُلْزِلُوا زِلْزَالًا شَدِيدًا - وَإِذْ يَقُولُ الْمُنَافِقُونَ وَالَّذِينَ فِي قُلُوبِهِم مَّرَضٌ مَّا وَعَدَنَا اللَّهُ وَرَسُولُهُ إِلَّا غُرُورًا\n(When they came upon you from above you and from below you, and when the eyes grew wild and the hearts reached to the throats, and you were harboring doubts about Allah. There, the believers were tried and shaken with a mighty shaking. And when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease (of doubts) said: \"Allah and His Messenger promised us nothing but delusion!\")(33:10-12)\nWhen Heraclius asked Abu Sufyan, \"Did you fight him (Prophet Muhammad)?\" He said, \"Yes.\" Heraclius said, \"What was the outcome of warfare between you?\" Abu Sufyan said, \"Sometimes we lose and sometimes he loses.\" He said, \"Such is the case with Prophets, they are tested, but the final victory is theirs.\"\nAllah's statement:\nمَّثَلُ الَّذِينَ خَلَوْا مِن قَبْلِكُم\n(...without (such)(trials) as came to those who passed away before you) meaning, their way of life. Similarly, Allah said:\nفَأَهْلَكْنَا أَشَدَّ مِنْهُم بَطْشًا وَمَضَىٰ مَثَلُ الْأَوَّلِينَ\n(Then We destroyed men stronger (in power) than these ـ and the example of the ancients has passed away (before them))(43:8) and:\nوَزُلْزِلُوا حَتَّىٰ يَقُولَ الرَّسُولُ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مَعَهُ مَتَىٰ نَصْرُ اللَّهِ\n(...were so shaken that even the Messenger and those who believed along with him said, \"When (will come) the help of Allah.\")\nThey pleaded (to Allah) for victory against their enemies and invoked Him for aid and deliverance from their hardships and trials. Allah said:\nأَلَا إِنَّ نَصْرَ اللَّهِ قَرِيبٌ\n(Yes! Certainly, the help of Allah is near!)\nAllah said:\nفَإِنَّ مَعَ الْعُسْرِ يُسْرًا - إِنَّ مَعَ الْعُسْرِ يُسْرًا\n(Verily, along with every hardship is relief. Verily, along with every hardship is relief.)(94:5-6)\nSo just as there is hardship, its equal of relief will soon arrive. This is why Allah said:\nأَلَا إِنَّ نَصْرَ اللَّهِ قَرِيبٌ\n(Yes! Certainly, the help of Allah is near!)","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=214","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:215","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:215","text":"They ask you (O Muhammad ﷺ) what they should spend. Say: \"Whatever you spend of good must be for parents and kindred and orphans and Al-Masakin (the poor) and the wayfarer, and whatever you do of good deeds, truly, Allah knows it well. (215)\n\n## Who deserves the Nafaqah (Spending or Charity)\n\nMuqatil bin Hayyan said that this Ayah was revealed about the voluntary charity. The Ayah means, 'They ask you (O Muhammad ﷺ) how they should spend,' as Ibn 'Abbas and Mujahid have stated. So, Allah explained it for them, saying:\nقُلْ مَا أَنفَقْتُم مِّنْ خَيْرٍ فَلِلْوَالِدَيْنِ وَالْأَقْرَبِينَ وَالْيَتَامَىٰ وَالْمَسَاكِينِ وَابْنِ السَّبِيلِ\n(Say: \"Whatever you spend of good must be for parents and kindred and orphans and Al-Masakin and the wayfarer,\") meaning, spend it on these categories or areas. Similarly, a Hadith states (that those who deserve one's generosity the most, are):\nأُمَّكَ وَأَبَاكَ وَأُخْتَكَ وَأَخَاكَ ثُمَّ أَدْنَاكَ أَدْنَاكَ\n(Your mother, father, sister, brother, the closest and then the farthest (relatives).)\nMaymun bin Mihran once recited this Ayah (2:215) and commented, \"These are the areas of spending. Allah did not mention among them the drums, pipe, wooden pictures, or the curtains that cover the walls.\"\nNext, Allah said:\nوَمَا تَفْعَلُوا مِنْ خَيْرٍ فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ بِهِ عَلِيمٌ\n(...and whatever you do of good deeds, truly, Allah knows it well.) meaning, whatever you perform of good works, Allah knows them and He will reward you for them in the best manner, no one will be dealt with unjustly, even the weight of an atom.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=215","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:216","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:216","text":"Fighting is ordained for you (Muslims) though you dislike it, and it may be that you dislike a thing which is good for you and that you like a thing which is bad for you. Allah knows but you do not know (216)\n\n## Jihad is made Obligatory\n\nIn this Ayah, Allah made it obligatory for the Muslims to fight in Jihad against the evil of the enemy who transgress against Islam. Az-Zuhri said, \"Jihad is required from every person, whether he actually joins the fighting or remains behind. Whoever remains behind is required to give support, if support is warranted; to provide aid, if aid is needed; and to march forth, if he is commanded to do so. If he is not needed, then he remains behind.\" It is reported in the Sahih:\nمَنْ مَاتَ وَلَمْ يَغْزُ وَلَمْ يُحَدِّثْ نَفْسَهُ بِالْغَزْوِ، مَاتَ مِيتَةً جَاهِلِيَّــةً\n(Whoever dies but neither fought (i.e., in Allah's cause), nor sincerely considered fighting, will die a death of Jahiliyyah (pre-Islamic era of ignorance).)\nOn the day of Al-Fath (when he conquered Makkah), the Prophet ﷺ said:\nلَا هِجْرَةَ بَعْدَ الْفَتْحِ وَلكِنْ جِهَادٌ وَنِيَّةٌ، وَإِذَا اسْتُنْفِرْتُمْ فَانْفِرُوا\n(There is no Hijrah (migration from Makkah to Al-Madinah) after the victory, but only Jihad and good intention. If you were required to march forth, then march forth.)\nAllah's statement:\nوَهُوَ كُرْهٌ لَّكُمْ\n(...though you dislike it) means, 'Fighting is difficult and heavy on your hearts.' Indeed, fighting is as the Ayah describes it, as it includes being killed, wounded, striving against the enemies and enduring the hardship of travel. Allah then said:\nوَعَسَىٰ أَن تَكْرَهُوا شَيْئًا وَهُوَ خَيْرٌ لَّكُمْ\n(...and it may be that you dislike a thing which is good for you) meaning, fighting is followed by victory, dominance over the enemy, taking over their lands, money and offspring. Allah continues:\nوَعَسَىٰ أَن تُحِبُّوا شَيْئًا وَهُوَ شَرٌّ لَّكُمْ\n(...and that you like a thing which is bad for you.)\nThis Ayah is general in meaning. Hence, one might covet something, yet in reality it is not good or beneficial for him, such as refraining from joining the Jihad, for it might lead to the enemy taking over the land and the government. Then, Allah said:\nوَاللَّهُ يَعْلَمُ وَأَنتُمْ لَا تَعْلَمُونَ\n(Allah knows, but you do not know.) meaning, He has better knowledge than you of how things will turn out to be in the end, and of what benefits you in this earthly life and the Hereafter. Hence, obey Him and adhere to His commands, so that you may acquire the true guidance.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=216","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:217","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:217–218","text":"They ask you concerning fighting in the Sacred Months. Say, \"Fighting therein is a great (transgression) but a greater (transgression) with Allah is to prevent mankind from following the way of Allah, to disbelieve in Him, to prevent access to Al-Masjid Al-Haram (at Makkah), and to drive out its inhabitants, and Al-Fitnah is worse than killing.\" And they will never cease fighting you until they turn you back from your religion (Islamic Monotheism) if they can. And whosoever of you turns back from his religion and dies as a disbeliever, then his deeds will be lost in this life and in the Hereafter, and they will be the dwellers of the Fire. They will abide therein forever (217)Verily, those who have believed, and those who have emigrated (for Allah's religion) and have striven hard in the way of Allah, all these hope for Allah's mercy. And Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most-Merciful (218)\n\n## The Nakhlah Military Maneuvers, and the Ruling on Fighting during the Sacred Months\n\nIbn Abu Hatim reported that Jundub bin 'Abdullah said: Allah's Messenger ﷺ assembled a group of men under the command of Abu 'Ubaydah bin Jarrah. When he was about to march, he started crying for the thought of missing Allah's Messenger ﷺ. Consequently, the Messenger ﷺ relieved Abu 'Ubaydah from command, appointed 'Abdullah bin Jahsh instead, gave him some written instructions and commanded him not to read the instructions until he reached such and such area. He also said to 'Abdullah:\nلَا تُكْرِهَنَّ أَحَدًا عَلَى السَّيْرِ مَعَكَ مِنْ أَصْحَابِكَ.\n(Do not compel any of your men to continue marching with you thereafter.)\nWhen 'Abdullah read the instructions, he recited Istirja' [saying, 'Truly! to Allah we belong and truly, to Him we shall return'; and refer to (2:156)] and said, \"I hear and obey Allah and His Messenger.\" He then told his companions the story and read the instructions to them, and two men went back while the rest remained. Soon after, they found Ibn Hadrami (one of the disbelievers of Quraysh) and killed him not knowing that that day was in Rajab or Jumadi (where Rajab is the Sacred Month). The polytheists said to the Muslims, \"You have committed murder in the Sacred Month.\" Allah then revealed:\nيَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الشَّهْرِ الْحَرَامِ قِتَالٍ فِيهِ قُلْ قِتَالٌ فِيهِ كَبِيرٌ\n(They ask you concerning fighting in the Sacred Months. Say, \"Fighting therein is a great (transgression)...\")\nAbdul-Malik bin Hisham, who compiled the Sirah (life story of the Prophet ﷺ), related that Ziyad bin 'Abdullah Bakka'i said that Muhammad bin Ishaq bin Yasar Al-Madani wrote in his book on the Sirah, \"Allah's Messenger ﷺ sent 'Abdullah bin Jahsh bin Riyab Al-Asadi in Rajab, after he (the Prophet ﷺ) came back from the first battle of Badr. The Prophet ﷺ sent eight people with him, all from among the Muhajirun and none from the Ansar. He also gave him some written instructions and ordered him not to read them until he marched for two days. 'Abdullah should then read the instructions and march to implement them, but should not force any of those who were with him to accompany him.\nThe companions of 'Abdullah bin Jahsh were all from the Muhajirun, from the tribe of Banu 'Abd Shams bin 'Abd Manaf, there was Abu Hudhayfah bin 'Utbah bin Rabi'ah bin 'Abd Shams bin 'Abd Manaf. From their allies, there was 'Abdullah bin Jahsh, who was the commander of the army unit, and 'Ukkashah bin Mihsan from the tribe of Banu Asad bin Khuzaymah. From the tribe of Banu Nawfal bin 'Abd Manaf, there was 'Utbah bin Ghazwan bin Jabir, one of their allies. From the tribe of Banu Zuhrah bin Kilab, there was Sa'd bin Abu Waqqas. From Banu Ka'b, there were their allies: 'Adi bin 'Amr bin Ar-Rabi'ah not from the tribe of Ibn Wa'il; Waqid bin 'Abdullah bin 'Abd Manaf bin 'Arin bin Tha'labah bin Yarbu' from Banu Tamim; and Khalid bin Bukair from the tribe of Banu Sa'd bin Layth, Suhayl bin Bayda' from Banu Al-Harith bin Fihr was also among them. When 'Abdullah bin Jahsh marched for two days, he opened and read the (Prophet's) instructions, \"When you read these instructions, march until you set camp at Nakhlah between Makkah and At-Ta'if. There, watch the movements of the caravan of Quraysh and collect news about them for us.\" When 'Abdullah bin Jahsh read the document, he said, \"I hear and obey.\" He then said to his companions, \"Allah's Messenger ﷺ has commanded me to march forth to Nakhlah to watch the movements of the caravan of Quraysh and to inform him about their news. He has prohibited me from forcing any of you (to go with me). So, those who seek martyrdom, they should march with me. Those who dislike the idea of martyrdom, let them turn back. Surely, I will implement the command of Allah's Messenger ﷺ.\" He and his companions continued without any of them turning back.\nAbdullah entered the Hijaz area (western Arabia) until he reached an area called Buhran, close to Furu'. There, Sa'd bin Abu Waqqas and 'Utbah bin Ghazwan lost the camel that they were riding in turns, and they went back to search for it while 'Abdullah bin Jahsh and the rest of his companions continued until they reached Nakhlah. Then, a caravan belonging to the Quraysh passed by carrying raisins, food stuff and some trade items for the Quraysh. 'Amr bin Hadrami, whose name was 'Abdullah bin 'Abbad, was in the caravan, as well as 'Uthman bin 'Abdullah bin Al-Mughirah and his brother Nawfal bin 'Abdullah from the tribe of Makhzum, and Al-Hakam bin Kaysan, a freed slave of Hisham bin Al-Mughirah. When they saw the Companions they were frightened, but when they saw 'Ukkashah bin Mihsan their fears subsided, since his head was shaved. They said, \"These people seek the 'Umrah, so there is no need to fear them.\"\nThe Companions conferred among themselves. That day was the last day in the (sacred) month of Rajab. They said to each other, \"By Allah! If you let them pass, they will soon enter the Sacred Area and take refuge in it from you. If you kill them, you will kill them during the Sacred Month.\" They at first hesitated and did not like to attack them. They then began encouraging themselves and decided to kill whomever they could among the disbelievers and to confiscate whatever they had. Hence, Waqid bin 'Abdullah At-Tamimi shot an arrow at 'Amr bin Al-Hadrami and killed him. 'Uthman bin 'Abdullah and Al-Hakam bin Kaysan gave themselves up, while Nawfal bin 'Abdullah was able to outrun them in flight. Later on, 'Abdullah bin Jahsh and his companions went back to Allah's Messenger ﷺ in Al-Madinah with the caravan and the two prisoners.\nIbn Ishaq went on: I was told that some members of the family of 'Abdullah bin Jahsh said that 'Abdullah said to his companions: \"Allah's Messenger ﷺ will have one-fifth of what we have confiscated.\" This occurred before Allah required one-fifth for His Messenger from the war booty. So, 'Abdullah designated one-fifth of the caravan for Allah's Messenger ﷺ and divided the rest among his companions. Ibn Ishaq also stated that at first, when the Sariyah came back to Allah's Messenger ﷺ, he said to them:\nمَا أَمَرْتُكُمْ بِقِتَالٍ فِي الشَّهْرِ الْحَرَامِ\n(I have not commanded you to conduct warfare during the Sacred Month.)\nHe left the caravan and the two prisoners alone and did not take any share of the war booty.\nWhen Allah's Messenger ﷺ did that, the soldiers from the attack were concerned and felt that they were destroyed, and their Muslim brethren criticized them for what they did. The Quraysh said that Muhammad ﷺ and his Companions violated the sanctity of the Sacred Month and shed blood, confiscated property and took prisoners during it. Those who refuted them among the Muslims who remained in Makkah replied that the Muslims had done that during the month of Sha'ban (which is not a sacred month). Meanwhile, the Jews were pleased about what happened to Allah's Messenger ﷺ. They said, ' Amr bin Hadrami was killed by Waqid bin 'Abdullah: 'Amr, means the war has started, Hadrami means the war has come, as for Waqid (bin 'Abdullah): the war has raged (using some of the literal meanings of these names to support their fortune-telling!).\" But, Allah made all that turn against them.\nThe people continued talking about this matter, then Allah revealed to His Messenger ﷺ:\nيَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الشَّهْرِ الْحَرَامِ قِتَالٍ فِيهِ قُلْ قِتَالٌ فِيهِ كَبِيرٌ وَصَدٌّ عَن سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ وَكُفْرٌ بِهِ وَالْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ وَإِخْرَاجُ أَهْلِهِ مِنْهُ أَكْبَرُ عِندَ اللَّهِ وَالْفِتْنَةُ أَكْبَرُ مِنَ الْقَتْلِ\n(They ask you concerning fighting in the Sacred Months. Say, \"Fighting therein is a great (transgression) but a greater (transgression) with Allah is to prevent mankind from following the way of Allah, to disbelieve in Him, to prevent access to Al-Masjid Al-Haram (at Makkah), and to drive out its inhabitants, and Al-Fitnah is worse than killing.)\nThis Ayah means, 'If you had killed during the Sacred Month, they (disbelievers of Quraysh) have hindered you from the path of Allah and disbelieved in it. They also prevented you from entering the Sacred Mosque, and expelled you from it, while you are its people,\nأَكْبَرُ عِندَ اللَّهِ\n(...a greater (transgression) with Allah) than killing whom you killed among them. Also:\nوَالْفِتْنَةُ أَكْبَرُ مِنَ الْقَتْلِ\n(...and Al-Fitnah is worse than killing.) means, trying to force the Muslims to revert from their religion and re-embrace Kufr after they had believed, is worse with Allah than killing.' Allah said:\nوَلَا يَزَالُونَ يُقَاتِلُونَكُمْ حَتَّىٰ يَرُدُّوكُمْ عَن دِينِكُمْ إِنِ اسْتَطَاعُوا\n(And they will never cease fighting you until they turn you back from your religion (Islamic Monotheism) if they can.)\nSo, they will go on fighting you with unrelenting viciousness.\nIbn Ishaq went on: When the Qur'an touched this subject and Allah brought relief to the Muslims instead of the sadness that had befallen them, Allah's Messenger ﷺ took possession of the caravan and the two prisoners. The Quraysh offered to ransom the two prisoners, 'Uthman bin 'Abdullah and Hakam bin Kaysan. Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nلَا نَفْدِيكُمُوهُمَا حَتَّى يَقْدَمَ صَاحِبَانَا\n(We will not accept your ransom until our two companions return safely.) meaning Sa'd bin Abu Waqqas and 'Utbah bin Ghazwan, \"For we fear for their safety with you. If you kill them, we will kill your people.\" Later on, Sa'd and 'Utbah returned safely and Allah's Messenger ﷺ accepted the Quraysh's ransom for their prisoners. As for Al-Hakam bin Kaysan, he became Muslim and his Islam strengthened. He remained with Allah's Messenger ﷺ until he was martyred during the incident at Bir Ma'unah (when the Prophet ﷺ sent seventy Companions to Najd to teach them Islam, but Banu Sulaim killed them all except two). As for 'Uthman bin 'Abdullah, he went back to Makkah and died there as a disbeliever.\nIbn Ishaq went on: When 'Abdullah bin Jahsh and his companions were relieved from their depressing thoughts after the Qur'an was revealed about this subject, they sought the reward of the fighters (in Allah's way). They said, \"O Messenger of Allah! We wish that this incident be considered a battle for us, so that we gain the rewards of the Mujahidin.\" Then, Allah revealed:\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَالَّذِينَ هَاجَرُوا وَجَاهَدُوا فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ أُولَٰئِكَ يَرْجُونَ رَحْمَتَ اللَّهِ وَاللَّهُ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ\n(Verily, those who have believed, and those who have emigrated (for Allah's religion) and have striven hard in the way of Allah, all these hope for Allah's mercy. And Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.)\nHence, Allah has greatly elevated their hopes of gaining what they had wished for.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=217","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:219","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:219–220","text":"They ask you (O Muhammad ﷺ) concerning alcoholic drink and gambling. Say: \"In them is a great sin, and (some) benefits for men, but the sin of them is greater than their benefit.\" And they ask you what they ought to spend. Say: \"That which is (spare) beyond your needs.\" Thus Allah makes clear to you His Laws in order that you may give thought (219)In (to) this worldly life and in the Hereafter. And they ask you concerning orphans. Say: \"The best thing is to work honestly in their property, and if you mix your affairs with theirs, then they are your brothers. And Allah knows (the one) who means mischief (e.g., to swallow their property) from (the one) who means good (e.g., to save their property). And if Allah had wished, He could have put you into difficulties. Truly, Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise. (220)\n\n## The Gradual Prohibition of Khamr (Alchoholic Drink)\n\nImam Ahmad recorded that Abu Maysarah said that 'Umar once said, \"O Allah! Give us a clear ruling regarding Al-Khamr!\" Allah sent down the Ayah of Surat Al-Baqarah:\nيَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْخَمْرِ وَالْمَيْسِرِ قُلْ فِيهِمَا إِثْمٌ كَبِيرٌ\n(They ask you (O Muhammad ﷺ) concerning alcoholic drink and gambling. Say: \"In them is a great sin...)\nUmar was then summoned and the Ayah was recited to him. Yet, he still said, \"O Allah! Give us a clear ruling regarding Al-Khamr.\" Then, this Ayah that is in Surat An-Nisa' was revealed:\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَقْرَبُوا الصَّلَاةَ وَأَنتُمْ سُكَارَىٰ\n(O you who believe! Approach not As-Salah (the prayer) when you are in a drunken state.)(4:43)\nThen, when the prayer was called for, a person used to herald on behalf of Allah's Messenger ﷺ, \"No drunk person should attend the prayer.\" 'Umar was summoned again and the Ayah was recited to him. Yet, he still said, \"O Allah! Give us a clear ruling regarding Al-Khamr.\" Then, the Ayah that is in Surat Al-Ma'idah was revealed, 'Umar was again summoned and the Ayah was recited to him. When he reached:\nفَهَلْ أَنتُم مُّنتَهُونَ\n(So, will you not then abstain)(5:91) he said, \"We did abstain, we did abstain.\" This is also the narration that Abu Dawud, At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasai collected in their books. 'Ali bin Al-Madini and At-Tirmidhi said that the chain of narrators for this Hadith is sound and authentic. We will mention this Hadith again along with what Imam Ahmad collected by Abu Hurayrah Allah's saying in Surat Al-Ma'idah:\nإِنَّمَا الْخَمْرُ وَالْمَيْسِرُ وَالْأَنصَابُ وَالْأَزْلَامُ رِجْسٌ مِّنْ عَمَلِ الشَّيْطَانِ فَاجْتَنِبُوهُ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ\n(Intoxicants and gambling, and Al-Ansab, and Al-Azlam are an abomination of Satan's handiwork. So avoid (strictly all) that (abomination) in order that you may be successful.)(5:90)\nAllah said:\nيَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْخَمْرِ وَالْمَيْسِرِ\n(They ask you (O Muhammad ﷺ) concerning alcoholic drinks and gambling.)\nAs for Al-Khamr, 'Umar bin Khattab, the Leader of the faithful, used to say, \"It includes all what intoxicates the mind.\" We will also mention this statement in the explanation of Surat Al-Ma'idah, along with the topic of gambling.\nAllah said:\nقُلْ فِيهِمَا إِثْمٌ كَبِيرٌ وَمَنَافِعُ لِلنَّاسِ\n(Say: In them is a great sin, and (some) benefits for men.)\nAs for the harm that the Khamr and gambling cause, it effects the religion. As for their benefit, it is material, including benefit for the body, digesting the food, getting rid of the excrements, sharpening the mind, bringing about a joyous sensation and financially benefiting from their sale. Also, (their benefit includes) earnings through gambling that one uses to spend on his family and on himself. Yet, these benefits are outweighed by the clear harm that they cause which affects the mind and the religion. This is why Allah said:\nوَإِثْمُهُمَا أَكْبَرُ مِن نَّفْعِهِمَا\n(...but the sin of them is greater than their benefit.)\nThis Ayah was the beginning of the process of prohibiting Khamr, not explicity, but it only implied this meaning. So when this Ayah was recited to 'Umar, he still said, \"O Allah! Give us a clear ruling regarding Al-Khamr.\" Soon after, Allah sent down a clear prohibition of Khamr in Surat Al-Ma'idah:\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِنَّمَا الْخَمْرُ وَالْمَيْسِرُ وَالْأَنصَابُ وَالْأَزْلَامُ رِجْسٌ مِّنْ عَمَلِ الشَّيْطَانِ فَاجْتَنِبُوهُ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ - إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ الشَّيْطَانُ أَن يُوقِعَ بَيْنَكُمُ الْعَدَاوَةَ وَالْبَغْضَاءَ فِي الْخَمْرِ وَالْمَيْسِرِ وَيَصُدَّكُمْ عَن ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ وَعَنِ الصَّلَاةِ فَهَلْ أَنتُم مُّنتَهُونَ\n(O you who believe! Intoxicants (all kinds of alcoholic drinks), and gambling, and Al-Ansab, and Al-Azlam are an abomination of Shaytan's handiwork. So avoid (strictly all) that (abomination) in order that you may be successful. Shaytan wants only to excite enmity and hatred between you with intoxicants (alcoholic drinks) and gambling, and hinder you from the remembrance of Allah and from As-Salah (the prayer). So, will you not then abstain?)(5:90-91)\nWe will mention this subject, by the will of Allah, when we explain Surat Al-Ma'idah.\nIbn 'Umar, Ash-Sha'bi, Mujahid, Qatadah, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas and 'Abdur-Rahman bin Aslam stated that the first Ayah revealed about Khamr was:\nيَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْخَمْرِ وَالْمَيْسِرِ قُلْ فِيهِمَا إِثْمٌ كَبِيرٌ\n(They ask you about Khamr and gambling. Say: \"In them there is great sin.\")(2:219)\nThen, the Ayah in Surat An-Nisa' was revealed (on this subject) and then the Ayah in Surat Al-Ma'idah which prohibited Khamr.\n\n## Spending whatever One could spare of his Money on Charity\n\nAllah said:\nوَيَسْأَلُونَكَ مَاذَا يُنفِقُونَ قُلِ الْعَفْوَ\n(And they ask you what they ought to spend. Say: \"That which is (spare) beyond your needs.\")\nAl-Hakam said that Miqsam said that Ibn 'Abbas said that this Ayah means, whatever you can spare above the needs of your family. This is also the opinion of Ibn 'Umar, Mujahid, 'Ata', 'Ikrimah, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Muhammad bin Ka'b, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Al-Qasim, Salim, 'Ata' Al-Khurasani and Ar-Rabi' bin Anas.\nIbn Jarir related that Abu Hurayrah said that a man said, \"O Messenger of Allah! I have a Dinar (a currency).\" The Prophet ﷺ said:\nأَنْفِقْهُ عَلى نَفْسِكَ\n(Spend it you on yourself.) He said, \"I have another Dinar.\" He said:\nأَنْفِقْهُ عَلى أَهْلِكَ\n(Spend it on your wife.) He said, \"I have another Dinar.\" He said:\nأَنْفِقْهُ عَلى وَلَدِكَ\n(Spend it on your offspring.) He said, \"I have another Dinar.\" He said:\nفَأَنْتَ أَبْصَرُ\n(You have better knowledge (meaning how and where to spend it in charity).)\nMuslim also recorded this Hadith in his Sahih.\nMuslim recorded that Jabir said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said to a man:\nابْدَأْ بِنَفْسِكَ فَتَصَدَّقْ عَلَيْهَا، فَإِنْ فَضَلَ شَيْءٌ فَلِأَهْلِكَ، فَإِنْ فَضَلَ شَيْءٌ عَنْ أَهْلِكَ فَلِذِي قَرَابَتِكَ، فَإِنْ فَضَلَ عَنْ ذِي قَرَابَتِكَ شَيْءٌ فَهٰكَذَا وَهٰكَذَا\n(Start with yourself and grant it some charity. If anything remains, then spend it on your family. If anything remains, then spend it on your relatives. If anything remains, then spend it like this and like that (i.e., on various charitable purposes).)\nA Hadith states:\nابْنَ آدَمَ إِنَّكَ أَنْ تَبْذُلَ الْفَضْلَ خَيْرٌ لَكَ، وَأَنْ تُمْسِكَهُ شَرٌّ لَكَ، وَلَا تُلَامُ عَلى كَفَافٍ\n(O son of Adam! If you spend whatever you can spare, it would be better for you; but if you keep it, it would be worse for you. You shall not be blamed for whatever is barely sufficient.)\nAllah said:\nكَذَٰلِكَ يُبَيِّنُ اللَّهُ لَكُمُ الْآيَاتِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَفَكَّرُونَ - فِي الدُّنْيَا وَالْآخِرَةِ\n(Thus Allah makes clear to you His Ayat in order that you may give thought. In (to) this worldly life and in the Hereafter.) meaning, just as He stated and explained these commandments for you, He also explains the rest of His Ayat regarding the commandments and His promises and warnings, so that you might give thought in this life and the Hereafter. 'Ali bin Abu Talhah said that Ibn 'Abbas commented, \"Meaning about the imminent demise and the brevity of this life, and the imminent commencement of the Hereafter and its continuity.\"\n\n## Maintaining the Orphan's Property\n\nAllah said:\nوَيَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْيَتَامَىٰ قُلْ إِصْلَاحٌ لَّهُمْ خَيْرٌ وَإِن تُخَالِطُوهُمْ فَإِخْوَانُكُمْ وَاللَّهُ يَعْلَمُ الْمُفْسِدَ مِنَ الْمُصْلِحِ وَلَوْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ لَأَعْنَتَكُمْ\n(And they ask you concerning orphans. Say: \"The best thing is to work honestly in their property, and if you mix your affairs with theirs, then they are your brothers. And Allah knows him who means mischief (e.g., to swallow their property) from him who means good (e.g., to save their property). And if Allah had wished, He could have put you into difficulties.)\nIbn Jarir reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"When the Ayat:\nوَلَا تَقْرَبُوا مَالَ الْيَتِيمِ إِلَّا بِالَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ\n(And come not near to the orphan's property, except to improve it.)(6:152) and\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَأْكُلُونَ أَمْوَالَ الْيَتَامَىٰ ظُلْمًا إِنَّمَا يَأْكُلُونَ فِي بُطُونِهِمْ نَارًا وَسَيَصْلَوْنَ سَعِيرًا\n(Verily, those who unjustly eat up the property of orphans, they eat up only fire into their bellies, and they will be burnt in the blazing Fire!)(4:10) were revealed, those who took care of some orphans, separated their food and drink from the orphans' food and drink. When some of the orphans' food and drink remained, they would keep it for them until they eat it or otherwise get spoiled. This situation was difficult for them and they mentioned this subject to Allah's Messenger ﷺ.\nوَيَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْيَتَامَىٰ قُلْ إِصْلَاحٌ لَّهُمْ خَيْرٌ وَإِن تُخَالِطُوهُمْ فَإِخْوَانُكُمْ\n(And they ask you concerning orphans. Say: \"The best thing is to work honestly in their property, and if you mix your affairs with theirs, then they are your brothers.)\nHence, they joined their food and drink with the food and drink of the orphans.\" This Hadith was also collected by Abu Dawud, An-Nasa'i and Al-Hakim in his Mustadrak. Several others said similarly about the circumstances surrounding the revelation of the Ayah (2:220), including Mujahid, 'Ata', Ash-Sha'bi, Ibn Abu Layla, Qatadah and others among the Salaf and those after them.\nIbn Jarir reported that 'A'ishah said, \"I dislike that an orphan's money be under my care, unless I mix my food with his food and my drink with his drink.\"\nAllah said:\nقُلْ إِصْلاَحٌ لَّهُمْ خَيْرٌ\n(Say: The best thing is to work honestly in their property.) meaning, on the one hand (i.e., this is required in any case). Allah then said:\nوَإِن تُخَالِطُوهُمْ فَإِخْوَانُكُمْ\n(...and if you mix your affairs with theirs, then they are your brothers.) meaning, there is no harm if you mix your food and drink with their food and drink, since they are your brothers in the religion. This is why Allah said afterwards:\nوَاللَّهُ يَعْلَمُ الْمُفْسِدَ مِنَ الْمُصْلِحِ\n(And Allah knows (the one) who means mischief (e.g., to swallow their property) from (the one) who means good (e.g., to save their property).) meaning, He knows those whose intent is to cause mischief or righteousness. He also said:\nوَلَوْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ لَأَعْنَتَكُمْ إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَزِيزٌ حَكِيمٌ\n(And if Allah had wished, He could have put you into difficulties. Truly, Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise) meaning, if Allah wills, He will make this matter difficult for you. But, He made it easy for you, and allowed you to mix your affairs with the orphans' affairs in a way that is better. Similarly, Allah said:\nوَلَا تَقْرَبُوا مَالَ الْيَتِيمِ إِلَّا بِالَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ\n(And come not near to the orphan's property, except to improve it.)(6:152)\nAllah has thus allowed spending from the orphan's estate by its executor, in reasonable proportions, on the condition that he has the intention to compensate the orphan later on, when he can afford it. We will mention about it in detail in Surat An-Nisa' by Allah's will.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=219","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:221","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:221","text":"And do not marry Al-Mushrikat (idolatresses) till they believe (worship Allah Alone). And indeed a slave woman who believes is better than a (free) Mushrikah (idolatress), even though she pleases you. And give not (your daughters) in marriage to Al-Mushrikin till they believe (in Allah Alone) and verily, a believing servant is better than a (free) Mushrik (idolator), even though he pleases you. Those (Mushrikin) invite you to the Fire, but Allah invites (you) to Paradise and forgiveness by His leave, and makes His Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) clear to mankind that they may remember (221)\n\n## The Prohibition of marrying Mushrik Men and Women\n\nAllah prohibited the believers from marrying Mushrik women who worship idols. Although the meaning is general and includes every Mushrik woman from among the idol worshippers and the People of the Scripture, Allah excluded the People of the Scripture from this ruling. Allah stated:\nمِنَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ مِن قَبْلِكُمْ إِذَا آتَيْتُمُوهُنَّ أُجُورَهُنَّ مُحْصِنِينَ غَيْرَ مُسَافِحِينَ\n((Lawful to you in marriage) are chaste women from those who were given the Scripture (Jews and Christians) before your time when you have given their due dowry, desiring chastity (i.e., taking them in legal wedlock) not committing illegal sexual intercourse.)(5:5)\nAli bin Abu Talhah said that Ibn 'Abbas said about what Allah said:\nوَلَا تَنكِحُوا الْمُشْرِكَاتِ حَتَّىٰ يُؤْمِنَّ\n(And do not marry Al-Mushrikat (female idolators) till they believe (worship Allah Alone).)\n\"Allah has excluded the women of the People of the Scripture.\" This is also the explanation of Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Makhul, Al-Hasan, Ad-Dahhak, Zayd bin Aslam and Ar-Rabi' bin Anas and others. Some scholars said that the Ayah is exclusively talking about idol worshippers and not the People of the Scripture, and this meaning is similar to the first meaning we mentioned. Allah knows best.\nAbu Ja'far bin Jarir (At-Tabari) said, after mentioning that there is Ijma' that marrying women from the People of the Scripture is allowed, \"Umar disliked this practice so that the Muslims do not refrain from marrying Muslim women, or for similar reasons.\" An authentic chain of narrators stated that Shaqiq said: Once Hudhayfah married a Jewish woman and 'Umar wrote to him, \"Divorce her.\" He wrote back, \"Do you claim that she is not allowed for me so that I divorce her?\" He said, \"No. But, I fear that you might marry the whores from among them.\" Ibn Jarir related that Zayd bin Wahb said that 'Umar bin Khattab said, \"The Muslim man marries the Christian woman, but the Christian man does not marry the Muslim woman.\" This Hadith has a stronger, authentic chain of narrators than the previous Hadith.\nIbn Abu Hatim said that Ibn 'Umar disliked marrying the women from the People of the Scripture. He relied on his own explanation for the Ayah:\nوَلَا تَنكِحُوا الْمُشْرِكَاتِ حَتَّىٰ يُؤْمِنَّ\n(And do not marry Al-Mushrikat (female idolators) till they believe (worship Allah Alone).)\nAl-Bukhari also reported that Ibn 'Umar said, \"I do not know of a bigger Shirk than her saying that Jesus is her Lord!\"\nAllah said:\nوَلَأَمَةٌ مُّؤْمِنَةٌ خَيْرٌ مِّن مُّشْرِكَةٍ وَلَوْ أَعْجَبَتْكُمْ\n(And indeed a slave woman who believes is better than a (free) Mushrikah (female idolators), even though she pleases you.)\nIt is recorded in the Two Sahihs that Abu Hurayrah narrated that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nتُنْـكَحُ الْمَرْأَةُ لِأَرْبَعٍ: لِمَالِهَا وَلِحَسَبِهَا وَلِجَمَالِهَا وَلِدِينِهَا، فَاظْفَرْ بِذَاتِ الدِّينِ، تَرِبَتْ يَدَاكَ\n(A woman is chosen for marriage for four reasons: her wealth, social status, beauty, and religion. So, marry the religious woman, may your hands be filled with sand (a statement of encouragement).)\nMuslim reported this Hadith from Jabir. Muslim also reported that Ibn 'Amr said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nالدُّنْيَا مَتَاعٌ، وَخَيْرُ مَتَاعِ الدُّنْيَا الْمَرْأَةُ الصَّالِحَةُ\n(The life of this world is but a delight, and the best of the delights of this earthly life is the righteous wife.)\nAllah then said:\nوَلَا تُنكِحُوا الْمُشْرِكِينَ حَتَّىٰ يُؤْمِنُوا\n(And give not (your daughters) in marriage to Al-Mushrikin till they believe (in Allah Alone).) meaning, do not marry Mushrik men to believing women. This statement is similar to Allah's statement:\nلَا هُنَّ حِلٌّ لَّهُمْ وَلَا هُمْ يَحِلُّونَ لَهُنَّ\n(They are not lawful (wives) for them, nor are they lawful (husbands) for them.)(60:10)\nNext, Allah said:\nوَلَعَبْدٌ مُّؤْمِنٌ خَيْرٌ مِّن مُّشْرِكٍ وَلَوْ أَعْجَبَكُمْ\n(...and verily, a believing servant is better than a (free) Mushrik (idolator), even though he pleases you.)\nThis Ayah indicates that a believing man, even an Abyssinian servant, is better than a Mushrik man, even if he was a rich master.\nأُولَٰئِكَ يَدْعُونَ إِلَى النَّارِ\n(Those (Al-Mushrikun) invite you to the Fire) meaning, associating and mingling with the disbelievers makes one love this life and prefer it over the Hereafter, leading to the severest repercussions. Allah said:\nوَاللَّهُ يَدْعُو إِلَى الْجَنَّةِ وَالْمَغْفِرَةِ بِإِذْنِهِ\n(...but Allah invites (you) to Paradise and forgiveness by His leave) meaning, by His Law, commandments and prohibitions. Allah said:\nوَيُبَيِّنُ آيَاتِهِ لِلنَّاسِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَذَكَّرُونَ\n(...and makes His Ayat clear to mankind that they may remember.)","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=221","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:222","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:222–223","text":"They ask you concerning menstruation. Say: \"That is an Adha, therefore, keep away from women during menses and go not in unto them till they are purified.\" And when they have purified themselves, then go in unto them as Allah has ordained for you. Truly, Allah loves those who turn unto Him in repentance and loves those who purify themselves (222)Your wives are a tilth for you, so go to your tilth, when or how you will, and send (good deeds, or ask Allah to bestow upon you pious offspring) for your own selves beforehand. And fear Allah, and know that you are to meet Him (in the Hereafter), and give good tidings to the believers (O Muhammad ﷺ)(223)\n\n## Sexual Intercourse with Menstruating Women is prohibited\n\nImam Ahmad recorded that Anas said that the Jews used to avoid their menstruating women, they would not eat, or even mingle with them in the house. The Companions of the Prophet ﷺ asked about this matter and Allah revealed:\nوَيَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْمَحِيضِ قُلْ هُوَ أَذًى فَاعْتَزِلُوا النِّسَاءَ فِي الْمَحِيضِ وَلَا تَقْرَبُوهُنَّ حَتَّىٰ يَطْهُرْنَ\n(They ask you concerning menstruation. Say: \"That is an Adha, therefore, keep away from women during menses and go not in unto them till they are purified.)\nAllah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nاصْنَعُوا كُلَّ شَيْءٍ إِلَّا النِّكَاحَ\n(Do everything you wish, except having sexual intercourse.)\nWhen the Jews were told about the Prophet's statement, they said, \"What is the matter with this man? He would not hear of any of our practices, but would defy it.\" Then, Usayd bin Hudayr and 'Abbad bin Bishr came and said, \"O Messenger of Allah! The Jews said this and that, should we have sex with our women (meaning, during the menstruation period)?\" The face of Allah's Messenger ﷺ changed color, until the Companions thought that he was angry with them. They left. Soon after, some milk was brought to Allah's Messenger ﷺ as a gift, and he sent some of it for them to drink. They knew then that Allah's Messenger ﷺ was not angry with them. Muslim also reported this Hadith. Allah said:\nفَاعْتَزِلُوا النِّسَاءَ فِي الْمَحِيضِ\n(...therefore, keep away from women during menses.) meaning, avoid the sexual organ. The Prophet ﷺ said:\nاصْنَعُوا كُلَّ شَيْءٍ إِلَّا النِّكَاحَ\n(Do anything you wish except having sexual intercourse.)\nThis is why most of the scholars said that it is allowed to fondle the wife, except for having sexual intercourse (when she is having her menses). Abu Dawud reported that 'Ikrimah related to one of the Prophet's wives that she said that whenever the Prophet ﷺ wanted to fondle (one of his wives) during her menses, he would cover her sexual organ with something.\nAbu Ja'far bin Jarir related that Masruq went to 'A'ishah and greeted her, and 'A'ishah greeted him in return. Masruq said, \"I wish to ask you about a matter, but I am shy.\" She replied, \"I am your mother and you are my son.\" He said, \"What can the man enjoy of his wife when she is having her menses\" She said, \"Everything except her sexual organ.\" This is also the opinion of Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, Al-Hasan and 'Ikrimah.\nOne is allowed to sleep next to his wife and to eat with her (when she is having her menses). 'A'ishah said, \"Allah's Messenger ﷺ used to ask me to wash his hair while I was having the menses. He would lay on my lap and read the Qur'an while I was having the period.\" It is also reported in the Sahih that 'A'ishah said, \"While having the menses, I used to eat from a piece of meat and give it to the Prophet ﷺ who would eat from the same place I ate from. I used to have sips of a drink and would then give the cup to the Prophet ﷺ who would place his mouth where I placed my mouth.\"\nIt is also reported in the Two Sahihs that Maymunah bint Al-Harith Al-Hilaliyah said, \"Whenever the Prophet ﷺ wanted to fondle any of his wives during the periods (menses), he used to ask her to wear an Izar (a sheet covering the lower-half of the body).\" These are the wordings collected by Al-Bukhari. Similar was reported from 'A'ishah. In addition, Imam Ahmad, Abu Dawud, At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah reported that 'Abdullah bin Sa'd Al-Ansari asked Allah's Messenger ﷺ, \"What am I allowed of my wife while she is having her menses?\" He said, \"What is above the Izar (a sheet covering the lower-half of the body).\" Hence, Allah's statement:\nوَلَا تَقْرَبُوهُنَّ حَتَّىٰ يَطْهُرْنَ\n(...and go not in unto them till they are purified.) explains His statement:\nفَاعْتَزِلُوا النِّسَاءَ فِي الْمَحِيضِ\n(...therefore, keep away from women during menses.)\nAllah prohibited having sexual intercourse with the wife during menstruation, indicating that sexual intercourse is allowed otherwise.\nAllah's statement:\nفَإِذَا تَطَهَّرْنَ فَأْتُوهُنَّ مِنْ حَيْثُ أَمَرَكُمُ اللَّهُ\n(And when they have purified themselves, then go in unto them as Allah has ordained for you.) indicates that men should have sexual intercourse with their wives after they take a bath. The scholars agree that the woman is obliged to take a bath, or to perform Tayammum with sand, if she is unable to use water, before she is allowed to have sexual intercourse with her husband, after the monthly period ends. Ibn 'Abbas said:\nحَتَّىٰ يَطْهُرْنَ\n\"(till they are purified) means from blood, and,\nفَإِذَا تَطَهَّرْنَ\n(And when they have purified themselves) means with water.\" This is also the Tafsir of Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Al-Hasan, Muqatil bin Hayyan and Al-Layth bin Sa'd and others.\n\n## Anal Sex is prohibited\n\nAllah said:\nمِنْ حَيْثُ أَمَرَكُمُ اللَّهُ\n(...as Allah has ordained for you.) this refers to Al-Farj (the vagina), as Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid and other scholars have stated. Therefore, anal sex is prohibited, as we will further emphasize afterwards, Allah willing. Abu Razin, 'Ikrimah and Ad-Dahhak and others said that:\nفَأْتُوهُنَّ مِنْ حَيْثُ أَمَرَكُمُ اللَّهُ\n(...then go in unto them as Allah has ordained for you.) means when they are pure, and not during the menses. Allah said afterwards:\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ يُحِبُّ التَّوَّابِينَ\n(Truly, Allah loves those who turn unto Him in repentance) from the sin even if it was repeated,\nوَيُحِبُّ الْمُتَطَهِّرِينَ\n(and loves those who purify themselves.) meaning, those who purify themselves from the impurity and the filth that include having sexual intercourse with the wife during the menses and anal sex.\n\n## The Reason behind revealing Allah's Statement: \"Your Wives are a Tilth for You.\"\n\nAllah said:\nنِسَاؤُكُمْ حَرْثٌ لَّكُمْ\n(Your wives are a tilth for you,)\nIbn 'Abbas commented, \"Meaning the place of pregnancy.\" [Allah then said:]\nفَأْتُوا حَرْثَكُمْ أَنَّىٰ شِئْتُمْ\n(...so go to your tilth, when or how you will,) meaning, wherever you wish from the front or from behind, as long as sex takes place in one valve (the female sexual organ), as the authentic Hadiths have indicated.\nFor instance, Al-Bukhari recorded that Ibn Al-Munkadir said that he heard Jabir say that the Jews used to claim that if one has sex with his wife from behind (in the vagina) the offspring would become cross-eyed. Then, this Ayah was revealed:\nنِسَاؤُكُمْ حَرْثٌ لَّكُمْ فَأْتُوا حَرْثَكُمْ أَنَّىٰ شِئْتُمْ\n(Your wives are a tilth for you, so go to your tilth, when or how you will,)\nMuslim and Abu Dawud also reported this Hadith.\nIbn Abu Hatim said that Muhammad bin Al-Munkadir narrated that Jabir bin 'Abdullah told him that the Jews claimed to the Muslims that if one has sex with their wife from behind (in the vagina) their offspring will become cross-eyed. Allah revealed afterwards:\nنِسَاؤُكُمْ حَرْثٌ لَّكُمْ فَأْتُوا حَرْثَكُمْ أَنَّىٰ شِئْتُمْ\n(Your wives are a tilth for you, so go to your tilth, when or how you will,)\nIbn Jurayj (one of the reporters of the Hadith) said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nمُقْبِلَةً ومُدْبِرَةً إِذَا كَان ذٰلِكَ فِي الْفَرْجِ\n(From the front or from behind, as long as that occurs in the Farj (vagina).)\nImam Ahmad recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"The Ayah,\nنِسَاؤُكُمْ حَرْثٌ لَّكُمْ\n(Your wives are a tilth for you) was revealed about some people from the Ansar who came to the Prophet ﷺ and asked him (about having sex with the wife from behind). He said to them:\nائْتِهَا عَلى كُلِّ حَالٍ إِذَا كَانَ فِي الْفَرْجِ\n(Have sex with her as you like as long as that occurs in the vagina.)\nImam Ahmad recorded that 'Abdullah bin Sabit said: I went to Hafsah bint 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr and said, \"I wish to ask you about something, but I am shy.\" She said, \"Do not be shy, O my nephew.\" He said, \"About having sex from behind with women.\" She said, \"Umm Salamah told me that the Ansar used to refrain from having sex from behind (in the vagina). The Jews claimed that those who have sex with their women from behind would have offspring with crossed-eyes. When the Muhajirun came to Al-Madinah, they married Ansar women and had sex with them from behind. One of these women would not obey her husband and said, 'You will not do that until I go to Allah's Messenger ﷺ (and ask him about this matter). ' She went to Umm Salamah and told her the story. Umm Salamah said, 'Wait until Allah's Messenger ﷺ comes.' When Allah's Messenger ﷺ came, the Ansari woman was shy to ask him about this matter, so she left. Umm Salamah told Allah's Messenger ﷺ the story and he said:\nادْعِي الْأَنْصَارِيَّـةِ\n(Summon the Ansari woman.)\"\nShe was summoned and he recited this Ayah to her:\nنِسَاؤُكُمْ حَرْثٌ لَّكُمْ فَأْتُوا حَرْثَكُمْ أَنَّىٰ شِئْتُمْ\n(Your wives are a tilth for you, so go to your tilth, when or how you will.) He added:\nصِمَامًا وَاحِدًا\n(Only in one valve (the vagina).)\"\nThis Hadith was also collected by At-Tirmidhi who said, \"Hasan.\"\nAn-Nasa'i reported that Ka'b bin 'Alqamah said that Abu An-Nadr said that he asked Nafi', \"The people are repeating the statement that you relate from Ibn 'Umar that he allowed sex with women in their rear (anus).\" He said, \"They have said a lie about me. But let me tell you what really happened. Ibn 'Umar was once reciting the Qur'an while I was with him and he reached the Ayah:\nنِسَاؤُكُمْ حَرْثٌ لَّكُمْ فَأْتُوا حَرْثَكُمْ أَنَّىٰ شِئْتُمْ\n(Your wives are a tilth for you, so go to your tilth, when or how you will,) He then said, 'O Nafi'! Do you know the story behind this Ayah?' I said, 'No.' He said, 'We, the people of Quraysh, used to have sexual intercourse with our wives from the back (in the vagina). When we migrated to Al-Madinah and married some Ansari women, we wanted to do the same with them. They disliked it and made a big issue out of it. The Ansari women had followed the practice of the Jews who have sex with their women while they lay on their sides. Then, Allah revealed:\nنِسَاؤُكُمْ حَرْثٌ لَّكُمْ فَأْتُوا حَرْثَكُمْ أَنَّىٰ شِئْتُمْ\n(Your wives are a tilth for you, so go to your tilth, when or how you will,)\"\nThis has an authentic chain of narrators.\nImam Ahmad reported that Khuzaymah bin Thabit Al-Khatami narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nلَا يَسْتَحْيِي اللهُ مِنَ الْحَقِّ - ثَلَاثًا - لَا تَأْتُوا النِّسَاءَ فِي أَعْجَازِهِنَّ\n(Allah does not shy from the truth - he said it thrice - do not have anal sex with women.)\nThis Hadith was collected by An-Nasa'i and Ibn Majah.\nAbu 'Isa At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa'i reported that Ibn 'Abbas narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nلَا يَنْظُرُ اللهُ إِلى رَجُلٍ أَتَى رَجُلًا أَوِ امْرَأَةً فِي الدُّبُرِ\n(Allah does not look at a man who had anal sex with another man or a woman.)\nAt-Tirmidhi said, \"Hasan Gharib.\" This is also the narration that Ibn Hibban collected in his Sahih, while Ibn Hazm stated that this is an authentic Hadith.\nIn addition, Imam Ahmad reported that 'Ali bin Talaq said, \"Allah's Messenger ﷺ forbade anal sex with women, for Allah does not shy away from truth.\" Abu 'Isa At-Tirmidhi also reported this Hadith and said, \"Hasan\".\nAbu Muhammad 'Abdullah bin 'Abdur-Rahman Darimi reported in his Musnad that Sa'id bin Yasar Abu Hubab said: I said to Ibn 'Umar, \"What do you say about having sex with women in the rear?\" He said, \"What does it mean?\" I said, \"Anal sex.\" He said, \"Does a Muslim do that?\" This Hadith has an authentic chain of narrators and is an explicit rejection of anal sex from Ibn 'Umar.\nAbu Bakr bin Ziyad Naysaburi reported that Isma'il bin Ruh said that he asked Malik bin Anas, \"What do you say about having sex with women in the anus?\" He said, \"You are not an Arab? Does sex occur but in the place of pregnancy? Do it only in the Farj (vagina).\" I said, \"O Abu 'Abdullah! They say that you allow that practice.\" He said, \"They utter a lie about me, they lie about me.\" This is Malik's firm stance on this subject. It is also the view of Sa'id bin Musayyib, Abu Salamah, 'Ikrimah, Tawus, 'Ata , Sa'id bin Jubayr, 'Urwah bin Az-Zubayr, Mujahid bin Jabr, Al-Hasan and other scholars of the Salaf (the Companions and the following two generations after them). They all, along with the majority of the scholars, harshly rebuked the practice of anal sex and many of them called this practice a Kufr.\nAllah said:\nوَقَدِّمُواْ لِأَنفُسِكُمْ\n(...and send for your own selves beforehand.) meaning, by performing the acts of worship while refraining from whatever Allah has prohibited for you. This is why Allah said afterwards:\nوَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّكُم مُّلَاقُوهُ\n(And fear Allah, and know that you are to meet Him (in the Hereafter),)\nmeaning, He will hold you accountable for all of your deeds,\nوَبَشِّرِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ\n(...and give good tidings to the believers (O Muhammad ﷺ).) meaning, those who obey what Allah has commanded and refrain from what He has prohibited. Ibn Jarir reported that 'Ata' said, or related it to Ibn 'Abbas,\nوَقَدِّمُوا لِأَنفُسِكُمْ\n(...and send for your own selves beforehand.) means, mention Allah's Name, by saying, 'Bismillah', before having sexual intercourse.\" Al-Bukhari also reported that Ibn 'Abbas narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nلَوْ أَنَّ أَحَدَكُمْ إِذَا أَرَادَ أَنْ يَأْتِيَ أَهْلَهُ قَالَ: بِاسْمِ اللهِ، اللَّهُمَّ جَنِّبْنَا الشَّيْطَانَ وَجَنِّبِ الشَّيْطَانَ مَا رَزَقْتَنَا، فَإنَّهُ إِنْ يُقَدَّرْ بَيْنَهُمَا وَلَدٌ فِي ذلِكَ، لَمْ يَضُرَّهُ الشَّيْطَانُ أَبَدًا\n(If anyone of you on having sexual relations with his wife said: 'In the Name of Allah. O Allah! Protect us from Satan and also protect what you bestow upon us (i.e., the coming offspring) from Satan,' and if it is destined that they should have a child then, Satan will never be able to harm him.)","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=222","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:224","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:224–225","text":"And make not Allah's (Name) an excuse in your oaths against doing good and acting piously, and making peace among mankind. And Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower (i.e., do not swear much and if you have sworn against doing something good then give an expiation for the oath and do good)(224)Allah will not call you to account for that which is unintentional in your oaths, but He will call you to account for that which your hearts have earned. And Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most-Forbearing (225)\n\n## The Prohibition of swearing to abandon a Good Deed\n\nAllah commands, 'You should not implement your vows in Allah's Name to refrain from pious acts and severing the relations with the relatives, if you swear to abandon such causes.' Allah said in another Ayah:\nوَلَا يَأْتَلِ أُولُو الْفَضْلِ مِنكُمْ وَالسَّعَةِ أَن يُؤْتُوا أُولِي الْقُرْبَىٰ وَالْمَسَاكِينَ وَالْمُهَاجِرِينَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ وَلْيَعْفُوا وَلْيَصْفَحُوا أَلَا تُحِبُّونَ أَن يَغْفِرَ اللَّهُ لَكُمْ\n(And let not those among you who are blessed with graces and wealth swear not to give (any sort of help) to their kinsmen, Al-Masakin (the poor), and those who left their homes for Allah's cause. Let them pardon and forgive. Do you not love that Allah should forgive you?)(24:22)\nContinuity in a sinful vow is more sinful than breaking it by expiation. Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nوَاللهِ لَأَنْ يَلَجَّ أَحَدُكُمْ بِيَمِينِهِ فِي أَهْلِهِ آثَمُ لَهُ عِنْد اللهِ مِنْ أَنْ يُعْطِيَ كَفَّارَتَهُ الَّتِي افْتَرَضَ اللهُ عَلَيْهِ\n(By Allah! It is more sinful to Allah that one of you implements his vow regarding (severing the relations with) his relatives than (breaking his promise and) paying the Kaffarah that Allah has required in such cases.)\nThis is how Muslim reported this Hadith and also Imam Ahmad.\nAli bin Abu Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas said that what Allah said:\nوَلَا تَجْعَلُوا اللَّهَ عُرْضَةً لِّأَيْمَانِكُمْ\n(And make not Allah's (Name) an excuse in your oaths) means, \"Do not vow to refrain from doing good works. (If you make such vow then) break it, pay the Kaffarah and do the good work.\" This was also said by Masruq, Ash-Sha'bi, Ibrahim An-Nakha'i, Mujahid, Tawus, Sa'id bin Jubayr, 'Ata', 'Ikrimah, Makhul, Az-Zuhri, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Muqatil bin Hayyan, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, Ad-Dahhak, 'Ata' Al-Khurasani and As-Suddi.\nSuporting this view, which is the majority view, is what is reported in the Two Sahihs that Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nإِنِّي وَاللهِ إِنْ شَاءَ اللهُ، لَا أَحْلِفُ عَلى يَمِينٍ فَأَرَى غَيْرَهَا خَيْرًا مِنْهَا إِلَّا أَتَيْتُ الَّذِي هُوَ خَيْرٌ وَتَحَلَّلْتُهَا\n(By Allah! Allah willing, I will not vow to do a thing and then see a better act, but I would do what is better and break my vow.) Muslim reported that Abu Hurayrah said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nمَنْ حَلَفَ عَلى يَمِينٍ فَرَأَى غَيْرَهَا خَيْرًا مِنْهَا فَلْيُكَفِّرْ عَنْ يَمِينِهِ، وَلْيَفْعَلِ الَّذِي هُوَ خَيْرٌ\n(Whoever makes a vow and then finds what is better than his vow (should break his vow,) pay the Kaffarah and perform the better deed.)\n\n## The Laghw (Unintentional) Vows\n\nAllah said:\nلَّا يُؤَاخِذُكُمُ اللَّهُ بِاللَّغْوِ فِي أَيْمَانِكُمْ\n(Allah will not call you to account for that which is unintentional in your oaths,)\nThis Ayah means, 'Allah does not punish or hold you accountable for the Laghw (unintentional) vows that you make.' The Laghw vows are unintentional and are just like the habitual statements that the tongue repeats, without really intending them. For instance, it is reported in the Two Sahihs that Abu Hurayrah narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nمَنْ حَلَفَ فَقَالَ فِي حَلِفِهِ بِاللَّاتِ وَالْعُزَّى، فَلْيَقُلْ لَا إِلَهَ إِلَّا اللهُ\n(Whoever swore and (unintentionally) mentioned Al-Lat and Al-'Uzza (two idols) in his vow, should then say, 'There is no deity worthy of worship except Allah'.)\nThe Messenger ﷺ said this statement to some new Muslims whose tongues were, before Islam, used to vowing by their idol Al-Lat. Therefore, the Prophet ﷺ ordered them to intentionally recite the slogan of Ikhlas, just as they mentioned these words by mistake, so that it (the word of Ikhlas) may eradicate the word (of Shirk). This is why Allah said:\nوَلَٰكِن يُؤَاخِذُكُم بِمَا كَسَبَتْ قُلُوبُكُمْ\n(...but He will call you to account for that which your hearts have earned.) and in another Ayah:\nبِمَا عَقَّدتُّمُ الْأَيْمَانَ\n(...for your deliberate oaths)(5:89)\nAbu Dawud reported under Chapter: 'The Laghw Vows' that 'Ata' said that 'A'ishah said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nاللَّغْوُ فِي الْيَمِينِ هُوَ كَلَامُ الرَّجُلِ فِي بَيْتِهِ: كَلَّا وَاللهِ، وَبَلَى وَاللهِ\n(The Laghw in the vows includes what the man says in his house, such as, 'No, by Allah,' and, 'Yes, by Allah'.)\nIbn Abu Hatim reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"The Laghw vow includes vowing while angry.\"\nHe also reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"The Laghw vow includes vowing to prohibit what Allah has allowed, and this type does not require a Kaffarah (expiation).\" Similar was said by Sa'id bin Jubayr.\nIn addition, Abu Dawud related under Chapter: 'Vowing while Angry' that Sa'id bin Musayyib said that two Ansari brothers both received inheritance and one of them asked that the inheritance be divided. His brother said, \"If you ask me about dividing the inheritance again, then all of what I have will be spent on the Ka'bah's door.\" 'Umar said to him, \"The Ka'bah does not need your money. So break your vow, pay the Kaffarah and come to terms with your brother. I heard Allah's Messenger ﷺ saying:\nلَا يـَمِينَ عَلَيْكَ وَلَا نَذْرَ فِي مَعْصِيَةِ الرَّبِّ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ، وَفِي قَطِيعَةِ الرَّحِمِ، وَفِيمَا لَا تـَمْلِكُ\n(Do not make a vow against yourself, nor to disobey the Lord, cut the relations of the womb or dispose of what you do not own.)\"\nAllah said:\nوَلَٰكِن يُؤَاخِذُكُم بِمَا كَسَبَتْ قُلُوبُكُمْ\n(...but He will call you to account for that which your hearts have earned,)\nIbn 'Abbas, Mujahid and several others said that this Ayah means swearing about a matter while knowing that he is lying. Mujahid and others said this Ayah is similar to what Allah said:\nوَلَٰكِن يُؤَاخِذُكُم بِمَا عَقَّدتُّمُ الْأَيْمَانَ\n(...but He will punish you for your deliberate oaths.)(5:89) Allah said (2:225 above):\nوَاللَّهُ غَفُورٌ حَلِيمٌ\n(And Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most-Forbearing.) meaning, He is Oft-Forgiving to His servants and Most Forbearing with them.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=224","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:226","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:226–227","text":"Those who take an oath not to have sexual relation with their wives must wait for four months, then if they return, verily, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful (226)And if they decide upon divorce, then Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower (227)\n\n## The Īlā' and its Rulings\n\nĪlā' is a type of vow where a man swears not to sleep with his wife for a certain period, whether less or more than four months. If the vow of Īlā' was for less than four months, the man has to wait for the vow's period to end and then is allowed to have sexual intercourse with his wife. She has to be patient and she cannot ask her husband, in this case, to end his vow before the end of its term. It is reported in the Two Sahihs that 'A'ishah said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ swore he would stay away from with his wives for a month. He then came down after twenty-nine days saying:\nالشَّهْرُ تِسْعٌ وَعِشْرُونَ\n(The (lunar) month is twenty-nine days.)\nSimilar was narrated by 'Umar bin Al-Khattab and reported in the Two Sahihs. If the period of Īlā' is for more than four months, the wife is allowed in this case to ask her husband, upon the end of the four months, to end the Īlā' and have sexual relations with her. Otherwise, he should divorce her, by being forced to do so by the authorities if necessary, so that the wife is not harmed. Allah said:\nلِّلَّذِينَ يُؤْلُونَ مِن نِّسَائِهِمْ\n(Those who take an oath not to have sexual relations with their wives) meaning, swear not to have sexual relations with the wife. This Ayah indicates that the Īlā' involves the wife and not a slave-women, as the majority of the scholars have agreed,\nتَرَبُّصُ أَرْبَعَةِ أَشْهُرٍ\n(...must wait for four months,) meaning, the husband waits for four months from the time of the vow and then ends the Īlā' (if the vow was for four or more months) and is required to either return to his wife or divorce her. This is why Allah said next:\nفَإِن فَاءُوا\n(...then if they return,) meaning, to a normal relationship, having sexual intercourse with the wife. This is the Tafsir of Ibn 'Abbas, Masruq, Ash-Sha'bi, Sa'id bin Jubayr and Ibn Jarir.\nفَإِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ\n(...verily, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.) with any shortcomings that occurred in the rights of the wife because of the vow of Īlā'.\nAllah said:\nوَإِنْ عَزَمُوا الطَّلَاقَ\n(And if they decide upon divorce,) indicating that divorce does not occur by merely passing the four month mark (during the Īlā'). Malik reported from Nafi' that 'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, \"If the man swears to Īlā' from his wife, then divorce does not occur automatically even after the four months have passed. When he stops at the four months mark, he should either divorce or return.\" Al-Bukhari also reported this Hadith. Ibn Jarir reported that Suhayl bin Abu Salih said that his father said, \"I asked twelve Companions about the man who does Īlā' with his wife. They all stated that he does not have to do anything until the four months have passed and then has to either retain or divorce her.\" Ad-Daraqutni also reported this from Suhayl.\nIt is also reported from 'Umar, 'Uthman, 'Ali, Abu Ad-Darda', 'A'ishah, Ibn 'Umar and Ibn 'Abbas. This is also the opinion of Sa'id bin Musayyib, 'Umar bin 'Abdul-'Aziz, Mujahid, Tawus, Muhammad bin Ka'b and Al-Qasim.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=226","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:228","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:228","text":"And divorced women shall wait (as regards their marriage) for three menstrual periods, and it is not lawful for them to conceal what Allah has created in their wombs, if they believe in Allah and the Last Day. And their husbands have the better right to take them back in that period, if they wish for reconciliation. And they (women) have rights (over their husbands as regards living expenses) similar (to those of their husbands) over them (as regards obedience and respect) to what is reasonable, but men have a degree (of responsibility) over them. And Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise (228)\n\n## The 'Iddah (Waiting Period) of the Divorced Woman\n\nThis Ayah contains a command from Allah that the divorced woman, whose marriage was consummated and who still has menstruation periods, should wait for three (menstrual) periods (Quru') after the divorce and then remarry if she wishes.\n\n## The Meaning of Al-Quru'\n\nIbn Jarir related that 'Alqamah said: We were with 'Umar bin Al-Khattab when a woman came and said, \"My husband divorced me one or two periods ago. He then came back to me while I had prepared my water [for taking a bath], took off my clothes and closed my door.\" 'Umar asked 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud, \"What do you think?\" He said, \"I think that she is still his wife, as long as she is not allowed to resume praying (i.e., until the third period ends before he takes her back).\" 'Umar said, \"This is my opinion too.\" This is also the opinion of Abu Bakr As-Siddiq, 'Umar, 'Uthman, 'Ali, Abu Ad-Darda', 'Ubadah bin As-Samit, Anas bin Malik, Ibn Mas'ud, Mu'adh, Ubayy bin Ka'b, Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari and Ibn 'Abbas. Furthermore, this is the opinion of Sa'id bin Musayyib, 'Alqamah, Aswad, Ibrahim, Mujahid, 'Ata', Tawus, Sa'id bin Jubayr, 'Ikrimah, Muhammad bin Sirin, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ash-Sha'bi, Ar-Rabi', Muqatil bin Hayyan, As-Suddi, Makhul, Ad-Dahhak and 'Ata' Al-Khurasani. They all stated that the Quru' is the menstruation period. What testifies to this is the Hadith that Abu Dawud and An-Nasa'i reported that Fatimah bint Abu Hubaiysh said that Allah's Messenger said ﷺ to her:\nدَعِي الصَّلاَةَ أَيَّامَ أَقْرَائِكِ\n(Do not pray during your Aqra' (pl. for Quru', the menstruation period).)\nIf this Hadith was authentic, it would have been a clear proof that the Quru' is the menstruation period. However, one of the narrators of this Hadith, Al-Mundhir, is an unknown person (in Hadith terminology), as Abu Hatim has stated, although Ibn Hibban has mentioned Al-Mundhir in his book Ath-Thiqat.\n\n## A Woman's Statement about Menses and Purity is to be accepted\n\nAllah said:\nوَلَا يَحِلُّ لَهُنَّ أَن يَكْتُمْنَ مَا خَلَقَ اللَّهُ فِي أَرْحَامِهِنَّ\n(...and it is not lawful for them to conceal what Allah has created in their wombs,) meaning, of pregnancy or menstruation periods. This is the Tafsir of Ibn 'Abbas, Ibn 'Umar, Mujahid, Ash-Sha'bi, Al-Hakam bin 'Utaybah, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, Ad-Dahhak and others.\nAllah then said:\nإِن كُنَّ يُؤْمِنَّ بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الْآخِرِ\n(...if they believe in Allah and the Last Day.)\nThis Ayah warns women against hiding the truth (if they were pregnant or on their menses), indicating that they are the authority in such matters as they alone know such facts about themselves. Since verifying such matters is difficult, Allah left this decision with them. Yet, women were warned not to hide the truth in case they wish to end the 'Iddah sooner, or later, according to their desires. Women were thus commanded to say the truth (if they were pregnant or on their menses), no more and no less.\n\n## The Husband has the Right to take back his Divorced Wife during the 'Iddah (Waiting Period)\n\nAllah said:\nوَبُعُولَتُهُنَّ أَحَقُّ بِرَدِّهِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ إِنْ أَرَادُوا إِصْلَاحًا\n(And their husbands have the better right to take them back in that period, if they wish for reconciliation.)\nHence, the husband who divorces his wife can take her back, providing she is still in her 'Iddah (time spent before a divorced woman or a widow can remarry) and that his aim, by taking her back, is righteous and for the purpose of bringing things back to normal. However, this ruling applies where the husband is eligible to take his divorced wife back. We should mention that (when this Ayah 2:228 was revealed), the ruling that made the divorce thrice and specified when the husband is ineligible to take his divorced wife back, had not been revealed yet. Previously, the man used to divorce his wife and then take her back even if he had divorced her a hundred separate times. Thereafter, Allah revealed the following Ayah (2:229) that made the divorce only thrice. So there was now a reversible divorce and an irreversible final divorce.\n\n## The Rights the Spouses have over Each Other\n\nAllah said:\nوَلَهُنَّ مِثْلُ الَّذِي عَلَيْهِنَّ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ\n(And they (women) have rights (over their husbands as regards living expenses) similar (to those of their husbands) over them (as regards obedience and respect) to what is reasonable,)\nThis Ayah indicates that the wife has certain rights on her husband, just as he has certain rights on her, and each is obliged to give the other spouse his due rights. Muslim reported that Jabir said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nفَاتَّقُوا اللهَ فِي النِّسَاءِ، فَإِنَّكُمْ أَخَذْتُمُوهُنَّ بِأَمَانَةِ اللهِ، وَاسْتَحْلَلْتُمْ فُرُوجَهُنَّ بِكَلِمَةِ اللهِ، وَلَكُمْ عَلَيْهِنَّ أَنْ لَا يُوطِئْنَ فُرُشَكُمْ أَحَدًا تَكْرَهُونَهُ، فَإِنْ فَعَلْنَ ذَلِكَ فَاضْرِبُوهُنَّ ضَرْبًا غَيْرَ مُبَرِّحٍ، وَلَهُنَّ رِزْقُهُنَّ وَكِسْوَتُهُنَّ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ\n(Fear Allah regarding your women, for you have taken them by Allah's covenant and were allowed to enjoy with them sexually by Allah's Words. You have the right on them that they do not allow anyone you dislike to sit on your mat. If they do that, then discipline them leniently. They have the right to be spent on and to be bought clothes in what is reasonable.)\nBahz bin Hakim said that Mu'awiyah bin Haydah Al-Qushayri related that his grandfather said, \"O Messenger of Allah! What is the right the wife of one of us has?\" The Prophet ﷺ said:\nأَنْ تُطْعِمَهَا إِذَا طَعِمْتَ، وتَكْسُوَهَا إِذَا اكْتَسَيْتَ، وَلَا تَضْرِبِ الْوَجْهَ، وَلَا تُقَبِّحْ، وَلَا تَهْجُرْ إِلَّا فِي الْبَيْتِ\n(To feed her when you eat, buy her clothes when you buy for yourself and to refrain from striking her on the face, cursing her or staying away from her except in the house.)\nWaki' related that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"I like to take care of my appearance for my wife just as I like for her to take care of her appearance for me. This is because Allah says:\nوَلَهُنَّ مِثْلُ الَّذِي عَلَيْهِنَّ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ\n(And they (women) have rights similar (to those of their husbands) over them to what is reasonable.)\" This statement is reported by Ibn Jarir and Ibn Abu Hatim.\n\n## The Virtue Men have over Women\n\nAllah said:\nوَلِلرِّجَالِ عَلَيْهِنَّ دَرَجَةٌ\n(but men have a degree (of responsibility) over them.)\nThis Ayah indicates that men are in a more advantageous position than women physically as well as in their mannerism, status, obedience (of women to them), spending, taking care of the affairs and in general, in this life and in the Hereafter. Allah said (in another Ayah):\nالرِّجَالُ قَوَّامُونَ عَلَى النِّسَاءِ بِمَا فَضَّلَ اللَّهُ بَعْضَهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ وَبِمَا أَنفَقُوا مِنْ أَمْوَالِهِمْ\n(Men are the protectors and maintainers of women, because Allah has made one of them to excel the other, and because they spend (to support them) from their means.)(4:34)\nAllah's statement:\nوَاللَّهُ عَزِيزٌ حَكِيمٌ\n(And Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise) means, He is Mighty in His punishment of those who disobey and defy His commands. He is Wise in what He commands, destines and legislates.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=228","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:229","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:229–230","text":"The divorce is twice, after that either you retain her on reasonable terms or release her with kindness. And it is not lawful for you (men) to take back (from your wives) any of what you gave them (the Mahr, bridal-money given by the husband to his wife at the time of marriage), except when both parties fear that they would be unable to keep the limits ordained by Allah (e.g., to deal with each other on a fair basis). Then if you fear that they would not be able to keep the limits ordained by Allah, then there is no sin on either of them if she gives back (the Mahr or a part of it). These are the limits ordained by Allah, so do not transgress them. And whoever transgresses the limits ordained by Allah, then such are the wrongdoers (229)And if he has divorced her (the third time), then she is not lawful unto him thereafter until she has married another husband. Then, if the other husband divorces her, it is no sin on both of them that they reunite, provided they feel that they can keep the limits ordained by Allah. These are the limits of Allah, which He makes plain for the people who have knowledge (230)\n\n## Divorce is Thrice\n\nThis honorable Ayah abrogated the previous practice in the beginning of Islam, when the man had the right to take back his divorced wife even if he had divorced her a hundred times, as long as she was still in her 'Iddah (waiting period). This situation was harmful for the wife, and this is why Allah made the divorce thrice, where the husband is allowed to take back his wife after the first and the second divorce (as long as she is still in her 'Iddah). The divorce becomes irrevocable after the third divorce, as Allah said:\nالطَّلَاقُ مَرَّتَانِ فَإِمْسَاكٌ بِمَعْرُوفٍ أَوْ تَسْرِيحٌ بِإِحْسَانٍ\n(The divorce is twice, after that, either you retain her on reasonable terms or release her with kindness.)\nIn his Sunan, Abu Dawud reported in Chapter: \"Taking the Wife back after the third (Divorce) is an abrogated practice,\" that Ibn 'Abbas commented on the Ayah:\nوَالْمُطَلَّقَاتُ يَتَرَبَّصْنَ بِأَنفُسِهِنَّ ثَلَاثَةَ قُرُوءٍ وَلَا يَحِلُّ لَهُنَّ أَن يَكْتُمْنَ مَا خَلَقَ اللَّهُ فِي أَرْحَامِهِنَّ\n(And divorced women shall wait (as regards their marriage) for three menstrual periods, and it is not lawful for them to conceal what Allah has created in their wombs,)(2:228)\nThe man used to have the right to take back his wife even if he had divorced her thrice. Allah abrogated this and said:\nالطَّلَاقُ مَرَّتَانِ\n(The divorce is twice.)\nThis Hadith was also collected by An-Nasa'i. Ibn Abu Hatim reported that 'Urwah said that a man said to his wife, \"I will neither divorce you nor take you back.\" She said, \"How?\" He said, \"I will divorce you and when your term of 'Iddah nears its end, I will take you back.\" She went to Allah's Messenger ﷺ and told him what happened, and Allah revealed:\nالطَّلَاقُ مَرَّتَانِ\n(The divorce is twice.)\nIbn Jarir (At-Tabari) also reported this Hadith in his Tafsir.\nAllah said:\nفَإِمْسَاكٌ بِمَعْرُوفٍ أَوْ تَسْرِيحٌ بِإِحْسَانٍ\n(...after that, either you retain her on reasonable terms or release her with kindness.) meaning, 'If you divorce her once or twice, you have the choice to take her back, as long as she is still in her 'Iddah, intending to be kind to her and to mend differences. Otherwise, await the end of her term of 'Iddah, when the divorce becomes final, and let her go her own way in peace, without committing any harm or injustice against her.' 'Ali bin Abu Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"When the man divorces his wife twice, let him fear Allah, regarding the third time. He should either keep her with him and treat her with kindness, or let her go her own way with kindness, without infringing upon any of her rights.\"\n\n## Taking back the Mahr (Dowry)\n\nAllah said:\nوَلَا يَحِلُّ لَكُمْ أَن تَأْخُذُوا مِمَّا آتَيْتُمُوهُنَّ شَيْئًا\n(And it is not lawful for you (men) to take back (from your wives) any of (the dowry) what you gave them,) meaning, you are not allowed to bother or pressure your wives to end this situation by giving you back the Mahr and any gifts that you have given them (in return for divorce). Similarly, Allah said:\nوَلَا تَعْضُلُوهُنَّ لِتَذْهَبُوا بِبَعْضِ مَا آتَيْتُمُوهُنَّ إِلَّا أَن يَأْتِينَ بِفَاحِشَةٍ مُّبَيِّنَةٍ\n(...and you should not treat them with harshness, that you may take away part of what you have given them, unless they commit open illegal sexual intercourse.)(4:19)\nHowever, if the wife willingly gives back anything with a good heart, then Allah said regarding this situation:\nفَإِن طِبْنَ لَكُمْ عَن شَيْءٍ مِّنْهُ نَفْسًا فَكُلُوهُ هَنِيئًا مَّرِيئًا\n(...but if they, of their own good pleasure, remit any part of it to you, take it, and enjoy it without fear of any harm.)(4:4)\n\n## Allowing Khul' and the Return of the Mahr in that Case\n\nWhen the spouses have irreconcilable differences wherein the wife ignores the rights of the husband, dislikes him and becomes unable to live with him any longer, she is allowed to free herself (from married life) by giving him back what he had given her (in gifts and Mahr). There is no sin on her in this case nor on him if he accepts such offer. This is why Allah said:\nوَلَا يَحِلُّ لَكُمْ أَن تَأْخُذُوا مِمَّا آتَيْتُمُوهُنَّ شَيْئًا إِلَّا أَن يَخَافَا أَلَّا يُقِيمَا حُدُودَ اللَّهِ فَإِنْ خِفْتُمْ أَلَّا يُقِيمَا حُدُودَ اللَّهِ فَلَا جُنَاحَ عَلَيْهِمَا فِيمَا افْتَدَتْ بِهِ\n(And it is not lawful for you (men) to take back (from your wives) any of what you gave them, except when both parties fear that they would be unable to keep the limits ordained by Allah (e.g., to deal with each other on a fair basis). Then if you fear that they would not be able to keep the limits ordained by Allah, then there is no sin on either of them if she gives back.)\nSometimes, the woman has no valid reason and she still asks for her marriage to be ended. In this case, Ibn Jarir reported that Thawban said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nأَيّـُمَا امْرَأَةٍ سَأَلَتْ زَوْجَهَا طَلَاقًا فِي غَيْرِ مَا بَأْسٍ، فَحَرَامٌ عَلَيْهَا رَائِحَةُ الْجَنَّـةِ\n(Any woman who asks her husband for divorce without justification, then the scent of Paradise will be forbidden for her.)\nAt-Tirmidhi recorded this Hadith and stated that it is Hasan.\nIbn Jarir said that the Ayah (2:229) was revealed about Thabit bin Qays bin Shammas and his wife Habibah bint 'Abdullah bin Ubayy bin Salul. In his Muwatta', Imam Malik reported that Habibah bint Sahl Al-Ansariyah was married to Thabit bin Qays bin Shammas and that Allah's Messenger ﷺ once went to the Fajr (Dawn) prayer and found Habibah bint Sahl by his door in the dark. Allah's Messenger ﷺ said, \"Who is this?\" She said, \"I am Habibah bint Sahl, O Messenger of Allah!\" He said, \"What is the matter?\" She said, \"I and Thabit bin Qays\", meaning, (she can no longer be with) her husband. When her husband Thabit bin Qays came, Allah's Messenger ﷺ said to him:\nهذِهِ حَبِيبَةُ بِنْتُ سَهْلٍ قَدْ ذَكَرَتْ مَا شَاءَ اللهُ أَنْ تَذْكُرَ\n(This is Habibah bint Sahl, she said what Allah has permitted her to say.)\nHabibah also said, \"O Messenger of Allah! I still have everything he gave me.\" Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nخُذْ مِنْهَا\n(Take it from her.) So, he took it from her and she remained in her family's house.\"\nThis was reported by Ahmad, Abu Dawud and An-Nasai.\nAl-Bukhari reported that Ibn 'Abbas said that the wife of Thabit bin Qays bin Shammas came to the Prophet ﷺ and said, \"O Messenger of Allah! I do not criticize his religion or mannerism. But I hate committing Kufr in Islam (by ignoring his rights on her).\" Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nأَتَرُدِّينَ عَلَيهِ حَدِيقَتَهُ؟\n(Will you give him back his garden?)\nShe said, \"Yes.\" Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nاقْبَلِ الْـحَدِيقَةَ وَطَلِّقْهَا تَطْلِيقَةً\n(Take back the garden and divorce her once.)\nAn-Nasa'i also recorded it.\n\n## The 'Iddah (Waiting Period) for the Khul'\n\nAt-Tirmidhi reported that Rubayi' bint Mu'awwidh bin 'Afra' got a Khul' during the time of Allah's Messenger ﷺ and the Prophet ﷺ ordered her to wait for one menstruation period for 'Iddah.\n\n## Transgressing the set limits of Allah is an Injustice\n\nAllah said:\nتِلْكَ حُدُودُ اللَّهِ فَلَا تَعْتَدُوهَا وَمَن يَتَعَدَّ حُدُودَ اللَّهِ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الظَّالِمُونَ\n(These are the limits ordained by Allah, so do not transgress them. And whoever transgresses the limits ordained by Allah, then such are the wrongdoers.)\nThis means that the laws that Allah has legislated are His set limits, so do not transgress them. An authentic Hadith states:\nإِنَّ اللهَ حَدَّ حُدُودًا فَلَا تَعْتَدُوهَا، وفَرَضَ فَرَائِضَ فَلَا تُضَيِّعُوهَا، وحَرَّمَ مَحَارِمَ فَلَا تَنْتَهِكُوهَا، وَسَكَتَ عَنْ أَشْيَاءَ رَحْمَةً لَكُمْ مِنْ غَيْرِ نِسْيَانٍ فَلَا تَسْأَلُوا عَنْهَا\n(Allah has set some limits, so do not transgress them; and commanded some commands, so do not ignore them; and made some things unlawful, so do not commit them. He has also left some matters (without rulings) as a mercy with you, not because He has forgotten them, so do not ask about them.)\n\n## Pronouncing Three Divorces at the same Time is Unlawful\n\nThe last Ayah we mentioned was used as evidence to prove that it is not allowed to pronounce three divorces at one time. What further proves this ruling is that Mahmud bin Labid has stated - as An-Nasa'i recorded - that Allah's Messenger ﷺ was told about a man who pronounced three divorces on his wife at one time, so the Prophet ﷺ stood up while angry and said:\nأَيُلْعَبُ بِكِتَابِ اللهِ وَأَنَا بَيْنَ أَظْهُرِكُم؟\n(The Book of Allah is being made the subject of jest while I am still amongst you?)\nA man then stood up and said, \"Should I kill that man, O Messenger of Allah?\"\n\n## The Wife cannot be taken back after the Third Divorce\n\nAllah said:\nفَإِن طَلَّقَهَا فَلَا تَحِلُّ لَهُ مِن بَعْدُ حَتَّىٰ تَنكِحَ زَوْجًا غَيْرَهُ\n(And if he has divorced her (the third time), then she is not lawful for him thereafter until she has married another husband.)\nThis Ayah indicates that if the man divorces his wife for the third time after he divorced her twice, then she will no longer be allowed for marriage to him. Allah said:\nحَتَّىٰ تَنكِحَ زَوْجًا غَيْرَهُ\n(...until she has married another husband.) meaning, until she legally marries another man. For instance, if she has sexual intercourse with any man, even her master (if she was a servant), she would still be ineligible for marriage for her ex-husband (who divorced her thrice), because whomever she had sexual relations with was not her legal husband. If she marries a man without consummating the marriage, she will not be eligible for her ex-husband. Muslim reported that 'A'ishah said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ was asked about a woman who marries a man who thereafter divorces her (thrice). She then marries another man and he divorces her before he has sexual relations with her, would she be allowed for her first husband? Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nلَا، حَتَّى يَذُوقَ عُسَيْلَتَهَا\n(No, until he enjoys her 'Usaylah (sexual relation).) Al-Bukhari also reported this Hadith.\nImam Ahmad recorded that 'A'ishah said, \"The wife of Rifa'ah Al-Qurazi came while I and Abu Bakr were with the Prophet ﷺ and she said, 'I was Rifa'ah's wife, but he divorced me and it was an irrevocable divorce. Then I married 'Abdur-Rahman bin Az-Zubayr, but his sexual organ is minute like a string.' She then took a small string of her garment (to resemble how small his sexual organ was). Khalid bin Sa'id bin Al-'As, who was next to the door and was not yet allowed in, said, 'O Abu Bakr! Why do you not forbid this (woman) from what she is revealing frankly before the Prophet?' The Prophet ﷺ merely smiled. Then, Allah's Messenger ﷺ asked her:\nكَأَنَّكِ تُرِيدِينَ أَنْ تَرْجِعِي إِلى رِفَاعَةَ، لَا، حَتَّى تَذُوقِي عُسَيْلَتَهُ، وَيَذُوقَ عُسَيْلَتَكِ\n(Do you want to remarry Rifa'ah? You cannot unless you experience his 'Usaylah and he experiences your 'Usaylah (i.e., had a complete sexual relation with your present husband).)\"\nAl-Bukhari, Muslim, and An-Nasa'i also recorded this Hadith. Muslim's wording is \"Rifa'ah divorced his wife for the third and final time.\"\nThe word 'Usaylah mentioned in the Hadith means sexual intercourse. Imam Ahmad and An-Nasa'i reported that 'A'ishah said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nأَلَا إِنَّ الْعُسَيْلَةَ الْجِمَاعُ\n('Usaylah is sexual intercourse.)\n\n## The Curse on the Participants of Tahlil/Halalah\n\nThe reason for the woman (who was divorced thrice) to marry another man must be that the man desires her and has the intention of having an extended married life with her. These are the legal goals and aims behind marriage. If the reason behind the second marriage was to make the woman eligible for her ex-husband again, then this is the Tahlil that the Hadiths have cursed and criticized. In addition, when the reason behind this marriage (if it was Tahlil) is announced in the contract, it would make the contract invalid according to the majority of the scholars.\nImam Ahmad reported that 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud said, \"Allah's Messenger ﷺ cursed the one who does Tahlil, the one in whose favor it is done, those who eat Riba (usury) and those who feed it (pay the usury).\" At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa'i reported this Hadith and At-Tirmidhi said, \"This Hadith is Hasan.\" He said, \"This is what is acted upon according to people of knowledge among the Companions, among whom are 'Umar, 'Uthman and Ibn 'Umar. It was also the saying of the scholars of Fiqh among the Tabi'in (second generation of Islam). And it has been reported from 'Ali, Ibn Mas'ud and Ibn 'Abbas\".\nIn his Mustadrak, Al-Hakim reported that Nafi' said: \"A man came to Ibn 'Umar and asked him about a man who divorced his wife three times. Then, his brother married her to make Tahlil for his brother, without the brother knowing this fact. He then asked, \"Is she allowed for the first (husband)?\" He said, \"No, unless it is a marriage that involves desire. We used to consider this an act of adultery during the time of Allah's Messenger ﷺ.\" Al-Hakim said, \"This Hadith has a Sahih chain although they (Al-Bukhari and Muslim) did not record it.\"The wording of this Hadith indicates that the ruling came from the Prophet ﷺ. Abu Bakr bin Abu Shaybah, Al-Jawzjani, Harb Al-Kirmani and Abu Bakr Al-Athram said that Qabisah bin Jabir said that 'Umar said, \"If the participants to Tahlil are brought to me, I will have them stoned.\"\n\n## When does a Woman who was divorced Three Times become Eligible for Her First Husband\n\nAllah said:\nفَإِن طَلَّقَهَا\n(And if he has divorced her) meaning, the second husband after he had complete sexual relations with her,\nفَلَا جُنَاحَ عَلَيْهِمَا أَن يَتَرَاجَعَا\n(it is no sin on both of them that they reunite) meaning, the wife and her first husband,\nإِن ظَنَّا أَن يُقِيمَا حُدُودَ اللَّهِ\n(provided they feel that they can keep the limits ordained by Allah.) meaning, they live together honorably. Mujahid said, \"If they are convinced that the aim behind their marriage is honorable.\" Next, Allah said:\nوَتِلْكَ حُدُودُ اللَّهِ\n(These are the limits of Allah,) His commandments and legislation,\nيُبَيِّنُهَا\n(He makes plain)\nلِقَوْمٍ يَعْلَمُونَ\n(for the people who have knowledge.)","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=229","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:231","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:231","text":"And when you have divorced women and they have fulfilled the term of their prescribed period, either take them back on a reasonable basis or set them free on a reasonable basis. But do not take them back to hurt them, and whoever does that, then he has wronged himself. And treat not the verses (Laws) of Allah in jest, but remember Allah's favors on you (i.e., Islam), and that which He has sent down to you of the Book (i.e., the Qur'an) and Al-Hikmah (the Prophet's Sunnah ـ legal ways ـ Islamic jurisprudence) whereby He instructs you. And fear Allah, and know that Allah is All-Aware of everything (231)\n\n## Being Kind to the Divorced Wife\n\nThis is a command from Allah to men that when one of them divorces his wife with a reversible divorce, he should treat her kindly. So when her term of 'Iddah (waiting period) nears its end, he either takes her back in a way that is better, including having witnesses that he has taken her back, and he lives with her with kindness. Or, he should release her after her 'Iddah finishes and then kindly asks her to depart from his house, without disputing, fighting with her or using foul words. Allah then said:\nوَلَا تُمْسِكُوهُنَّ ضِرَارًا لِّتَعْتَدُوا\n(But do not take them back to hurt them,)\nIbn 'Abbas, Mujahid, Masruq, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak, Ar-Rabi' and Muqatil bin Hayyan said that a man used to divorce his wife, and when her 'Iddah came near its end, he would take her back to harm her and to stop her from marrying someone else. He then divorced her and she would begin her 'Iddah and when her 'Iddah term neared its end, he would take her back again, so that the term of 'Iddah would be prolonged for her. After that, Allah prohibited this practice. Allah has also threatened those who indulge in such practices, when He said;\nوَمَن يَفْعَلْ ذَٰلِكَ فَقَدْ ظَلَمَ نَفْسَهُ\n(...and whoever does that, then he has wronged himself.) meaning, by defying Allah's commandments. Allah then said:\nوَلَا تَتَّخِذُوا آيَاتِ اللَّهِ هُزُوًا\n(And treat not the verses (Laws) of Allah in a jest,)\nIbn Jarir said that Abu Musa (Al-Ash'ari) narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ once became angry at the Ash'ari tribe. Abu Musa went to him and said, \"O Messenger of Allah! Are you angry with the Ash'ariyyin?\" The Prophet ﷺ said:\nيَقُولُ أَحَدُكُمْ: قَدْ طَلَّقْتُ، قَدْ رَاجَعْتُ، لَيْسَ هَذَا طَلَاقُ الْمُسْلِمِينَ، طَلِّقُوا الْمَرْأَةَ فِي قُبُلِ عِدَّتِـهَا\n(One of you says, 'I divorced her' - then says - 'I took her back!' This is not the appropriate way Muslims conduct divorce. Divorce the woman when she has fulfilled the term of the prescribed period.)\nMasruq said that the Ayah refers to the man who harms his wife by divorcing her and then taking her back, so that the 'Iddah term is prolonged for her. Al-Hasan, Qatadah, 'Ata' Al-Khurasani, Ar-Rabi' and Muqatil bin Hayyan said, \"He is the man who divorces his wife and says, 'I was joking.' Or he frees a servant or gets married and says, 'I was only joking.' Allah revealed:\nوَلَا تَتَّخِذُوا آيَاتِ اللَّهِ هُزُوًا\n(And treat not the verses (Laws) of Allah in a jest,)\nThen such men were made to bear the consequences of their actions.\nAllah then said:\nوَاذْكُرُوا نِعْمَتَ اللَّهِ عَلَيْكُمْ\n(...but remember Allah's favors on you,) meaning, by His sending His Messenger ﷺ with the right guidance and clear signs to you:\nوَمَا أَنزَلَ عَلَيْكُم مِّنَ الْكِتَابِ وَالْحِكْمَةِ\n(...and that which He has sent down to you of the Book (i.e., the Qur'an) and Al-Hikmah) meaning the Sunnah,\nيَعِظُكُم بِهِ\n(...whereby He instructs you.) meaning, commands you, forbids you and threatens you for transgressing His prohibitions. Allah said:\nوَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ\n(And fear Allah) meaning, concerning what you perform and what you avoid,\nوَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ عَلِيمٌ\n(and know that Allah is All-Aware of everything.) none of your secret or public affairs ever escapes His knowledge, and He will treat you accordingly.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=231","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:232","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:232","text":"And when you have divorced women and they have fulfilled the term of their prescribed period, do not prevent them from marrying their (former) husbands, if they mutually agree on reasonable basis. This (instruction) is an admonition for him among you who believes in Allah and the Last Day. That is more virtuous and purer for you. Allah knows and you know not (232)\n\n## The Wali (Guardian) of the Divorced Woman should not prevent Her from going back to Her Husband\n\nAli bin Abu Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"This Ayah was revealed about the man who divorces his wife once or twice and her 'Iddah finishes. He later thinks about taking her back in marriage and the woman also wishes that, yet, her family prevents her from remarrying him. Hence, Allah prohibited her family from preventing her.\" Masruq, Ibrahim An-Nakha'i, Az-Zuhri and Ad-Dahhak stated that this is the reason behind revealing the Ayah (2:232). These statements clearly conform to the apparent meaning of the Ayah.\n\n## There is no Marriage without a Wali (for the Woman)\n\nThe Ayah (2:232) also indicates that the woman is not permitted to give herself in marriage. Rather, she requires a Wali (guardian such as her father, brother, adult son, and so forth) to give her away in marriage, as Ibn Jarir and At-Tirmidhi have stated when they mentioned this Ayah. Also, a Hadith states that:\nلَا تُزَوِّجُ الْمَرْأةُ الْمَرْأَةَ، ولَا تُزَوِّج الْمَرأةُ نَفْسَهَا، فَإِنَّ الزَّانِيَةَ هِيَ الَّتِي تُزَوِّجُ نَفْسَهَا\n(The woman does not give another woman away for marriage and the woman does not give herself away in marriage, for only the adulteress gives herself away for marriage.)\nAnother Hadith states:\nلَا نِكَاحَ إلَّا بِوَلِيٍّ مُرْشِدٍ وَشَاهِدَيْ عَدْلٍ\n(No marriage is valid except with the participation of a mature Wali and two trustworthy witnesses.)\n\n## The Reason behind revealing the Ayah (2:232)\n\nIt was reported that this Ayah was revealed about Ma'qil bin Yasar Al-Muzani and his sister. Al-Bukhari reported in his Sahih, when he mentioned the Tafsir of this Ayah (2:232), that the husband of the sister of Ma'qil bin Yasar divorced her. He waited until her 'Iddah finished and then asked to remarry her, but Ma'qil refused. Then, this Ayah was sent down:\nفَلَا تَعْضُلُوهُنَّ أَن يَنكِحْنَ أَزْوَاجَهُنَّ\n(...do not prevent them from marrying their (former) husbands.)\nAbu Dawud, At-Tirmidhi, Ibn Abu Hatim, Ibn Jarir and Ibn Marduwyah and Al-Bayhaqi reported this Hadith from Al-Hasan from Ma'qil bin Yasar. At-Tirmidhi rendered this Hadith authentic and in his narration, Ma'qil bin Yasar gave his sister in marriage for a Muslim man during the time of Allah's Messenger ﷺ. She remained with him for a while and he divorced her once and did not take her back until her 'Iddah finished. They then wanted to get back with each other and he came to ask her for marriage. Ma'qil said to him, \"O ungrateful one! I honored you and married her to you but you divorced her. By Allah! She will never be returned to you.\" But Allah knew his need for his wife and her need for her husband and He revealed:\nوَإِذَا طَلَّقْتُمُ النِّسَاءَ فَبَلَغْنَ أَجَلَهُنَّ\n(And when you have divorced women and they have fulfilled the term of their prescribed period,) until He said:\nوَأَنتُمْ لَا تَعْلَمُونَ\n(...and you know not.)\nWhen Ma'qil heard the Ayah, he said, \"I hear and obey my Lord.\" He then summoned the man and said, \"I will honor you and let you remarry (my sister).\" Ibn Marduwyah added (that Ma'qil said), \"And will pay (the expiation) for breaking my vow.\"\nAllah said:\nذَٰلِكَ يُوعَظُ بِهِ مَن كَانَ مِنكُمْ يُؤْمِنُ بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الْآخِرِ\n(This (instruction) is an admonition for him among you who believes in Allah and the Last Day.) meaning, prohibiting you from preventing the women from marrying their ex-husbands, if they both agree to it,\nمَن كَانَ مِنكُمْ\n(among you) O people,\nيُؤْمِنُ بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الْآخِرِ\n(who believes in Allah and the Last Day.) meaning, believes in Allah's commandments and fears His warnings and the torment in the Hereafter. Allah said:\nذَٰلِكُمْ أَزْكَىٰ لَكُمْ وَأَطْهَرُ\n(That is more virtuous and purer for you.) meaning, obeying Allah's Law by returning the women to their ex-husbands, and abandoning your displeasure, is purer and cleaner for your hearts,\nوَاللَّهُ يَعْلَمُ\n(Allah knows) the benefits you gain from what He commands and what He forbids.\nوَأَنتُمْ لَا تَعْلَمُونَ\n(and you know not) the benefits in what you do or what you refrain from doing.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=232","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:233","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:233","text":"The mothers should suckle their children for two whole years, (that is) for those (parents) who desire to complete the term of suckling, but the father of the child shall bear the cost of the mother's food and clothing on a reasonable basis. No person shall have a burden laid on him greater than he can bear. No mother shall be treated unfairly on account of her child, nor father on account of his child. And on the (father's) heir is incumbent the like of that (which was incumbent on the father). If they both decide on weaning, by mutual consent, and after due consultation, there is no sin on them. And if you decide on a foster suckling-mother for your children, there is no sin on you, provided you pay (the mother) what you agreed (to give her) on a reasonable basis. And fear Allah and know that Allah is All-Seer of what you do (233)\n\n## The Suckling Period is only Two Years\n\nThis is a direction from Allah to the mothers to suckle their infants through the complete term of suckling, which is two years. Hence, suckling after two years is not included in this address. Allah said:\nلِمَنْ أَرَادَ أَن يُتِمَّ الرَّضَاعَةَ\n(...who desire to complete the term of suckling,)\nTherefore, the suckling that establishes Tahrim (prohibition, i.e., one cannot marry his mother or sister from suckling) is what occurs before the two years end. If the infant is suckled only after two years of age, then no Tahrim will be established. At-Tirmidhi under Chapter: 'Suckling establishes Tahrim within the first two years,' reported that Umm Salamah narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nلَا يَحْرُمُ مِنَ الرَّضَاعِ إِلَّا مَا فَتَقَ الْأَمْعَاءَ فِي الثَّدْيِ وَكَانَ قَبْلَ الْفِطَامِ\n(Suckling establishes Tahrim if it is on the breast and before Fitam (before weaning, i.e., before the end of the first two years).)\nAt-Tirmidhi said, \"This Hadith is Hasan Sahih. The majority of the people of knowledge among the Companions of Allah's Messenger ﷺ and others acted upon this, that is that suckling establishes Tahrim (prohibition in marriage) before the end of the two years and that whatever occurs after that does not establish Tahrim\". At-Tirmidhi is alone in recording this Hadith and the narrators in its chain meet the criteria of the Sahihayn. The Prophet's statement:\nإِلَّا مَا كَانَ فِي الثَّدْي\n(On the breast) refers to the organ of suckling before the two years. Imam Ahmad reported a Hadith in which Al-Bara' bin 'Azib narrated, \"When Ibrahim, the Prophet's son, died, the Prophet ﷺ said:\nإِنَّ ابْنِي مَاتَ فِي الثَّدْيِ، إِنَّ لَهُ مُرْضِعًا فِي الْجَنَّـةِ\n(My son has died on the breast and he has someone to suckle him in Paradise.)\nFurthermore, Ad-Daraqutni related that Ibn 'Abbas said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nلَا يَحْرُمُ مِنَ الرَّضَاعِ إِلَّا مَا كَانَ فِي الْحَوْلَيْنِ\n(Suckling establishes Tahrim only within the (first) two years.)\nImam Malik reported this Hadith from Thawr bin Zayd who narrated that Ibn 'Abbas related it to the Prophet ﷺ. Ad-Darawardi reported this Hadith from Thawr who narrated it from 'Ikrimah who narrated it from Ibn 'Abbas. In this narration, which is more authentic, he added:\nوَمَا كَانَ بَعْدَ الْحَوْلَيْنِ فَليْسَ بِشَيْءٍ\n(Whatever occurs after the two years is not considered.)\n\n## Suckling beyond the Two Years\n\nIt is reported in the Sahih that 'A'ishah thought that if a woman gives her milk to an older person (meaning beyond the age of two years) then this will establish Tahrim. This is also the opinion of 'Ata' bin Abu Rabah and Layth bin Sa'd. Hence, 'A'ishah thought that it is permissible to suckle the man whom the woman needs to be allowed in her house. She used as evidence the Hadith of Salim, the freed slave of Abu Hudhayfah, where the Prophet ﷺ ordered Abu Hudhayfah's wife to give some of her milk to Salim, although he was a man, and ever since then, he used to enter her house freely. However, the rest of the Prophet's wives did not agree with this opinion and thought that this was only a special case. This is also the opinion of the majority of the scholars.\n\n## Suckling for Monetary Compensation\n\nAllah said:\nوَعَلَى الْمَوْلُودِ لَهُ رِزْقُهُنَّ وَكِسْوَتُهُنَّ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ\n(...but the father of the child shall bear the cost of the mother's food and clothing on a reasonable basis.) meaning, the father of the baby is obliged to provide for the expenses of the mother and to buy her clothes, in reasonable amounts usually used by similar women in that area, without extravagance or stinginess. The father spends within his means in this case. Allah said in another Ayah:\nلِيُنفِقْ ذُو سَعَةٍ مِّن سَعَتِهِ وَمَن قُدِرَ عَلَيْهِ رِزْقُهُ فَلْيُنفِقْ مِمَّا آتَاهُ اللَّهُ لَا يُكَلِّفُ اللَّهُ نَفْسًا إِلَّا مَا آتَاهَا سَيَجْعَلُ اللَّهُ بَعْدَ عُسْرٍ يُسْرًا\n(Let the rich man spend according to his means; and the man whose resources are restricted, let him spend according to what Allah has given him. Allah puts no burden on any person beyond what He has given him. Allah will grant after hardship, ease.)(65:7)\nAd-Dahhak commented, \"If the husband divorces his wife, with whom he had a child, and she suckles that child, he is required to provide for the mother's expenses and clothes within reason.\"\n\n## No Darar (Harm) or Dirar (Revenge)\n\nAllah said:\nلَا تُضَارَّ وَالِدَةٌ بِوَلَدِهَا\n(No mother shall be treated unfairly on account of her child,) meaning, the mother should not decline to rear her child to harm its father. The mother does not have the right to refrain from suckling the child after giving birth, unless she suckles him/her the milk that is necessary for his/her survival. Later on, she is allowed to give up custody of the child as long as she does not do that intending to harm the father. In addition, the father is not allowed to take the child from his mother to harm the mother. This is why Allah said:\nوَلَا مَوْلُودٌ لَّهُ بِوَلَدِهِ\n(...nor father on account of his child.) meaning, by taking the child from its mother intending to harm the mother. This is the Tafsir of Mujahid, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak, Az-Zuhri, As-Suddi, Ath-Thawri and Ibn Zayd, and others on this Ayah.\nAllah then said:\nوَعَلَى الْوَارِثِ مِثْلُ ذَٰلِكَ\n(And on the (father's) heir is incumbent the like of that (which was incumbent on the father).) meaning, by refraining from harming the relative (of the father, i.e., his infant), as Mujahid, Ash-Sha'bi and Ad-Dahhak stated. It was also reported that (the Ayah requires) the inheritor (of the father) to spend on the mother of the child, just as the father was spending, and to preserve her rights and refrain from harming her, according to the Tafsir of the majority of the scholars. We should state that Ibn Jarir has explained this subject in detail in his Tafsir and that he also stated that suckling the child after the second year might harm the child's body and mind. Sufyan Ath-Thawri narrated that 'Alqamah asked a woman who was suckling her child after the second year ended, not to do that.\n\n## Fitām (weaning) occurs by Mutual Consent\n\nAllah said:\nفَإِنْ أَرَادَا فِصَالًا عَن تَرَاضٍ مِّنْهُمَا وَتَشَاوُرٍ فَلَا جُنَاحَ عَلَيْهِمَا\n(If they both decide on weaning, by mutual consent, and after due consultation, there is no sin on them.)\nThis Ayah indicates that if the father and the mother decide on the Fitam (weaning) before the two years (of suckling) end, and for a benefit that they duly discuss and agree upon, then there is no sin in this case. So, the Ayah indicates that one parent is not allowed to make this kind of decision without duly consulting the other parent, as stated by Ath-Thawri. The method of mutual consultation protects the child's interests. It is also a mercy from Allah to His servants, for He has legislated the best method for parents to rear their children, and His legislation guides and directs the parents and the children to success. Similarly, Allah said in Surat At-Talaq (chapter 65 in the Qur'an):\nفَإِنْ أَرْضَعْنَ لَكُمْ فَآتُوهُنَّ أُجُورَهُنَّ وَأْتَمِرُوا بَيْنَكُم بِمَعْرُوفٍ وَإِن تَعَاسَرْتُمْ فَسَتُرْضِعُ لَهُ أُخْرَىٰ\n(Then if they give suck to the children for you, give them their due payment, and let each of you accept the advice of the other in a just way. But if you make difficulties for one another, then some other woman may give suck for him (the father of the child).)(65:6)\nAllah then said:\nوَإِنْ أَرَدتُّمْ أَن تَسْتَرْضِعُوا أَوْلَادَكُمْ فَلَا جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ إِذَا سَلَّمْتُم مَّا آتَيْتُم بِالْمَعْرُوفِ\n(And if you decide on a foster suckling-mother for your children, there is no sin on you, provided you pay (the mother) what you agreed (to give her) on a reasonable basis.) meaning, if the mother and the father both agree that the father assumes custody of the child due to a circumstance that compels her or allows him to do so, then there is no sin in this case. Hence, the mother is allowed to give up the child and the father is allowed to assume custody of the child. The father should kindly give the mother her expenses for the previous period (during which she reared and suckled the child), and he should seek other women to suckle his child for monetary compensation. Thereafter, Allah said:\nوَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ\n(And fear Allah) meaning, in all of your affairs,\nوَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ بَصِيرٌ\n(And know that Allah is All-Seer of what you do.) meaning, none of your affairs or speech escapes His perfect Watch.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=233","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:234","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:234","text":"And those of you who die and leave wives behind them, they (the wives) shall wait (as regards their marriage) for four months and ten days, then when they have fulfilled their term, there is no sin on you if they (the wives) dispose of themselves in a (just and) honorable manner (i.e., they can marry). And Allah is well-acquainted with what you do (234)\n\n## The 'Iddah (Waiting Period) of the Widow\n\nThis Ayah contains a command from Allah to the wives whose husbands die, that they should observe a period of 'Iddah of four months and ten nights, including the cases where the marriage was consummated or otherwise, according to the consensus (of the scholars).\nThe proof that this ruling includes the case where the marriage was not consummated is included in the general meaning of the Ayah. In a narration recorded by Imam Ahmad and the compilers of the Sunan, which At-Tirmidhi graded Sahih, Ibn Mas'ud was asked about a man who married a woman, but he died before consummating the marriage. He also did not appoint a Mahr (dowry) for her. They kept asking Ibn Mas'ud about this subject until he said, \"I shall give you my own opinion, and if it is correct then it is from Allah, while if it is wrong it is because of my error and because of (the evil efforts of) Satan. In this case, Allah and His Messenger are innocent of my opinion. She has her full Mahr.\" In another narration, Ibn Mas'ud said, \"She has a similar Mahr to that of the women of her status, without stinginess or extravagance.\" He then continued, \"She has to spend the 'Iddah and has a right to the inheritance.\" Ma'qil bin Yasar Ashja'i then stood up and said, \"I heard Allah's Messenger ﷺ issue a similar judgment for the benefit of Barwa' bint Washiq.\" 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud became very delighted upon hearing this statement. In another narration, several men from Ashja' (tribe) stood up and said, \"We testify that Allah's Messenger ﷺ issued a similar ruling for the benefit of Barwa' bint Washiq.\"\nAs for the case of the widow whose husband dies while she is pregnant, her term of 'Iddah ends when she gives birth, even if it occurs an instant (after her husband dies). This ruling is taken from Allah's statement:\nوَأُولَاتُ الْأَحْمَالِ أَجَلُهُنَّ أَن يَضَعْنَ حَمْلَهُنَّ\n(And for those who are pregnant, their 'Iddah is until they lay down their burden.)(65:4)\nThere is also a Hadith from Subay'ah Al-Aslamiyah in the Two Sahihs, through various chains of narration. Her husband, Sa'd bin Khawlah, died while she was pregnant and she gave birth only a few nights after his death. When she finished her Nifas (postnatal period), she beautified herself for those who might seek to engage her (for marriage). Then, Abu Sanabil bin Ba'kak came to her and said, \"Why do I see you beautified yourself, do you wish to marry? By Allah! You will not marry until the four months and ten nights have passed.\" Subay'ah said, \"When he said that to me, I collected my garments when night fell and went to Allah's Messenger ﷺ and asked him about this matter. He said that my 'Iddah had finished when I gave birth and allowed me to get married if I wished.\"\n\n## The Wisdom behind legislating the 'Iddah\n\nSa'id bin Musayyib and Abu Al-'Aliyah stated that the wisdom behind making the 'Iddah of the widow four months and ten nights is that the womb might contain a fetus. When the woman waits for this period, it will become evident if she is pregnant. Similarly, there is a Hadith in the Two Sahihs narrated by Ibn Mas'ud stating:\nإنَّ خَلْقَ أَحَدِكُمْ يُجْمَعُ فِي بَطْنِ أُمِّهِ أَرْبَعِينَ يَوْمًا نُطْفَةً، ثُمَّ يَكُونُ عَلَقَةً مِثْلَ ذلِكَ، ثُمَّ يَكُونُ مُضْغَةً مِثْلَ ذلِكَ، ثُمَّ يُبْعَثُ إِلَيْهِ الْمَلَكُ فَيَنْفُخُ فِيهِ الرُّوحَ\n((The creation of) a human being is put together in the womb of his mother in forty days in the form of a seed, and next he becomes a clot of thick blood for a similar period, and next a morsel of flesh for a similar period. Then, Allah sends an angel who is ordered to breathe life unto the fetus.)\nSo, these are four months and ten more days to be sure, as some months are less (than thirty days), and the fetus will then start to show signs of life after the soul has been breathed into it. Allah knows best.\n\n## The 'Iddah of the Slave Mother whose Master dies\n\nWe should state here that the 'Iddah of the slave mother is the same in the case of death, as the 'Iddah of the free woman. Imam Ahmad reported that 'Amr bin Al-'As said, \"Do not confuse the Sunnah of our Prophet for us. The 'Iddah of the mother, who is also a servant, when her master dies, is four months and ten nights.\"\n\n## Mourning is required during the 'Iddah of Death\n\nAllah said:\nفَإِذَا بَلَغْنَ أَجَلَهُنَّ فَلَا جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِيمَا فَعَلْنَ فِي أَنفُسِهِنَّ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَاللَّهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ خَبِيرٌ\n(...then when they have fulfilled their term, there is no sin on you if they (the wives) dispose of themselves in a (just and) honorable manner (i.e., they can marry). And Allah is well-acquainted with what you do.)\nThis Ayah indicates that mourning for the dead husband is required until the 'Iddah is finished. It is also reported in the Two Sahihs that Umm Habibah and Zaynab bint Jahsh narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\nلَا يَحِلُّ لِامْرَأَةٍ تُؤْمِنُ بِاللهِ وَالْيَوْم الآخِر أن تُحِدَّ عَلى مَيِّتٍ فَوْقَ ثَلَاثٍ، إِلَّا عَلى زَوْجٍ أَرْبَعَةَ أَشْهُرٍ وَعَشْرًا\n(It is not lawful for a woman who believes in Allah and the Last Day to mourn for more than three days for any dead person except her husband, for whom she mourns for four months and ten days.)\nIt is reported in the Two Sahihs that Umm Salamah said that a woman said, \"O Messenger of Allah! My daughter's husband died and she is complaining about her eye, should we administer kohl in her eye?\" He said, \"No,\" several times upon repeating this question. He then said:\nإنَّمَا هِيَ أَرْبَعَةُ أَشْهُرٍ وَعَشْرٌ، وَقَدْ كَانَتْ إِحْدَاكُنَّ فِي الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ تَمْكُثُ سَنَةً\n(It is four months and ten (nights)! During the Jahiliyyah, one of you would mourn for an entire year.)\nZaiynab the daughter of Umm Salamah said (about the pre-Islamic era of ignorance), \"When the woman's husband died, she would go into seclusion and would wear the worst clothes she has. She would refrain from wearing perfume or any adornments until a year passed. She would then come out of seclusion and would be given dung that she would throw. Then an animal would be brought out, a donkey, a sheep, or a bird. Then some blood would be drained from it, usually resulting in its death.\"\nIn short, the mourning required from a wife whose husband dies, includes not using beautification aids, such as wearing perfume and the clothes and jewelry that encourage the men to seek marriage from the woman. All widows must observe this period of mourning whether they are young, old, free, servant, Muslim or disbeliever, as the general meaning of the Ayah indicates.\nAllah also said:\nفَإِذَا بَلَغْنَ أَجَلَهُنَّ\n(...then when they have fulfilled their term) meaning, when the 'Iddah finishes, according to Ad-Dahhak and Ar-Rabi' bin Anas.\nفَلَا جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ\n(there is no sin on you) Az-Zuhri said, \"Meaning her Wali (guardian).\"\nفِيمَا فَعَلْنَ\n(if they (the wives) dispose) meaning, the women whose 'Iddah has finished. Al-'Awfi said that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"If the woman is divorced or if her husband dies and then her 'Iddah term ends, there is no sin that she beautifies herself, so that she becomes ready for marriage proposals. This is the way 'that is just and honorable'.\" It was reported that Muqatil bin Hayyan gave the same explanation. Ibn Jurayj related that Mujahid said:\nفَلَا جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِيمَا فَعَلْنَ فِي أَنفُسِهِنَّ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ\n(...there is no sin on you if they (the wives) dispose of themselves in a just and honorable manner.) \"refers to allowed and pure (honorable) marriage.\" It was also reported that Al-Hasan, Az-Zuhri and As-Suddi said the same.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=234","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:235","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:235","text":"And there is no sin on you if you make a hint of betrothal or conceal it in yourself, Allah knows that you will remember them, but do not make a promise (of contract) with them in secret except that you speak an honorable saying. And do not be determined on the marriage bond until the term prescribed is fulfilled. And know that Allah knows what is in your minds, so fear Him. And know that Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Forbearing (235)\n\n## Mentioning Marriage indirectly during the 'Iddah\n\nAllah said:\nوَلَا جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ\n(And there is no sin on you) meaning, to indirectly mention marriage to the widow during the term of 'Iddah for her deceased husband. Ath-Thawri, Shu'bah and Jarir stated that Ibn 'Abbas said:\nوَلَا جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِيمَا عَرَّضْتُم بِهِ مِنْ خِطْبَةِ النِّسَاءِ\n(And there is no sin on you if you make a hint of betrothal) \"means saying, 'I want to marry and I am looking for a woman whose qualities are such and such,' thus talking to her in general terms in a way that is better.\" In another narration (by Ibn 'Abbas), \"Saying, 'I wish that Allah endows me with a wife,' but he should not make a direct marriage proposal.\" Al-Bukhari reported that Ibn 'Abbas said that the Ayah:\nوَلَا جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِيمَا عَرَّضْتُم بِهِ مِنْ خِطْبَةِ النِّسَاءِ\n(And there is no sin on you if you make a hint of betrothal) means, \"The man could say, 'I wish to marry,' 'I desire a wife,' or, 'I wish I could find a good wife'.\" Mujahid, Tawus, 'Ikrimah, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Ibrahim An-Nakha'i, Ash-Sha'bi, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Az-Zuhri, Yazid bin Qusayt, Muqatil bin Hayyan and Al-Qasim bin Muhammad and several others among the Salaf and the Imams said that one is allowed to mention marriage indirectly to the woman whose husband died. It is also allowed to indirectly mention marriage to a woman who had gone through final, irrevocable divorce. The Prophet ﷺ ordered Fatimah bint Qays to remain in the house of Ibn Umm Maktum for 'Iddah when her husband Abu 'Amr bin Hafs divorced her for the third time. He said to her:\nفَإِذَا حَلَلْتِ فَآذِنِينِي\n(Inform me when your 'Iddah term ends.)\nWhen she finished the 'Iddah, Usamah bin Zayd, the Prophet's freed slave asked to marry her, and the Prophet ﷺ married her to him. As for the divorced wife (not irrevocably divorced), there is no disagreement that it is not allowed for other than her husband to mention marriage proposals to her directly or indirectly (before the 'Iddah finishes). Allah knows best.\nAllah said:\nأَوْ أَكْنَنتُمْ فِي أَنفُسِكُمْ\n(...or conceal it in yourself,) meaning, if you hide the intention of seeking marriage with them. Similarly, Allah said:\nوَرَبُّكَ يَعْلَمُ مَا تُكِنُّ صُدُورُهُمْ وَمَا يُعْلِنُونَ\n(And your Lord knows what their breasts conceal, and what they reveal)(28:69) and:\nوَأَنَا أَعْلَمُ بِمَا أَخْفَيْتُمْ وَمَا أَعْلَنتُمْ\n(...while I am All-Aware of what you conceal and what you reveal.)(60: 1) So, Allah said here:\nعَلِمَ اللَّهُ أَنَّكُمْ سَتَذْكُرُونَهُنَّ\n(Allah knows that you will remember them) meaning, in your hearts, so He made it easy for you. Allah then said:\nوَلَٰكِن لَّا تُوَاعِدُوهُنَّ سِرًّا\n(...but do not make a promise (of contract) with them in secret)\nAli bin Abu Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas said that\nوَلَٰكِن لَّا تُوَاعِدُوهُنَّ سِرًّا\n(but do not make a promise (of contract) with them in secret) means do not say to her, \"I am in love (with you),\" or, \"Promise me you will not marry someone else (after the 'Iddah finishes),\" and so forth. Sa'id bin Jubayr, Ash-Sha'bi, 'Ikrimah, Abu Ad-Duha, Ad-Dahhak, Az-Zuhri, Mujahid and Ath-Thawri said that it (meaning of the Ayah) means taking the woman's promise not to marry someone else.\nAfterwards, Allah said:\nإِلَّا أَن تَقُولُوا قَوْلًا مَّعْرُوفًا\n(...except that you speak an honorable saying.)\nIbn 'Abbas, Mujahid, Sa'id bin Jubayr, As-Suddi, Ath-Thawri and Ibn Zayd said that the Ayah means to indirectly refer to marriage, such as saying, \"I desire someone like you.\" Muhammad bin Sirin said: I asked 'Ubaydah about the meaning of Allah's statement:\nإِلَّا أَن تَقُولُوا قَوْلًا مَّعْرُوفًا\n(...except that you speak an honorable saying.) He said, \"He says to her Wali, 'Do not give her away (in marriage) until you inform me first'.\" This statement was narrated by Ibn Abu Hatim.\nAllah then said:\nوَلَا تَعْزِمُوا عُقْدَةَ النِّكَاحِ حَتَّىٰ يَبْلُغَ الْكِتَابُ أَجَلَهُ\n(And do not be determined on the marriage bond until the term prescribed is fulfilled.) meaning, do not make marriage contracts before the 'Iddah finishes. Ibn 'Abbas, Mujahid, Ash-Sha'bi, Qatadah, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, Abu Malik, Zayd bin Aslam, Muqatil bin Hayyan, Az-Zuhri, 'Ata' Al-Khurasani, As-Suddi, Ath-Thawri and Ad-Dahhak said that:\nحَتَّىٰ يَبْلُغَ الْكِتَابُ أَجَلَهُ\n(until the term prescribed is fulfilled.) means, 'Do not consummate the marriage before the 'Iddah term finishes.' The scholars agree that marriage contracts during the 'Iddah are invalid.\nAllah then said:\nوَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ يَعْلَمُ مَا فِي أَنفُسِكُمْ فَاحْذَرُوهُ\n(And know that Allah knows what is in your minds, so fear Him.) warning the men against the ideas they conceal in their hearts about women, directing them to think good about them rather than the evil, and Allah would not let them despair of His mercy, as He said:\nوَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ حَلِيمٌ\n(And know that Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Forbearing.)","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=235","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:236","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:236","text":"There is no sin on you, if you divorce women while yet you have not touched them, nor appointed for them their due (dowry). But give them a Mut'ah (a suitable gift, the rich according to his means, and the poor according to his means, a gift of reasonable amount is a duty on the doers of good (236)\n\n## Divorce before consummating the Marriage\n\nAllah allowed divorce after the marriage contract and before consummating the marriage. Ibn 'Abbas, Tawus, Ibrahim and Al-Hasan Al-Basri said that 'touched' (mentioned in the Ayah) means sexual intercourse. The husband is allowed to divorce his wife before consummating the marriage or giving the dowry if it was deferred.\n\n## The Mut'ah (Gift) at the time of Divorce\n\nAllah commands the husband to give the wife (whom he divorces before consummating the marriage) a gift of a reasonable amount, the rich according to his means and the poor according to his means, to compensate her for her loss. Al-Bukhari reported in his Sahih that Sahl bin Sa'd and Abu Usayd said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ married Umaymah bint Sharahil. When she was brought to the Prophet he extended his hand to her, but she did not like that. The Prophet ﷺ then ordered Abu Usayd to provide provisions for her along with a gift of two garments.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=236","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:237","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:237","text":"And if you divorce them before you have touched (had a sexual relation with) them, and you have appointed for them their due (dowry), then pay half of that, unless they (the women) agree to remit it, or he (the husband), in whose hands is the marriage tie, agrees to remit it. And to remit is nearer to At-Taqwa (piety, righteousness). And do not forget liberality between yourselves. Truly, Allah is All-Seer of what you do (237)\n\n## The Wife gets half of Her Mahr if She is divorced before the Marriage is consummated\n\nThis honorable Ayah is not a continuation of the Mut'ah (gift) that was mentioned in the previous Ayah (i.e., divorce before the marriage is consummated). This Ayah (2:237) requires the husband to relinquish half of the appointed Mahr if he divorces his wife before the marriage is consummated. If it was discussing any other type of gift, then it would have been mentioned that way, especially when this Ayah follows the previous Ayah related to this subject. Allah knows best. Giving away half of the bridal-money in this case is the agreed practice according to the scholars. So, the husband pays half of the appointed Mahr if he divorces his wife before consummating the marriage.\nAllah then said:\nإِلَّا أَن يَعْفُونَ\n(unless they (the women) agree to remit it,) meaning, the wife forfeits the dowry and relieves the husband from further financial responsibility. As-Suddi said that Abu Salih mentioned that Ibn 'Abbas commented on Allah's statement:\nإِلَّا أَن يَعْفُونَ\n(unless they (the women) agree to remit it,) \"Unless the wife forfeits her right.\"Furthermore, Imam Abu Muhammad bin Abu Hatim said that it was reported that Shurayh, Sa'id bin Musayyib, 'Ikrimah, Mujahid, Ash-Sha'bi, Al-Hasan, Nafi', Qatadah, Jabir bin Zayd, 'Ata' Al-Khurasani, Ad-Dahhak, Az-Zuhri, Muqatil bin Hayyan, Ibn Sirin, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas and As-Suddi said similarly.\nAllah then said:\nأَوْ يَعْفُوَ الَّذِي بِيَدِهِ عُقْدَةُ النِّكَاحِ\n(...or he (the husband), in whose hands is the marriage tie, agrees to remit it.)\nIbn Abu Hatim reported that 'Amr bin Shu'ayb said that his grandfather narrated that the Prophet ﷺ said:\nوَلِيُّ عُقْدَةِ النِّكَاحِ الزَّوْجُ\n(The husband is he who has the marriage tie.)\nIbn Marduwyah also reported this Hadith, and it is the view chosen by Ibn Jarir. The Hadith states that the husband is the person who really holds the marriage tie in his hand, as it is up to him to go on with the marriage or end it. On the other hand, the Wali of the wife is not allowed to give away any of her rightful dues without her permission, especially the dowry.\nAllah then stated:\nوَأَن تَعْفُوا أَقْرَبُ لِلتَّقْوَىٰ\n(And to remit it is nearer to At-Taqwa (piety, righteousness).)\nIbn Jarir said, \"Some scholars said that this statement is directed at both men and women.\" Ibn 'Abbas said:\nوَأَن تَعْفُوا أَقْرَبُ لِلتَّقْوَىٰ\n(And to remit it is nearer to At-Taqwa (piety, righteousness).) indicates that the one who forgives, is nearer to At-Taqwa (piety).\" A similar statement was made by Ash-Sha'bi and several other scholars.\nMujahid, An-Nakha'i, Ad-Dahhak, Muqatil bin Hayyan, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas and Thawri stated that 'liberality' mentioned in the Ayah refers to the woman giving away her half Mahr, or the man giving away the full Mahr. This is why Allah said here:\nوَلَا تَنسَوُا الْفَضْلَ بَيْنَكُمْ\n(And do not forget liberality between yourselves.) meaning, kindness (or generosity), as Sa'id has stated. Allah said:\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ بَصِيرٌ\n(Truly, Allah is All-Seer of what you do.) meaning, none of your affairs ever escapes His perfect Watch, and He will reward each according to his deeds.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=237","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:238","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:238–239","text":"Guard strictly (five obligatory) As-Salawat (the prayers) especially the Middle Salah.And stand before Allah with obedience(238) And if you fear (an enemy), (perform Salah) on foot or riding. And when you are in safety, then remember Allah (pray) in the manner He has taught you, which you knew not (before)(239)\n\nAllah commands that the prayer should be performed properly and on time. It is reported in the Two Sahihs that Ibn Mas'ud said, \"I asked the Prophet ﷺ, 'Which deed is the dearest (to Allah)?' He replied:\n\nالصَّلَاةُ عَلى وَقْتِها\n\n(To offer the prayers at their fixed times.) I asked, 'What is the next (in goodness)?' He replied:\n\nالْجِهَادُ فِي سَبِيلِ اللهِ\n\n(To participate in Jihad (religious fighting) in Allah's cause.)\" I again asked, 'What is the next (in goodness)?' He replied:\n\nبِرُّ الْوَالِدَيْنِ\n\n(To be good and dutiful to your parents.) 'Abdullah then added, \"The Prophet ﷺ told me these words, and had I asked more, the Prophet ﷺ would have told me more.\"\n\n## The Middle Prayer\n\nFurthermore, Allah has specifically mentioned the Middle prayer, which is the 'Asr prayer according to the majority of the scholars among the Companions, as At-Tirmidhi and Al-Baghawi have stated. Al-Qadi Al-Mawardi added that the majority of the scholars of the Tabi'in also held this view. Al-Hafiz Abu 'Umar bin 'Abdul-Barr said that this is also the opinion of the majority of the scholars of the Athar (i.e., the Hadith and the statements of the Salaf).\n\nIn addition, Abu Muhammad bin 'Atiyah said that this is the Tafsir (of the Middle prayer) of the majority of scholars. Al-Hafiz Abu Muhammad 'Abdul-Mu'min bin Khalaf Ad-Dumyati stated in his book on the Middle prayer that it is the 'Asr prayer and mentioned that this is the Tafsir of 'Umar, 'Ali, Ibn Mas'ud, Abu Ayyub, 'Abdullah bin 'Amr, Samurah bin Jundub, Abu Hurayrah, Abu Sa'id, Hafsah, Umm Habibah, Umm Salamah, Ibn 'Abbas and 'A'ishah. This is also the Tafsir of 'Ubaydah, Ibrahim An-Nakha'i, Razin, Zirr bin Hubaysh, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Ibn Sirin, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak, Al-Kalbi, Muqatil, 'Ubayd bin Abu Maryam, and others.\n\n## The Proof that the 'Asr Prayer is the Middle Prayer\n\nImam Ahmad reported that 'Ali narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said during the battle of Al-Ahzab (the Confederates):\n\nشَغَلُونَا عَنِ الصَّلَاةِ الْوُسْطَى، صَلَاةِ الْعَصْرِ، مَلَأَ اللهُ قُلُوبَهُم وَبُيُوتَـهم نَارًا\n\n(They (the disbelievers) busied us from performing the Middle prayer, the 'Asr prayer, may Allah fill their hearts and houses with fire.)\n\nHe performed the 'Asr prayer between Maghrib and 'Isha'. Muslim and An-Nasa'i recorded this Hadith. In addition, the Two Shaykhs, Abu Dawud, At-Tirmidhi An-Nasa'i and several other collectors of the Sunan recorded this Hadith using different chains of narrators to 'Ali. The Hadith about the battle of Al-Ahzab, when the Mushriks prevented Allah's Messenger ﷺ and his Companions from performing the 'Asr prayer, has been narrated by several other Companions. We only mentioned the narrations that stated that the Middle prayer is the 'Asr prayer. Furthermore, Muslim reported similar wordings for this Hadith from Ibn Mas'ud and Al-Bara' bin 'Azib.\n\nIn addition, Imam Ahmad reported that Samurah bin Jundub said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\n\nصَلَاةُ الْوسْطَى صَلَاةُ الْعَصْرِ\n\n(The Middle prayer is the 'Asr prayer.)\n\nIn another narration, Allah's Messenger ﷺ mentioned:\n\nحَافِظُوا عَلَى الصَّلَوَاتِ وَالصَّلَاةِ الْوُسْطَىٰ\n\n(Guard strictly (five obligatory) As-Salawat (the prayers) especially the Middle Salah) and stated that it is the 'Asr prayer. In another narration, Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\n\nهِيَ الْعَصْرُ\n\n(It is the 'Asr prayer.) and Ibn Ja'far mentioned that the Prophet ﷺ was then being asked about the Middle prayer. At-Tirmidhi reported this Hadith and said, \"Hasan, Sahih.\" In addition, Abu Hatim bin Hibban reported in his Sahih that 'Abdullah said that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\n\nصَلَاةُ الْوسْطَى صَلَاةُ الْعَصْرِ\n\n(The Middle prayer is the 'Asr prayer.)\n\nAt-Tirmidhi reported that Ibn Mas'ud narrated that Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:\n\nصَلَاةُ الْوسْطَى صَلَاةُ الْعَصْرِ\n\n(The 'Asr prayer is the Middle prayer.)\n\nAt-Tirmidhi then stated that this Hadith is of a Hasan, Sahih type. Muslim reported the Hadith in his Sahih and his wordings are:\n\nشَغَلُونَا عَنِ الصَّلَاةِ الْوسْطَى صَلَاةِ الْعَصْرِ\n\n(They (disbelievers) busied us from performing the Middle prayer, the 'Asr prayer.)\n\nThese texts emphasize the fact (that the 'Asr prayer is the Middle prayer). What further proves this fact is that, in an authentic Hadith, Allah's Messenger ﷺ emphasized the necessity of preserving the 'Asr prayer, when he said, as Ibn 'Umar narrated:\n\nمَنْ فَاتَتْهُ صَلَاةُ الْعَصْرِ فَكَأَنَّمَا وُتِرَ أَهْلَهُ وَمَالَهُ\n\n(Whoever misses the 'Asr prayer will be like who has lost his family and money.)\n\nIt is reported in the Sahih that Buraydah bin Al-Husayb said that the Prophet ﷺ said:\n\nبَكِّرُوا بِالصَّلَاةِ فِي يَوْمِ الْغَيْمِ، فَإِنَّهُ مَنْ تَرَكَ صَلَاةَ الْعَصْرِ، فَقَدْ حَبِطَ عَمَلُهُ\n\n(On a cloudy day, perform the ('Asr) prayer early, for whoever misses the 'Asr prayer, will have his (good) deeds annulled.)\n\n## The Prohibition of speaking during the Prayer\n\nAllah said:\n\nوَقُومُوا لِلَّهِ قَانِتِينَ\n\n(And stand before Allah with obedience.) meaning, with humbleness and humility before Him (i.e., during the prayer). This command indicates that it is not allowed to speak during the prayer, as speaking contradicts the nature of the prayer. This is why the Prophet ﷺ refused to answer Ibn Mas'ud when he greeted him while he was praying and said afterwards:\n\nإِنَّ فِي الصَّلَاةِ لَشُغْلًا\n\n(The prayer makes one sufficiently busy.)(i.e., by the various actions of the body, tongue and heart involved during the prayer.)\n\nMuslim reported that the Prophet ﷺ said to Mu'awiyah bin Hakam As-Sulami when he spoke during the prayer:\n\nإِنَّ هذِهِ الصَّلَاةَ لَا يَصْلُحُ فِيهَا شَيْءٌ مِنْ كَلَامِ النَّاسِ، إنَّمَا هِي التَّسْبِيحُ وَالتَّكْبِيرُ وَذِكْرُ اللهِ\n\n(The ordinary speech people indulge in is not appropriate during the prayer. The prayer involves only Tasbih (praising Allah), Takbir (saying Allahu Akbar, i.e., Allah is the Most Great) and remembering Allah.)\n\nImam Ahmad reported that Zayd bin Arqam said, \"One used to address his friend about various affairs during the prayer. Then when this Ayah was revealed:\n\nوَقُومُوا لِلَّهِ قَانِتِينَ\n\n(And stand before Allah with obedience.) we were ordered to refrain from speaking.\" The Group (i. e., the Hadith collections), except Ibn Majah, reported this Hadith.\n\n## The Fear Prayer\n\nAllah said:\n\nفَإِنْ خِفْتُمْ فَرِجَالًا أَوْ رُكْبَانًا فَإِذَا أَمِنتُمْ فَاذْكُرُوا اللَّهَ كَمَا عَلَّمَكُم مَّا لَمْ تَكُونُوا تَعْلَمُونَ\n\n(And if you fear (an enemy), (perform Salah) on foot or riding. And when you are in safety, then remember Allah (pray) in the manner He has taught you, which you knew not (before).)\n\nAfter Allah commanded His servants to perform the prayer perfectly and emphasized this commandment, He mentioned the situation where the person might not be able to perform the prayer perfectly, during battle and combat. Allah said:\n\nفَإِنْ خِفْتُمْ فَرِجَالًا أَوْ رُكْبَانًا\n\n(And if you fear (an enemy), perform Salah on foot or riding.) meaning, pray in the appropriate manner under these circumstances, whether on foot or riding and whether facing the Qiblah or otherwise. Imam Malik reported that Nafi' related that Ibn 'Umar used to describe the Fear prayer when he was asked about it and would then add, \"If there is intense fear, pray on foot, riding, facing the Qiblah and otherwise.\" Nafi' commented, \"I think that he related that to the Prophet ﷺ.\" Al-Bukhari and Muslim reported the Hadith.\n\nMuslim, Abu Dawud, An-Nasa'i, Ibn Majah and Ibn Jarir reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Allah has ordained the prayer by the words of your Prophet ﷺ: four (Rak'ah) while residing, two Rak'ah while traveling and one Rak'ah during times of fear.\" This is also the view of Al-Hasan Al-Basri, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak, and others.\n\nIn addition, Al-Bukhari has entitled a Chapter: 'Prayer while confronting the Forts and facing the Enemy'. Al-Awza'i said, \"If the victory seems near and the Muslims are unable to perform the prayer (in the normal manner), they should pray by nodding each by himself. If they are unable to nod, they should delay the prayer until fighting is finished. When they feel safe, they should pray two Rak'ah. If they are unable, they should then pray one Rak'ah that includes two prostrations. If they are unable, then Takbir alone does not suffice, so they should delay the prayer until they are safe.\" This is the same view that Makhul held. Anas bin Malik said, \"I participated in the attack on the fort of Tastar, when the light of dawn started to become clear. Suddenly, the fighting raged and the Muslims were unable to pray until the light of day spread. We then prayed (the Dawn prayer) with Abu Musa and we became victorious. I would not have been pleased if I were to gain in the life of this world and whatever is in it instead of that prayer.\" This is the wording of Al-Bukhari.\n\n## Prayer during the Times of Peace is performed normally\n\nAllah said:\n\nفَإِذَا أَمِنتُمْ فَاذْكُرُوا اللَّهَ\n\n(And when you are in safety, then remember Allah (pray)) meaning, 'Perform the prayer as I have commanded you by completing its bowing, prostration, standing, sitting, and with the required attention (in the heart) and supplication.' Allah said:\n\nكَمَا عَلَّمَكُم مَّا لَمْ تَكُونُوا تَعْلَمُونَ\n\n(in the manner He has taught you, which you knew not (before).) meaning, just as He has endowed you, guided you and taught you about what benefits you in this life and the Hereafter, so thank and remember Him. Similarly, Allah said after He mentioned the prayer of Fear,\n\nفَإِذَا اطْمَأْنَنتُمْ فَأَقِيمُوا الصَّلَاةَ إِنَّ الصَّلَاةَ كَانَتْ عَلَى الْمُؤْمِنِينَ كِتَابًا مَّوْقُوتًا\n\n(...but when you are free from danger, perform As-Salah. Verily, As-Salah (the prayer) is enjoined on the believers at fixed hours.)(4:103)\n\nWe will mention the Hadiths about the prayer of Fear and its description in Surat An-Nisa' while mentioning Allah's statement:\n\nوَإِذَا كُنتَ فِيهِمْ فَأَقَمْتَ لَهُمُ الصَّلَاةَ\n\n(When you (O Messenger Muhammad ﷺ) are among them, and lead them in As-Salah (the prayer).)(4:102)","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=238","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:240","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:240–242","text":"And those of you who die and leave behind wives should bequeath for their wives a year's maintenance (and residence) without turning them out, but if they (wives) leave, there is no sin on you for that which they do of themselves, provided it is honorable (e.g., lawful marriage). And Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise (240)And for divorced women, maintenance (should be provided) on reasonable (scale). This is a duty on Al-Muttaqin (the pious)(241)Thus Allah makes clear His Ayat (Laws) to you, in order that you may understand (242)\n\n## Ayah (2:240) was abrogated\n\nThe majority of the scholars said that this Ayah (2:240) was abrogated by the Ayah (2:234), what Allah said:\nيَتَرَبَّصْنَ بِأَنفُسِهِنَّ أَرْبَعَةَ أَشْهُرٍ وَعَشْرًا\n(...they (the wives) shall wait (as regards their marriage) for four months and ten days.)(2:234)\nFor instance, Al-Bukhari reported that Ibn Az-Zubayr said: I said to 'Uthman bin 'Affan:\nوَالَّذِينَ يُتَوَفَّوْنَ مِنكُمْ وَيَذَرُونَ أَزْوَاجًا\n(And those of you who die and leave wives behind them) was abrogated by the other Ayah (2:234). Therefore, why did you collect it (meaning, in the Qur'an)?\" He said, \"O my nephew! I shall not change any part of the Qur'an from its place.\"\nThe question that Ibn Az-Zubayr asked 'Uthman means: 'If the ruling of the Ayah (2:240) was abrogated to four months (the 'Iddah of the widow, and refer to 2:234), then what is the wisdom behind including it in the Qur'an, although its ruling has been abrogated? If the Ayah (2:240) remains (in the Qur'an) after the Ayah that abrogated it (2:234), this might imply that its ruling is still valid.' 'Uthman, the Leader of the faithful, answered him by stating that this is a matter of the revelation, which mentioned these Ayat in this order. 'Therefore, I shall leave the Ayah where I found it in the Qur'an.'\nIbn Abu Hatim reported that Ibn 'Abbas said about what Allah said:\nوَالَّذِينَ يُتَوَفَّوْنَ مِنكُمْ وَيَذَرُونَ أَزْوَاجًا وَصِيَّةً لِّأَزْوَاجِهِم مَّتَاعًا إِلَى الْحَوْلِ غَيْرَ إِخْرَاجٍ\n(And those of you who die and leave behind wives should bequeath for their wives a year's maintenance (and residence) without turning them out,) \"The widow used to reside, and have her provisions provided for her for a year, in her deceased husband's house. Later, the Ayah that specified the inheritance (4:12) abrogated this Ayah (2:240), and thus the widow inherits one-fourth or one-eighth of what her (deceased) husband leaves behind.\"\nIbn Abu Hatim also related that 'Ali bin Abu Talhah stated that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"When a man died and left behind a widow, she used to remain in his house for a year for her 'Iddah, all the while receiving her provisions during this time. Thereafter, Allah revealed this Ayah:\nوَالَّذِينَ يُتَوَفَّوْنَ مِنكُمْ وَيَذَرُونَ أَزْوَاجًا يَتَرَبَّصْنَ بِأَنفُسِهِنَّ أَرْبَعَةَ أَشْهُرٍ وَعَشْرًا\n(And those of you who die and leave wives behind them, they (the wives) shall wait (as regards their marriage) for four months and ten days.)(2:234)\nSo, this is the 'Iddah of the widow, unless she was pregnant, for her 'Iddah then ends when she gives birth. Allah also said:\nوَلَهُنَّ الرُّبُعُ مِمَّا تَرَكْتُمْ إِن لَّمْ يَكُن لَّكُمْ وَلَدٌ فَإِن كَانَ لَكُمْ وَلَدٌ فَلَهُنَّ الثُّمُنُ مِمَّا تَرَكْتُم\n(In that which you leave, their (your wives') share is a fourth if you leave no child; but if you leave a child, they get an eighth of that which you leave.)(4:12)\nSo Allah specified the share of the widow in the inheritance and there was no need for the will or the Nafaqah (maintenance) which were mentioned in (2:240).\"\nIbn Abu Hatim stated that Mujahid, Al-Hasan, 'Ikrimah, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak, Ar-Rabi' and Muqatil bin Hayyan said that the Ayah (2:240) was abrogated by:\nأَرْبَعَةَ أَشْهُرٍ وَعَشْرًا\n(four months and ten days.)(2:234)\nAl-Bukhari reported that Mujahid said that:\nوَالَّذِينَ يُتَوَفَّوْنَ مِنكُمْ وَيَذَرُونَ أَزْوَاجًا\n(And those of you who die and leave wives behind them)(2:234) used to be the 'Iddah, and the widow had to remain with her (deceased) husband's family (during that period, i.e., four months and ten days). Then, Allah revealed:\nوَالَّذِينَ يُتَوَفَّوْنَ مِنكُمْ وَيَذَرُونَ أَزْوَاجًا وَصِيَّةً لِّأَزْوَاجِهِم مَّتَاعًا إِلَى الْحَوْلِ غَيْرَ إِخْرَاجٍ فَإِنْ خَرَجْنَ فَلَا جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِي مَا فَعَلْنَ فِي أَنفُسِهِنَّ مِن مَّعْرُوفٍ\n(And those of you who die and leave behind wives should bequeath for their wives a year's maintenance (and residence) without turning them out, but if they (wives) leave, there is no sin on you for that which they do of themselves, provided it is honorable (e.g., lawful marriage).)\nSo, Allah made the rest of the year, which is seven months and twenty days, as a will and testament for her. Consequently, if she wants, she could use her right in this will and remain in the residence (for the rest of the year). Or, if she wants, she could leave the (deceased husband's) house after the four months and ten days have passed. This is the meaning of what Allah said:\nغَيْرَ إِخْرَاجٍ فَإِنْ خَرَجْنَ فَلَا جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ\n(...without turning them out, but if they (wives) leave, there is no sin on you.)\nTherefore, the required term of 'Iddah is still unchanged (refer to 2:234).\nAta' quoted Ibn 'Abbas, \"This Ayah (2:240) has abrogated (the requirement that) the widow spends the 'Iddah with his (i.e., her deceased husband's) family. So, she spends her 'Iddah wherever she wants. This is the meaning of what Allah said:\nغَيْرَ إِخْرَاجٍ\n(without turning them out,).\"\nAta' also said: \"If she wants, she spends the 'Iddah with his family and resides there according to the will (meaning the rest of the year). If she wants, she is allowed to leave, for Allah said:\nفَلَا جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِيمَا فَعَلْنَ\n(there is no sin on you for that which they do of themselves,).\"\nAta' then said: \"Then (the Ayah on) the inheritance (refer to 4:12) came and abrogated the residence. Hence, the widow spends her 'Iddah wherever she wants and does not have the right to residence any more.\"\nThe statement of 'Ata' and those who held the view that the Ayah (2:240) was abrogated by the Ayah on the inheritance (4: 12), is only valid for more than the four months and ten days (required in 2:234). However, if they mean that the four months and ten days are not required from the deceased husband's estate, then this opinion is the subject of disagreement among the scholars. As proof, they said that the widow is required to remain in her (deceased) husband's house (for four months and ten days) according to what Malik reported from Zaynab bint Ka'b bin 'Ujrah. She said that Fari'ah bint Malik bin Sinan, the sister of Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri, told her that she came to Allah's Messenger ﷺ asking him to return to her family's residence with Banu Khudrah. Her husband had pursued some of his servants who ran away, but when he reached the area of Al-Qadum, they killed him. She said, \"So I asked Allah's Messenger ﷺ if I should stay with my family in Banu Khudrah, for my (deceased) husband did not leave me a residence that he owns or Nafaqah (maintenance). Allah's Messenger ﷺ answered in the positive. While I was in the room, Allah's Messenger ﷺ summoned me or had someone summon me and said:\nكَيْفَ قُلْتِ؟\n(What did you say?) I repeated the story to him about my (deceased) husband. He said:\nامْكُثي فِي بَيْتِكِ حَتَّى يَبْلُغَ الكِتَابُ أَجَلَهُ\n(Stay at your home until the term reaches its end.)\nSo I remained through the 'Iddah term for four months and ten days in my (deceased husband's) house. Thereafter, 'Uthman bin 'Affan sent for me during his reign and asked me about this matter and I told him what happened. He made a judgment to the same effect.\" This Hadith was also collected by Abu Dawud, At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa'i and Ibn Majah. At-Tirmidhi said, \"Hasan Sahih\".\n\n## The Necessity of the Mut'ah (Gift) at the Time of Divorce\n\nAllah said:\nوَلِلْمُطَلَّقَاتِ مَتَاعٌ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ حَقًّا عَلَى الْمُتَّقِينَ\n(And for divorced women, maintenance (should be provided) on reasonable (scale). This is a duty on Al-Muttaqin (the pious).)\nAbdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam said that when Allah's statement:\nمَتَاعًا بِالْمَعْرُوفِ حَقًّا عَلَى الْمُحْسِنِينَ\n(...a gift of reasonable amount is a duty on the doers of good)(2:236) was revealed, a man said, \"If I want, I will be excellent and if I do not, I will not.\" Thereafter, Allah revealed this Ayah:\nوَلِلْمُطَلَّقَاتِ مَتَاعٌ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ حَقًّا عَلَى الْمُتَّقِينَ\n(And for divorced women, maintenance (should be provided) on reasonable (scale). This is a duty on Al-Muttaqin (the pious).)\nThe scholars who ruled that the Mut'ah (reasonable gift) at the time of divorce is required for every divorced woman, whether she had a bridal-money appointed for her or not, and whether the marriage was consummated or not, relied on this Ayah (2:241) when they issued their ruling. This is the view taken on this subject by Sa'id bin Jubayr and several others among the Salaf and also Ibn Jarir. Hence, Allah's statement:\nلَّا جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ إِن طَلَّقْتُمُ النِّسَاءَ مَا لَمْ تَمَسُّوهُنَّ أَوْ تَفْرِضُوا لَهُنَّ فَرِيضَةً وَمَتِّعُوهُنَّ عَلَى الْمُوسِعِ قَدَرُهُ وَعَلَى الْمُقْتِرِ قَدَرُهُ مَتَاعًا بِالْمَعْرُوفِ حَقًّا عَلَى الْمُحْسِنِينَ\n(There is no sin on you, if you divorce women while yet you have not touched (had sexual relation with) them, nor appointed for them their due (dowry). But bestow on them (a suitable gift), the rich according to his means, and the poor according to his means, a gift of reasonable amount is a duty on the doers of good.)(2:236) only mentions some specifics of this general ruling.\nAllah then said:\nكَذَٰلِكَ يُبَيِّنُ اللَّهُ لَكُمْ آيَاتِهِ\n(Thus Allah makes clear His Ayat (Laws) to you,) meaning, what He allows, forbids, requires, His set limits, His commandments and His prohibitions are all explained and made plain and clear for you. He did not leave any matter in general terms if you needed the specifics,\nلَعَلَّكُمْ تَعْقِلُونَ\n(in order that you may understand.) meaning, understand and comprehend.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=240","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:243","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:243–245","text":"Did you (O Muhammad ﷺ) not think of those who went forth from their homes in the thousands, fearing death? Allah said to them, \"Die\". And then He restored them to life. Truly, Allah is full of bounty to mankind, but most men thank not (243)And fight in the way of Allah and know that Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower (244)Who is he that will lend to Allah a goodly loan so that He may multiply it to him many times? And it is Allah that decreases or increases (your provisions), and unto Him you shall return (245)\n\n## The Story of the Dead People\n\nIbn Abu Hatim related that Ibn 'Abbas said that these people mentioned herein, were the residents of a village called Dawardan. 'Ali bin 'Asim said that they were from Dawardan, a village several miles away from Wasit (in Iraq).\nIn his Tafsir, Waki' bin Jarrah said that Ibn 'Abbas commented,\nأَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ خَرَجُوا مِن دِيَارِهِمْ وَهُمْ أُلُوفٌ حَذَرَ الْمَوْتِ\n(Did you (O Muhammad ﷺ) not think of those who went forth from their homes in thousands, fearing death?) that they were four thousand persons who escaped the plague (that broke out in their land). They said, \"We should go to a land that is free of death!\" When they reached a certain area, Allah said to them:\nمُوتُوا\n(\"Die.\") and they all died. Afterwards, one of the Prophets passed by them and supplicated to Allah to resurrect them and Allah brought them back to life. So, Allah stated:\nأَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ خَرَجُوا مِن دِيَارِهِمْ وَهُمْ أُلُوفٌ حَذَرَ الْمَوْتِ\n(Did you (O Muhammad ﷺ) not think of those who went forth from their homes in the thousands, fearing death?)\nFurthermore, several scholars among the Salaf said that these people were the residents of a city during the time of the Children of Israel. The weather in their land did not suit them and an epidemic broke out. They fled their land fearing death and took refuge in the wilderness. They later arrived at a fertile valley and they filled what is between its two sides. Then Allah sent two angels to them, one from the lower side and the other from the upper side of the valley. The angels screamed once and all the people died instantly, just as the death of one man. They were later moved to a different place, where walls and graves were built around them. They all perished, and their bodies rotted and disintegrated. Long afterwards, one of the Prophets of the Children of Israel, whose name was Hizqil (Ezekiel), passed by them and asked Allah to bring them back to life by his hand. Allah accepted his supplication and commanded him to say, \"O rotted bones, Allah commands you to come together.\" The bones of every body were brought together. Allah then commanded him to say, \"O bones, Allah commands you to be covered with flesh, nerves and skin.\" That also happened while Hizqil was watching. Allah then commanded him to say, \"O souls, Allah commands you to return, each to the body that it used to inhabit.\" They all came back to life, looked around and proclaimed, \"All praise is due to You (O Allah!) and there is no deity worthy of worship except You.\" Allah brought them back to life after they had perished long ago.\nWe should state that bringing these people back to life is a clear proof that physical resurrection shall occur on the Day of Resurrection. This is why Allah said:\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ لَذُو فَضْلٍ عَلَى النَّاسِ\n(Truly, Allah is full of bounty to mankind,) meaning, in that He shows them His great signs, sound proofs and clear evidences. Yet,\nوَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لَا يَشْكُرُونَ\n(but most men thank not.) as they do not thank Allah for what He has given them with in their worldly life and religious affairs.\nThe story of the dead people (2:244 above) also indicates that no caution can ever avert destiny and that there is no refuge from Allah, but to Allah Himself. These people departed from their land fleeing the epidemic and seeking to enjoy a long life. What they earned was the opposite of what they sought, as death came quickly and instantaneously and seized them all.\nThere is an authentic Hadith that Imam Ahmad reported that 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas said that 'Umar bin Al-Khattab once went to Ash-Sham (Syria). When he reached the area of Sargh, he was met by the commanders of the army: Abu 'Ubaydah bin Jarrah and his companions. They told him that the plague had broken out in Ash-Sham. The Hadith then mentioned that 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Awf, who was away attending to some of his affairs, came and said, \"I have knowledge regarding this matter. I heard Allah's Messenger ﷺ say:\nإِذَا كَانَ بِأَرْضٍ وَأَنْتُمْ بِهَا فَلَا تَخْرُجُوا فِرَارًا مِنْه، وإِذَا سَمِعتُمْ به بأَرْضٍ فَلا تَقْدمُوا عَلَيْهِ\n(If it (the plague) breaks out in a land that you are in, do not leave that land to escape from it. If you hear about it in a land, do not enter it.)\nUmar then thanked Allah and went back. This Hadith is also reported in the Sahihayn.\n\n## Abandoning Jihad does not alter Destiny\n\nAllah said:\nوَقَاتِلُوا فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ\n(And fight in the way of Allah and know that Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower.)\nThis Ayah indicates that just as caution does not alter destiny, abandoning Jihad will neither bring the appointed term closer nor delay it. Rather, destiny and the appointed provisions are fixed and shall never be changed or altered, neither by addition nor deletion. Similarly, Allah said:\nالَّذِينَ قَالُوا لِإِخْوَانِهِمْ وَقَعَدُوا لَوْ أَطَاعُونَا مَا قُتِلُوا قُلْ فَادْرَءُوا عَنْ أَنفُسِكُمُ الْمَوْتَ إِن كُنتُمْ صَادِقِينَ\n((They are) the ones who said about their killed brethren while they themselves sat (at home): \"If only they had listened to us, they would not have been killed.\" Say: \"Avert death from your own selves, if you speak the truth.\")(3:168)\nAllah said:\nوَقَالُوا رَبَّنَا لِمَ كَتَبْتَ عَلَيْنَا الْقِتَالَ لَوْلَا أَخَّرْتَنَا إِلَىٰ أَجَلٍ قَرِيبٍ قُلْ مَتَاعُ الدُّنْيَا قَلِيلٌ وَالْآخِرَةُ خَيْرٌ لِّمَنِ اتَّقَىٰ وَلَا تُظْلَمُونَ فَتِيلًا - أَيْنَمَا تَكُونُوا يُدْرِككُّمُ الْمَوْتُ وَلَوْ كُنتُمْ فِي بُرُوجٍ مُّشَيَّدَةٍ\n(They say: \"Our Lord! Why have you ordained for us fighting? Would that you had granted us respite for a short period?\" Say: \"Short is the enjoyment of this world. The Hereafter is (far) better for him who fears Allah, and you shall not be dealt with unjustly even equal to the Fatila (a scalish thread in the long slit of a date stone). Wheresoever you may be, death will overtake you even if you are in fortresses built up strong and high!\")(4:77-78)\nAbu Sulayman, Khalid bin Al-Walid, the commander of the Muslim armies, the veteran among Muslim soldiers, the protector of Islam and the Sword of Allah that was raised above His enemies, said while dying, \"I have participated in so-and-so number of battles. There is not a part of my body, but suffered a shot (of an arrow), a stab (of a spear) or a strike (of a sword). Yet, here I am, I die on my bed just as the camel dies! May the eyes of the cowards never taste sleep.\" He, may Allah be pleased with him, was sorry and in pain because he did not die as martyr in battle. He was sad that he had to die on his bed!\n\n## The Good Loan and its Reward\n\nAllah said:\nمَّن ذَا الَّذِي يُقْرِضُ اللَّهَ قَرْضًا حَسَنًا فَيُضَاعِفَهُ لَهُ أَضْعَافًا كَثِيرَةً\n(Who is he that will lend to Allah a goodly loan so that He may multiply it to him many times?)\nIn this Ayah, Allah encourages His servants to spend in His cause. Allah mentioned this same Ayah in several other parts of His Glorious Qur'an. The Hadith that mentions that Allah descends (every night down on the nearest heaven to us when the last third of the night remains) states that Allah says:\nمَنْ يُقْرِضُ غَيْرَ عَدِيـمٍ وَلَا ظَلُومٍ\n(Who would give a loan to He Who is neither poor nor unjust.)\nAllah's statement:\nفَيُضَاعِفَهُ لَهُ أَضْعَافًا كَثِيرَةً\n(He may multiply it to him many times), is similar to His statement:\nمَّثَلُ الَّذِينَ يُنفِقُونَ أَمْوَالَهُمْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ كَمَثَلِ حَبَّةٍ أَنبَتَتْ سَبْعَ سَنَابِلَ فِي كُلِّ سُنبُلَةٍ مِّائَةُ حَبَّةٍ وَاللَّهُ يُضَاعِفُ لِمَن يَشَاءُ\n(The likeness of those who spend their wealth in the way of Allah, is as the likeness of a grain (of corn); it grows seven ears, and each ear has a hundred grains. Allah gives manifold increase to whom He wills.)(2:261)\nWe will mention this Ayah later on. Allah then said:\nوَاللَّهُ يَقْبِضُ وَيَبْسُطُ\n(And it is Allah that decreases or increases (your provisions),) meaning, 'Spend (in Allah's cause) and do not be anxious.' Certainly, Allah is the Sustainer Who increases or decreases the provisions to whomever He wills among His servants. Allah's wisdom is perfect, and,\nوَإِلَيْهِ تُرْجَعُونَ\n(and unto Him you shall return.) on the Day of Resurrection.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=243","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:246","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:246","text":"Have you not thought about the group of the Children of Israel after (the time of) Musa? When they said to a Prophet of theirs, \"Appoint for us a king and we will fight in Allah's way.\" He said, \"Would you then refrain from fighting, if fighting was prescribed for you?\" They said, \"Why should we not fight in Allah's way while we have been driven out of our homes and our children (families have been taken as captives)?\" But when fighting was ordered for them, they turned away, all except a few of them. And Allah is All-Aware of the wrongdoers (246)\n\n## The Story of the Jews Who sought a King to be appointed over Them\n\nMujahid said that the Prophet (mentioned in the Ayah 2:246 above) is Shamwil (Samuel). Wahb bin Munabbih said: The Children of Israel remained on the straight path for a period of time after Moses. They then innovated in the religion and some of them even worshipped the idols. Yet, there were always Prophets sent among them who would command them to work righteous deeds, refrain from doing evil and who would rule them according to the commands of the Torah. When they (Israelites) committed the evil that they committed, Allah caused their enemies to overwhelm them, and many fatalities fell among them as a consequence. Their enemies also captured a great number of them, and took over large areas of their land. Earlier, anyone who would fight the Israelites would lose, because they had the Torah and the Tabut, which they inherited generation after generation ever since the time of Moses, who spoke to Allah directly. Yet, the Israelites kept indulging in misguidance until some king took the Tabut from them during a battle. That king also took possession of the Torah, and only a few of the Israelites who memorized it remained. The prophethood halted among their various tribes and only a pregnant woman remained of the offspring of Lavi (Levi), in whom the prophethood still appeared. Her husband had been killed, so the Israelites kept her in a house so that Allah may give her a boy, who would be their Prophet. The woman also kept invoking Allah to grant her a boy. Allah heard her pleas and gave her a boy whom she called 'Shamwil' meaning 'Allah has heard my pleas.' Some people said that the boy's name was Sham'un (Simeon), which also has a similar meaning.\nAs that boy grew, Allah raised him to be a righteous person. When he reached the age of prophethood, Allah revealed to him and commanded him to call (his people) to Him and to His Tawhid (Oneness). Shamwil called the Children of Israel (to Allah) and they asked him to appoint a king over them so that they could fight their enemies under his command. The kingship had also ended among them. Their Prophet said to them, \"What if Allah appoints a king over you, would you fulfill your vow to fight under his command?\"\nقَالُوا وَمَا لَنَا أَلَّا نُقَاتِلَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ وَقَدْ أُخْرِجْنَا مِن دِيَارِنَا وَأَبْنَائِنَا\n(They said, \"Why should we not fight in Allah's way while we have been driven out of our homes and our children?\") meaning, 'After our land had been confiscated and our children had been taken from us?' Allah said:\nفَلَمَّا كُتِبَ عَلَيْهِمُ الْقِتَالُ تَوَلَّوْا إِلَّا قَلِيلًا مِّنْهُمْ وَاللَّهُ عَلِيمٌ بِالظَّالِمِينَ\n(But when fighting was ordered for them, they turned away, all except a few of them. And Allah is All-Aware of the wrongdoers) meaning, only a few of them kept their promise, but the majority abandoned Jihad and Allah has full knowledge of them.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=246","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:247","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:247","text":"And their Prophet said to them, \"Indeed Allah has appointed Talut (Saul) as a king over you.\" They said, \"How can he be a king over us when we are fitter than him for the kingdom, and he has not been given enough wealth.\" He said: \"Verily, Allah has chosen him above you and has increased him abundantly in knowledge and stature. And Allah grants His kingdom to whom He wills. And Allah is All-Sufficient for His creatures' needs, All-Knower. (247)\nWhen the Israelites asked their Prophet to appoint a king over them, he appointed Talut (Saul), who was then a soldier. But, Talut was not a descendant of the house of kings among them, which was exclusively in the offspring of Yahudha (Judah). This is why they said:\nأَنَّىٰ يَكُونُ لَهُ الْمُلْكُ عَلَيْنَا\n(How can he be a king over us) meaning, how can he be the king for us,\nوَنَحْنُ أَحَقُّ بِالْمُلْكِ مِنْهُ وَلَمْ يُؤْتَ سَعَةً مِّنَ الْمَالِ\n(when we are fitter than him for the kingdom, and he has not been given enough wealth?) They said that Talut was also poor and did not have the wealth that justifies him being king. Some people stated that Talut used to bring water to the people, while others stated that his profession was dyeing skins. The Jews, thus, disputed with their Prophet while they were supposed to obey him and to say good words to him.\nTheir Prophet answered them:\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ اصْطَفَاهُ عَلَيْكُمْ\n(Verily, Allah has chosen him above you) meaning, 'Allah chose Talut from amongst you while having better knowledge about him.' Their Prophet stated, \"I did not choose Talut to be your king on my own. Rather, Allah has commanded that upon your request.\" Further:\nوَزَادَهُ بَسْطَةً فِي الْعِلْمِ وَالْجِسْمِ\n(...and has increased him abundantly in knowledge and stature.) meaning, 'Talut is more knowledgeable and honorable than you, and stronger and more patient during combat, and has more knowledge of warfare. In short, he has more knowledge and is stronger than you are. The king should have sufficient knowledge, be fair looking and should have a strong soul and body.' He then said:\nوَاللَّهُ يُؤْتِي مُلْكَهُ مَن يَشَاءُ\n(And Allah grants His kingdom to whom He wills.) meaning, Allah Alone is the Supreme Authority Who does what He wills and no one can ask Him about His actions, while they will be asked (about their actions by Him). This is because Allah has perfect knowledge, wisdom and kindness with His creation. Allah said:\nوَاللَّهُ وَاسِعٌ عَلِيمٌ\n(And Allah is All-Sufficient for His creatures' needs, All-Knower.) meaning, His favor is encompassing and He grants His mercy to whom He wills. He also knows those who deserve to be kings and those who do not deserve it.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=247","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:248","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:248","text":"And their Prophet said to them: \"Verily! The sign of His kingdom is that there shall come to you At-Tabut, wherein is Sakinah (peace and reassurance) from your Lord and a remnant of that which Musa (Moses) and Harun (Aaron) left behind, carried by the angels. Verily, in this is a sign for you if you are indeed believers (248)\nTheir Prophet then proclaimed, \"The sign of the blessings of Talut's kingship over you is that Allah will give you back the Tabut (wooden box) that has been taken from you.\" Allah said:\nفِيهِ سَكِينَةٌ مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ\n(wherein is Sakinah from your Lord) meaning, peace (or grace) and reassurance. 'Abdur-Razzaq stated that Qatadah said:\nفِيهِ سَكِينَةٌ\n(wherein is Sakinah) means grace. In addition, Ar-Rabi' said that Sakinah means mercy. This is also the meaning given by Ibn 'Abbas, as Al-'Awfi narrated.\nAllah then said:\nوَبَقِيَّةٌ مِّمَّا تَرَكَ آلُ مُوسَىٰ وَآلُ هَارُونَ\n(...and a remnant of that which Musa (Moses) and Harun (Aaron) left behind,)\nIbn Jarir related that Ibn 'Abbas said about this Ayah:\nوَبَقِيَّةٌ مِّمَّا تَرَكَ آلُ مُوسَىٰ وَآلُ هَارُونَ\n(...and a remnant of that which Musa (Moses) and Harun (Aaron) left behind,) Meaning, Moses' staff and the remnants of the Tablets. This is the same Tafsir of Qatadah, As-Suddi, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas and 'Ikrimah, who added, \"And also the Torah.\" 'Abdur-Razzaq said that he asked Ath-Thawri about the meaning of,\nوَبَقِيَّةٌ مِّمَّا تَرَكَ آلُ مُوسَىٰ وَآلُ هَارُونَ\n(...and a remnant of that which Musa (Moses) and Harun (Aaron) left behind,)\nAth-Thawri said, \"Some said that it contained a pot of manna and the remnants of the Tablets, while some others said that it contained (Moses') staff and two shoes (and refer to 20:12).\"\nAllah then said:\nتَحْمِلُهُ الْمَلَائِكَةُ\n(...carried by the angels.)\nIbn Jurayj stated that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"The angels came down while carrying the Tabut between the sky and the earth, until they placed it before Talut while the people were watching.\" As-Suddi said, \"The Tabut was brought to Talut's house, so the people believed in the prophethood of Sham'un (Simeon) and obeyed Talut.\"\nThe Prophet then said:\nإِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً لَّكُمْ\n(Verily, in this is a sign for you) testifying to my truth in what I was sent with, my prophethood, and my command to you to obey Talut,\nإِن كُنتُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ\n(if you are indeed believers.) in Allah and the Hereafter.'","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=248","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:249","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:249","text":"Then when Talut set out with the army, he said: \"Verily, Allah will try you by a river. So whoever drinks thereof, he is not of me; and whoever tastes it not, he is of me, except him who takes (thereof) in the hollow of his hand.\" Yet, they drank thereof, all, except a few of them. So when he had crossed it (the river), he and those who believed with him, they said: \"We have no power this day against Jalut (Goliath) and his hosts.\" But those who knew with certainty that they were going to meet Allah, said: \"How often has a small group overcome a mighty host by Allah's leave?\" And Allah is with As-Sabirin (the patient)(249)\nAllah states that Talut, the king of the Children of Israel, marched forth with his soldiers and the Israelites who obeyed him. His army was of eighty thousand then, according to As-Suddi, but Allah knows best. Talut said:\nإِنَّ اللَّهَ مُبْتَلِيكُم\n(Verily, Allah will try you) meaning, He will test you with a river, which flowed between Jordan and Palestine, i.e. , the Shari'ah river, according to Ibn 'Abbas and others. He continued,\nفَمَن شَرِبَ مِنْهُ فَلَيْسَ مِنِّي\n(So whoever drinks thereof, he is not of me;) meaning, shall not accompany me today,\nوَمَن لَّمْ يَطْعَمْهُ فَإِنَّهُ مِنِّي إِلَّا مَنِ اغْتَرَفَ غُرْفَةً بِيَدِهِ\n(and whoever tastes it not, he is of me, except him who takes (thereof) in the hollow of his hand.) meaning, there is no harm in this case. Allah then said:\nفَشَرِبُوا مِنْهُ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا مِّنْهُمْ\n(Yet, they drank thereof, all, except a few of them.)\nIbn Jurayj stated that Ibn 'Abbas commented, \"Whoever took some of it (the river's water) in the hollow of his hand, quenched his thirst; as for those who drank freely from it, their thirst was not quenched.\"\nIbn Jarir reported that Al-Bara' bin 'Azib said, \"We used to say that the Companions of Muhammad ﷺ who accompanied him on the battle of Badr were more than three hundred and ten, just as many as the soldiers who crossed the river with Talut. Only those who believed crossed the river with him.\" Al-Bukhari also reported this.\nThis is why Allah said:\nفَلَمَّا جَاوَزَهُ هُوَ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مَعَهُ قَالُوا لَا طَاقَةَ لَنَا الْيَوْمَ بِجَالُوتَ وَجُنُودِهِ\n(So when he had crossed it (the river), he and those who believed with him, they said: \"We have no power this day against Jalut (Goliath) and his hosts.\")\nThis Ayah indicates that the Israelites (who remained with Saul) thought that they were few in the face of their enemy who were many then. So, their knowledgeable scholars strengthened their resolve by stating that Allah's promise is true and that triumph comes from Allah Alone, not from the large numbers or the adequacy of the supplies. They said to them:\nكَم مِّن فِئَةٍ قَلِيلَةٍ غَلَبَتْ فِئَةً كَثِيرَةً بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ وَاللَّهُ مَعَ الصَّابِرِينَ\n(\"How often has a small group overcome a mighty host by Allah's leave?\" And Allah is with As-Sabirin (the patient).)","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=249","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:250","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:250–252","text":"And when they advanced to meet Jalut (Goliath) and his forces, they invoked: \"Our Lord! Pour forth on us patience, and set firm our feet and make us victorious over the disbelieving people. (250)So they routed them by Allah's leave and Dawud (David) killed Jalut (Goliath), and Allah gave him (Dawud) the kingdom [ after the death of Talut and Samuel] and Al-Hikmah (prophethood), and taught him of that which He willed. And if Allah did not check one set of people by means of another, the earth would indeed be full of mischief. But Allah is full of bounty to the 'Alamin (mankind, Jinn and all that exists)(251)These are the verses of Allah, We recite them to you (O Muhammad ﷺ) in truth, and surely, you are one of the Messengers (of Allah)(252)\nWhen the faithful party, who were few under the command of Talut, faced their enemy, who were many under the command of Jalut,\nقَالُوا رَبَّنَا أَفْرِغْ عَلَيْنَا صَبْرًا\n(they invoked: \"Our Lord! Pour forth on us patience...\") meaning, send down patience on us from You.\nوَثَبِّتْ أَقْدَامَنَا\n(and set firm our feet) meaning, against the enemy and save us from running away and from feebleness,\nوَانصُرْنَا عَلَى الْقَوْمِ الْكَافِرِينَ\n(and make us victorious over the disbelieving people.)\nAllah said:\nفَهَزَمُوهُم بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ\n(So they routed them by Allah's leave) meaning, they defeated and overwhelmed them by Allah's aid and support. Then,\nوَقَتَلَ دَاوُودُ جَالُوتَ\n(and Dawud killed Jalut)\nIsraelite accounts claimed that (Prophet) David killed Goliath with a slingshot that he had, which he launched at Goliath causing his death.\nTalut promised that whoever killed Jalut, would marry his daughter and would share his kingship and authority. He kept his promise. Later, the kingship was transferred to Prophet Dawud in addition to being granted Prophethood by Allah. So, Allah said:\nوَآتَاهُ اللَّهُ الْمُلْكَ\n(...and Allah gave him (Dawud) the kingdom) that Talut had and,\nوَالْحِكْمَةَ\n(and Al-Hikmah) that comes with the prophethood, meaning, after Shamwil. [Allah then said:]\nوَعَلَّمَهُ مِمَّا يَشَاءُ\n(and taught him of that which He willed.) meaning, what He willed of the knowledge that He bestowed on (Prophet) Dawud.\nNext, Allah said:\nوَلَوْلَا دَفْعُ اللَّهِ النَّاسَ بَعْضَهُم بِبَعْضٍ لَّفَسَدَتِ الْأَرْضُ\n(And if Allah did not check one set of people by means of another, the earth would indeed be full of mischief.)\nThis Ayah indicates that if it were not for the fact that Allah checks one set of people with another, such as when Talut and the bravery of Dawud helped the Children of Israel (against Goliath), then people would have perished. Similarly, Allah said:\nوَلَوْلَا دَفْعُ اللَّهِ النَّاسَ بَعْضَهُم بِبَعْضٍ لَّهُدِّمَتْ صَوَامِعُ وَبِيَعٌ وَصَلَوَاتٌ وَمَسَاجِدُ يُذْكَرُ فِيهَا اسْمُ اللَّهِ كَثِيرًا\n(For had it not been that Allah checks one set of people by means of another, monasteries, churches, synagogues, and Masjids, wherein the Name of Allah is mentioned much, would surely, have been pulled down.)(22:40)\nAllah then said:\nوَلَٰكِنَّ اللَّهَ ذُو فَضْلٍ عَلَى الْعَالَمِينَ\n(But Allah is full of bounty to the 'Alamin (mankind, Jinn and all that exists)) meaning, by His mercy and favor He fixes some of them by some others. Surely, Allah has the wisdom, the supreme authority and the clear proof against His creation in all of His actions and statements.\nAllah said:\nتِلْكَ آيَاتُ اللَّهِ نَتْلُوهَا عَلَيْكَ بِالْحَقِّ وَإِنَّكَ لَمِنَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ\n(These are the verses of Allah, We recite them to you (O Muhammad ﷺ) in truth, and surely, you are one of the Messengers (of Allah).)\nThis Ayah states, 'These Ayat (verses) of Allah that We have narrated for you in truth conform to the exact manner that these stories have occurred and to the truth that still remain in the (Divine) Books that the scholars of the Children of Israel have and know. Allah said: O Muhammad,\nوَإِنَّكَ\n(you are)\nلَمِنَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ\n(one of the Messengers (of Allah)) emphatically stating the truth of his prophethood.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=250","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:253","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:253","text":"Those Messengers! We preferred some of them to others; to some of them Allah spoke (directly); others He raised to degrees (of honor); and to 'Isa, the son of Maryam, We gave clear proofs and evidences, and supported him with Ruh-il-Qudus [Jibril]. If Allah had willed, succeeding generations would not have fought against each other, after clear Verses of Allah had come to them, but they differed ـ some of them believed and others disbelieved. If Allah had willed, they would not have fought against one another, but Allah does what He wills (253)\n\n## Allah Honored Some Prophets Above Others\n\nAllah states that He has honored some Prophets to others. For instance, Allah said,\nوَلَقَدْ فَضَّلْنَا بَعْضَ النَّبِيِّينَ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ وَآتَيْنَا دَاوُودَ زَبُورًا\n(And indeed, We have preferred some of the Prophets above others, and to Dawud We gave the Zabur (Psalms))[17:55]\nIn the Ayah above, Allah said,\nتِلْكَ الرُّسُلُ فَضَّلْنَا بَعْضَهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ ۘ مِّنْهُم مَّن كَلَّمَ اللَّهُ\n(Those Messengers! We preferred some of them to others; to some of them Allah spoke (directly)) meaning, Musa and Muhammad ﷺ, and also Adam according to a Hadith recorded in Sahih Ibn Hibban from Abu Dharr.\nوَرَفَعَ بَعْضَهُمْ دَرَجَاتٍ\n(Others He raised to degrees (of honor)) as is evident in the Hadith about the Isra' journey, when the Messenger of Allah ﷺ saw the Prophets in the various heavens according to their rank with Allah.\nIf somebody asks about the collective meaning of this Ayah and the Hadith that the Two Sahihs collected from Abu Hurayrah which states, \"Once, a Muslim man and a Jew had an argument and the Jew said, 'No, by Him Who gave Musa superiority over all human beings!' Hearing him, the Muslim man raised his hand and slapped the Jew on his face and said, 'Over Muhammad too, O evil one?!' The Jew went to the Prophet ﷺ and complained to him and the Prophet ﷺ said,\nلَا تُفَضِّلُونِي عَلَى الْأَنْبِيَاءِ، فَإِنَّ النَّاسَ يَصْعَقُونَ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ فَأَكُونُ أَوَّلَ مَنْ يُفِيقُ، فَأَجِدُ مُوسَى بَاطِشًا بِقَائِمَةِ الْعَرْشِ، فَلَا أَدْرِي أَفَاقَ قَبْلِي أَمْ جُوزِيَ بِصَعْقَةِ الطُّورِ؟ فَلَا تُفَضِّلُونِي عَلَى الْأَنْبِيَاءِ\n(Don't give me superiority above the Prophets, for the people will become unconscious on the Day of Resurrection, and I will be the first to be resurrected to see Musa holding on to the pillar of Allah's Throne. I will not know whether the unconsciousness Musa suffered on the Day of the Trumpet sufficed for him, or if he got up before me. So, do not give me superiority above the Prophets.) In another narration, the Prophet ﷺ said, (Do not give superiority to some Prophets above others.)\nThe answer to this question is that this Hadith prohibits preferring some Prophets above others in cases of dispute and argument, such as the incident mentioned in the Hadith. The Hadith indicates that it is not up to creation to decide which Prophet is better, for this is Allah's decision. The creation is only required to submit to, obey and believe in Allah's decision.\nAllah's statement,\nوَآتَيْنَا عِيسَى ابْنَ مَرْيَمَ الْبَيِّنَاتِ\n(And We gave 'Isa, the son of Maryam, clear signs) refers to the proofs and unequivocal evidences that testify to the truth that 'Isa delivered to the Children of Israel, thus testifying that he was Allah's servant and His Messenger to them.\nوَأَيَّدْنَاهُ بِرُوحِ الْقُدُسِ\n(And supported him with Ruh-il-Qudus) meaning Allah aided 'Isa with Jibil, peace be upon him. Allah then said,\nوَلَوْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ مَا اقْتَتَلَ الَّذِينَ مِن بَعْدِهِم مِّن بَعْدِ مَا جَاءَتْهُمُ الْبَيِّنَاتُ وَلَٰكِنِ اخْتَلَفُوا فَمِنْهُم مَّنْ آمَنَ وَمِنْهُم مَّن كَفَرَ وَلَوْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ مَا اقْتَتَلُوا\n(If Allah had willed, succeeding generations would not have fought against each other, after clear Verses of Allah had come to them, but they differed ـ some of them believed and others disbelieved. If Allah had willed, they would not have fought against one another.) meaning all this happened by Allah's decree, and this is why He said next,\nوَلَٰكِنَّ اللَّهَ يَفْعَلُ مَا يُرِيدُ\n(But Allah does what He wills.)","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=253","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:254","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:254","text":"O you who believe! Spend of that with which We have provided for you, before a Day comes when there will be no bargaining, nor friendship, nor intercession. And it is the disbelievers who are the wrongdoers (254)\nAllah commands His servants to spend for His sake, in the path of righteousness, from what He has granted them, so that they acquire and keep the reward of this righteous deed with their Lord and King. Let them rush to perform this deed in this life,\nمِّن قَبْلِ أَن يَأْتِيَ يَوْمٌ\n(before a Day comes) meaning, the Day of Resurrection,\nلَّا بَيْعٌ فِيهِ وَلَا خُلَّةٌ وَلَا شَفَاعَةٌ\n(when there will be no bargaining, nor friendship, nor intercession.)\nThis Ayah indicates that on that Day, no one will be able to bargain on behalf of himself or ransom himself with any amount, even if it was the earth's fill of gold; nor will his friendship or relation to anyone benefit him. Similarly, Allah said,\nفَإِذَا نُفِخَ فِي الصُّورِ فَلَا أَنسَابَ بَيْنَهُمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ وَلَا يَتَسَاءَلُونَ\n(Then, when the Trumpet is blown, there will be no kinship among them that Day, nor will they ask of one another)[23:101]\nوَلَا شَفَاعَةٌ\n(Nor intercession) meaning, they will not benefit by the intercession of anyone.\nAllah's statement,\nوَالْكَافِرُونَ هُمُ الظَّالِمُونَ\n(and it is the disbelievers who are the wrongdoers) indicates that no injustice is worse than meeting Allah on that Day while a disbeliever. Ibn Abi Hatim recorded that 'Ata' bin Dinar said, \"All thanks are due to Allah Who said,\nوَالْكَافِرُونَ هُمُ الظَّالِمُونَ\n(and it is the disbelievers who are the wrongdoers) but did not say, 'And it is the wrongdoers who are the disbelievers.'\"","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=254","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:255","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:255","text":"Allah! None has the right to be worshipped but He, the Ever Living, the One Who sustains and protects all that exists. Neither slumber nor sleep overtakes Him. To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. Who is he that can intercede with Him except with His permission? He knows what happens to them (His creatures) in this world, and what will happen to them in the Hereafter. And they will never compass anything of His Knowledge except that which He wills. His Kursi extends over the heavens and the earth, and He feels no fatigue in guarding and preserving them. And He is the Most High, the Most Great (255)\n\n## The Virtue of Ayat Al-Kursi\n\nThis is Ayat Al-Kursi and tremendous virtues have been associated with it, for the authentic Hadith describes it as 'the greatest Ayah in the Book of Allah.' Imam Ahmad recorded that 'Ubayy bin Ka'b said that the Prophet ﷺ asked him about the greatest Ayah in the Book of Allah, and 'Ubayy answered, \"Allah and His Messenger know better.\" When the Prophet repeated his question several times, 'Ubayy said, \"Ayat Al-Kursi.\" The Prophet ﷺ commented,\nلِيَهْنِكَ الْعِلْمُ أَبَا الْمُنْذِرِ، وَالَّذِي نَفْسِي بِيَدِهِ، إِنَّ لَهَا لِسَانًا وَشَفَتَيْنِ، تُقَدِّسُ الْمَلِكَ عِنْدَ سَاقِ الْعَرْشِ\n(Congratulations for having knowledge, O Abu Al-Mundhir! By He in Whose Hand is my soul! This Ayah has a tongue and two lips with which she praises the King (Allah) next to the leg of the Throne.)\nThis Hadith was also collected by Muslim, but he did not include the part that starts with, \"By He in Whose Hand...\"\nImam Ahmad recorded that Abu Ayyub said that he had some dates and a Ghoul used to take some, and he complained to the Prophet. The Prophet ﷺ said to him, \"When you see her, say, 'In the Name of Allah, answer to the Messenger of Allah'.\" Abu Ayyub said that when she came again, he said these words and he was able to grab her. She begged, \"I will not come again,\" so Abu Ayyub released her. Abu Ayyub went to the Prophet ﷺ and the Prophet asked him, \"What did your prisoner do?\" Abu Ayyub said, \"I grabbed her and she said twice, 'I will not come again,' and I released her.\" The Prophet said, \"She will come back.\" Abu Ayyub said, \"So I grabbed her twice or three times, yet each time [I would release her when] she vowed not to come back. I would go to the Prophet ﷺ who would ask me, 'What is the news of your prisoner?' I would say, 'I grabbed her, then released her when she said that she would not return.' The Prophet ﷺ would say that she would return. Once, I grabbed her and she said, 'Release me and I will teach you something to recite so that no harm touches you, that is, Ayat Al-Kursi.' Abu Ayyub went to the Prophet ﷺ and told him, and the Prophet ﷺ said, \"She is liar, but she told the truth.\" At-Tirmidhi recorded this Hadith in the chapter of the virtues of the Qur'an and said, \"Hasan Gharib.\" In Arabic, 'Ghoul' refers to the Jinn when they appear at night.\nAl-Bukhari recorded a similar story in his Sahih from Abu Hurayrah, in the chapters on the virtues of the Qur'an and the description of Shaytan. In this narration, Abu Hurayrah said,\n\"Allah's Messenger ﷺ assigned me to keep watch over the Sadaqah (charity) of Ramadan. A person snuck in and started taking handfuls of foodstuff. I caught him and said, 'By Allah, I will take you to Allah's Messenger.' He said, 'Release me, for I am meek and have many dependents and am in great need.' I released him, and in the morning Allah's Messenger ﷺ asked me, 'What did your prisoner do yesterday, O Abu Hurayrah?' I said, 'O Allah's Messenger! He complained of being needy and of having many dependents, so I pitied him and let him go.' Allah's Messenger ﷺ said, 'Indeed, he told you a lie and will be coming again.' I believed that he would show up again, for Allah's Messenger ﷺ had told me that he would return. So, I watched for him. When he (showed up and) started stealing handfuls of foodstuff, I caught hold of him again and said, 'I will definitely take you to Allah's Messenger.' He said, 'Leave me, for I am very needy and have many dependents. I promise I will not come back again.' I pitied him and let him go. In the morning Allah's Messenger ﷺ asked me, 'What did your prisoner do last night, O Abu Hurayrah?' I replied, 'O Allah's Messenger! He complained of his great need and of too many dependents, so I took pity on him and set him free.' Allah's Messenger ﷺ said, 'Verily, he told you a lie; he will return.' I waited for him attentively for the third time, and when he (came and) started stealing handfuls of the foodstuff, I caught hold of him and said, 'I will surely take you to Allah's Messenger as it is the third time you promised not to return, yet you returned.' He said, 'Let me teach you some words which Allah will give you benefit from.' I asked, 'What are they?' He replied, 'Whenever you go to bed, recite Ayat Al-Kursi - Allahu la ilaha illa Huwal-Hayyul-Qayyum, till you finish the whole verse. (If you do so), Allah will appoint a guard for you who will stay with you, and no Shaytan will come near you until morning.' So, I released him. In the morning, Allah's Messenger ﷺ asked, 'What did your prisoner do yesterday?' I replied, 'O Allah's Messenger! He claimed that he would teach me some words by which Allah will grant me some benefit, so I let him go.' Allah's Messenger ﷺ asked, 'What are they?' I replied, 'He said to me: Whenever you go to bed, recite Ayat Al-Kursi from the beginning to the end, Allahu la ilaha illa Huwal-Hayyul-Qayyum. He further said to me: (If you do so), Allah will appoint a guard for you who will stay with you, and no Shaytan will come near you until morning.' (One of the narrators) then commented that they (the Companions) were very keen to do good deeds. The Prophet ﷺ said, 'He spoke the truth, although he is a liar. Do you know whom you were talking to, these three nights, O Abu Hurayrah?' Abu Hurayrah said, 'No.' He said, 'It was Shaytan.'\" An-Nasa'i also recorded this Hadith in Al-Yawm wa Al-Laylah.\n\n## Allah's Greatest Name is in Ayat Al-Kursi\n\nImam Ahmad recorded that Asma' bint Yazid bin As-Sakan said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ say about these two Ayat,\nاللَّهُ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ الْحَيُّ الْقَيُّومُ\n(Allah! None has the right to be worshipped but He, the Ever Living, the One Who sustains and protects all that exists)[2:255] and,\nالم - اللَّهُ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ الْحَيُّ الْقَيُّومُ\n(Alif-Lam-Mim. Allah! None has the right to be worshipped but He, the Ever Living, the One Who sustains and protects all that exists)[3:1-2]\nإِنَّ فِيهِمَا اسْمَ اللهِ الْأَعْظَمَ\n(They contain Allah's Greatest Name.)\nThis is also the narration collected by Abu Dawud, At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah, and At-Tirmidhi said, \"Hasan Sahih\".\nFurther, Ibn Marduwyah recorded that Abu Umamah reported that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nاسْمُ اللهِ الْأَعْظَمُ، الَّذِي إِذَا دُعِيَ بِهِ أَجَابَ، فِي ثَلَاثٍ: سُورَةِ الْبَقَرَةِ وَآلِ عِمْرَانَ وَطٰهٰ\n(Allah's Greatest Name, if He was supplicated with it, He answers the supplication, is in three Surahs - Al-Baqarah, Āl-'Imrān and Ta-Ha.)\nHisham bin 'Ammar, the Khatib (orator) of Damascus (one of the narrators in the above narration), said, \"As for Al-Baqarah, it is in,\nاللَّهُ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ الْحَيُّ الْقَيُّومُ\n(Allah! None has the right to be worshipped but He, the Ever Living, the One Who sustains and protects all that exists)[2:255] in Āl-'Imrān, it is in,\nالم - اللَّهُ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ الْحَيُّ الْقَيُّومُ\n(Alif-Lam-Mim. Allah! None has the right to be worshipped but He, the Ever Living, the One Who sustains and protects all that exists)[3:1-2] while in Ta-Ha, it is in,\nوَعَنَتِ الْوُجُوهُ لِلْحَيِّ الْقَيُّومِ\n(And (all) faces shall be humbled before (Allah), the Ever Living, the One Who sustains and protects all that exists)[20:111]\"\n\n## Ayat Al-Kursi has Ten Complete Arabic Sentences\n\n1. Allah's statement,\nاللَّهُ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ\n(Allah! None has the right to be worshipped but He) mentions that Allah is the One and Only Lord of all creation.\n2. Allah's statement,\nالْحَيُّ الْقَيُّومُ\n(Al-Hayyul-Qayyum) testifies that Allah is the Ever Living, Who never dies, Who sustains everyone and everything. All creation stands in need of Allah and totally relies on Him, while He is the Most Rich, Who stands in need of nothing created. Similarly, Allah said,\nوَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ أَن تَقُومَ السَّمَاءُ وَالْأَرْضُ بِأَمْرِهِ\n(And among His signs is that the heaven and the earth stand by His command)[30:25].\n3. Allah's statement,\nلَا تَأْخُذُهُ سِنَةٌ وَلَا نَوْمٌ\n(Neither slumber nor sleep overtakes Him) means, no shortcoming, unawareness or ignorance ever touches Allah. Rather, He is aware of, and controls what every soul earns, has perfect watch over everything, nothing escapes His knowledge, and no secret matter is secret to Him. Among His perfect attributes, is the fact that He is never effected by slumber or sleep. Therefore, Allah's statement,\nلَا تَأْخُذُهُ سِنَةٌ\n(Neither slumber overtakes Him) indicates that no unawareness due to slumber ever overtakes Allah. Allah said afterwards,\nوَلَا نَوْمٌ\n(nor sleep), which is stronger than slumber. It is recorded in the Sahih that Abu Musa said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ delivered a speech regarding four words:\nإِنَّ اللهَ لا يَنَامُ، وَلَا يَنْبَغِي لَهُ أَنْ يَنَامَ، يَخْفِضُ الْقِسْطَ وَيَرْفَعُهُ، يُرْفَعُ إِلَيْهِ عَمَلُ النَّهَارِ قَبْلَ عَمَلِ اللَّيْلِ، وَعَمَلُ اللَّيْلِ قَبْلَ عَمَلِ النَّهَارِ، حِجَابُهُ النُّورُ - أَوِ النَّارُ - لَوْ كَشَفَهُ لَأَحْرَقَتْ سُبُحَاتُ وَجْهِهِ مَا انْتَهَى إِلَيْهِ بَصَرُهُ مِنْ خَلْقِهِ\n(Allah does not sleep, and it does not befit His majesty that He sleeps. He lowers the scales and raises them. The deeds of the day are resurrected in front of Him before the deeds of the night, and the deeds of the night before the deeds of the day. His Veil is light, or fire, and if He removes it, the rays from His Face would burn whatever His sight reaches of His creation.)\n4. Allah's statement,\nلَّهُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ\n(To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth) indicates that everyone is a servant for Allah, a part of His kingdom and under His power and authority. Similarly, Allah said,\nإِن كُلُّ مَن فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ إِلَّا آتِي الرَّحْمَٰنِ عَبْدًا - لَّقَدْ أَحْصَاهُمْ وَعَدَّهُمْ عَدًّا - وَكُلُّهُمْ آتِيهِ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ فَرْدًا\n(There is none in the heavens and the earth but comes unto the Most Gracious (Allah) as a servant. Verily, He knows each one of them, and has counted them a full counting. And everyone of them will come to Him alone on the Day of Resurrection (without any helper, or protector or defender))[19:93-95].\n5. Allah's statement,\nمَن ذَا الَّذِي يَشْفَعُ عِندَهُ إِلَّا بِإِذْنِهِ\n(Who is he that can intercede with Him except with His permission?) is similar to His statements,\nوَكَم مِّن مَّلَكٍ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ لَا تُغْنِي شَفَاعَتُهُمْ شَيْئًا إِلَّا مِن بَعْدِ أَن يَأْذَنَ اللَّهُ لِمَن يَشَاءُ وَيَرْضَىٰ\n(And there are many angels in the heavens, whose intercession will avail nothing except after Allah has given leave for whom He wills and is pleased with)[53:26], and,\nوَلَا يَشْفَعُونَ إِلَّا لِمَنِ ارْتَضَىٰ\n(They cannot intercede except for him with whom He is pleased)[21:28].\nThese Ayat assert Allah's greatness, pride, and grace, and that no one dares to intercede with Him on behalf of anyone else, except by His permission. Indeed, the Hadith about the intercession, states that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nآتِي تَحْتَ الْعَرْشِ فَأَخِرُّ سَاجِدًا، فَيَدَعُنِي مَا شَاءَ اللهُ أَنْ يَدَعَنِي. ثُمَّ يُقَالُ: ارْفَعْ رَأْسَكَ، وَقُلْ تُسْمَعْ، وَاشْفَعْ تُشَفَّعْ - قَالَ: - فَيَحُدُّ لِي حَدًّا فَأُدْخِلُهُمُ الْجَنَّةَ\n(I will stand under the Throne and fall in prostration, and Allah will allow me to remain in that position as much as He wills. I will thereafter be told, \"Raise your head, speak and you will be heard, intercede and your intercession will be accepted\". The Prophet ﷺ then said, \"He will allow me a proportion whom I will enter into Paradise.\")\n6. Allah's statement,\nيَعْلَمُ مَا بَيْنَ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَمَا خَلْفَهُمْ\n(He knows what happens to them (His creatures) in this world, and what will happen to them in the Hereafter) this refers to His perfect knowledge of all creation; its past, present and future. Similarly, Allah said that the angels proclaimed;\nوَمَا نَتَنَزَّلُ إِلَّا بِأَمْرِ رَبِّكَ لَهُ مَا بَيْنَ أَيْدِينَا وَمَا خَلْفَنَا وَمَا بَيْنَ ذَٰلِكَ وَمَا كَانَ رَبُّكَ نَسِيًّا\n(And we (angels) descend not except by the command of your Lord (O Muhammad ﷺ). To Him belongs what is before us and what is behind us, and what is between those two; and your Lord is never forgetful)[19:64].\n7. Allah's statement,\nوَلَا يُحِيطُونَ بِشَيْءٍ مِّنْ عِلْمِهِ إِلَّا بِمَا شَاءَ\n(And they will never compass anything of His Knowledge except that which He wills), asserts the fact that no one attains any part of Allah's knowledge except what Allah conveys and allows. This part of the Ayah indicates that no one ever acquires knowledge of Allah and in His Attributes, except what He conveys to them. For instance, Allah said,\nوَلَا يُحِيطُونَ بِهِ عِلْمًا\n(But they will never compass anything of His knowledge)[20:110].\n8. Allah said,\nوَسِعَ كُرْسِيُّهُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ\n(His Kursi extends over the heavens and the earth.)\nWaki' narrated in his Tafsir that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Kursi is the footstool, and no one is able to give due consideration to [Allah's] Throne.\" Al-Hakim recorded this Hadith in his Mustadrak from Ibn 'Abbas, who did not relate it to the Prophet ﷺ. Al-Hakim said, \"It is Sahih according to the criteria of the Two Sahihs, and they (Al-Bukhari and Muslim) did not record it.\" In addition, Ad-Dahhak said that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"If the seven heavens and the seven earths were flattened and laid side by side, they would add up to the size of a ring in a desert, compared to the Kursi.\"\n9. Allah said,\nوَلَا يَئُودُهُ حِفْظُهُمَا\n(And He feels no fatigue in guarding and preserving them) meaning, it does not burden or cause Him fatigue to protect the heavens and earth and all that is in between them. Rather, this is an easy matter for Him. Further, Allah sustains everything, has perfect watch over everything, nothing ever escapes His knowledge and no matter is ever a secret to Him. All matters are insignificant, modest and humble before Him. He is the Most Rich, worthy of all praise. He does what He wills, and no one can ask Him about what He does, while they will be asked. He has supreme power over all things and perfect alertness concerning everything. He is the Most High, the Greatest, there is no deity worthy of worship except Him, and no Lord other than Him.\n10. Allah's statement,\nوَهُوَ الْعَلِيُّ الْعَظِيمُ\n(And He is the Most High, the Most Great) is similar to His statement,\nالْكَبِيرُ الْمُتَعَالِ\n(the Most Great, the Most High)[13:9].\nThese and similar Ayat and authentic Hadiths about Allah's Attributes must be treated the way the Salaf (righteous ancestors) treated them by accepting their apparent meanings without equating them [with the attributes of the creation] or altering their apparent meanings.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=255","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:256","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:256","text":"There is no compulsion in religion. Verily, the right path has become distinct from the wrong path. Whoever disbelieves in Taghut and believes in Allah, then he has grasped the most trustworthy handhold that will never break. And Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower (256)\n\n## No Compulsion in Religion\n\nAllah said,\nلَا إِكْرَاهَ فِي الدِّينِ\n(There is no compulsion in religion), meaning, \"Do not force anyone to become Muslim, for Islam is plain and clear, and its proofs and evidence are plain and clear. Therefore, there is no need to force anyone to embrace Islam. Rather, whoever Allah directs to Islam, opens his heart for it and enlightens his mind, will embrace Islam with certainty. Whoever Allah blinds his heart and seals his hearing and sight, then he will not benefit from being forced to embrace Islam.\"\nIt was reported that the Ansar were the reason behind revealing this Ayah, although its indication is general in meaning. Ibn Jarir recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said [that before Islam], \"When (an Ansar) woman would not bear children who would live, she would vow that if she gives birth to a child who remains alive, she would raise him as a Jew. When Banu An-Nadir (the Jewish tribe) were evacuated [from Al-Madinah], some of the children of the Ansar were being raised among them, and the Ansar said, 'We will not abandon our children.' Allah revealed,\nلَا إِكْرَاهَ فِي الدِّينِ قَد تَّبَيَّنَ الرُّشْدُ مِنَ الْغَيِّ\n(There is no compulsion in religion. Verily, the right path has become distinct from the wrong path.)\"\nAbu Dawud and An-Nasa'i also recorded this Hadith.\nAs for the Hadith that Imam Ahmad recorded, in which Anas said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said to a man,\nأَسْلِم\nقَالَ: إِنِّي أَجِدُنِي كَارِهًا\nقَالَ: وَإِنْ كُنْتَ كَارِهًا\n(\"Embrace Islam.\" The man said, \"I dislike it.\" The Prophet ﷺ said, \"Even if you dislike it.\")\nFirst, this is an authentic Hadith, with only three narrators between Imam Ahmad and the Prophet ﷺ. However, it is not relevant to the subject under discussion, for the Prophet ﷺ did not force that man to become Muslim. The Prophet ﷺ merely invited this man to become Muslim, and he replied that he does not find himself eager to become Muslim. The Prophet ﷺ said to the man that even though he dislikes embracing Islam, he should still embrace it, 'for Allah will grant you sincerity and true intent.'\n\n## Tawhid is the Most Trustworthy Handhold\n\nAllah's statement,\nفَمَن يَكْفُرْ بِالطَّاغُوتِ وَيُؤْمِن بِاللَّهِ فَقَدِ اسْتَمْسَكَ بِالْعُرْوَةِ الْوُثْقَىٰ لَا انفِصَامَ لَهَا وَاللَّهُ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ\n(Whoever disbelieves in Taghut and believes in Allah, then he has grasped the most trustworthy handhold that will never break. And Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower) is in reference to, \"Whoever shuns the rivals of Allah, the idols, and those that Shaytan calls to be worshipped besides Allah, whoever believes in Allah's Oneness, worships Him alone and testifies that there is no deity worthy of worship except Him, then\nفَقَدِ اسْتَمْسَكَ بِالْعُرْوَةِ الْوُثْقَىٰ\n(then he has grasped the most trustworthy handhold.)\nTherefore, this person will have acquired firmness [in the religion] and proceeded on the correct way and the straight path. Abu Al-Qasim Al-Baghawi recorded that 'Umar said, \"Jibt means magic, and Taghut means Shaytan. Verily, courage and cowardice are two instincts that appear in men, the courageous fights for those whom he does not know and the coward runs away from defending his own mother. Man's honor resides with his religion and his status is based upon his character, even if he was Persian or Nabatian.\" 'Umar's statement that Taghut is Shaytan is very sound, for this meaning includes every type of evil that the ignorant people of Jahiliyyah (pre Islamic era of ignorace) fell into, such as worshipping idols, referring to them for judgement, and invoking them for victory.\nAllah's statement,\nفَقَدِ اسْتَمْسَكَ بِالْعُرْوَةِ الْوُثْقَىٰ لَا انفِصَامَ لَهَا\n(then he has grasped the most trustworthy handhold that will never break) means, \"He will have hold of the true religion with the strongest grasp.\" Allah equated this adherence to the firm handhold that never breaks because it is built solid and because its handle is firmly connected. This is why Allah said here,\nفَقَدِ اسْتَمْسَكَ بِالْعُرْوَةِ الْوُثْقَىٰ لَا انفِصَامَ لَهَا\n(then he has grasped the most trustworthy handhold that will never break.)\nMujahid said, \"The most trustworthy handhold is Iman (faith).\" As-Suddi said that it refers to Islam. Imam Ahmad recorded that Qays bin 'Abbad said, \"I was in the Masjid when a man whose face showed signs of humbleness came and prayed two Rak'ahs that were modest in length. The people said, 'This is a man from among the people of Paradise.' When he left, I followed him until he entered his house, and I entered it after him and spoke with him. When he felt at ease, I said to him, 'When you entered the Masjid, the people said such and such things.' He said, 'All praise is due to Allah! No one should say what he has no knowledge of. I will tell you why they said that. I saw a vision during the time of the Messenger of Allah, and I narrated it to him. I saw that I was in a green garden,' and he described the garden's plants and spaciousness, 'and there was an iron pole in the middle of the garden affixed in the earth and its tip reached the sky. On its tip, there was a handle, and I was told to ascend the pole. I said, 'I cannot.' Then a helper came and raised my robe from behind and said to me, 'Ascend.' I ascended until I grasped the handle and he said to me, 'Hold on to the handle.' I awoke from that dream with the handle in my hand. I went to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and told him about the vision and he said,\nأَمَّا الرَّوْضَةُ فَرَوْضَةُ الْإِسْلَامِ، وَأَمَّا الْعَمُودُ فَعَمُودُ الْإِسْلَامِ، وَأَمَّا الْعُرْوَةُ فَهِيَ الْعُرْوَةُ الْوُثْقَى، أَنْتَ عَلَى الْإِسْلَامِ حَتَّى تَمُوتَ\n(As for the garden, it represents Islam; as for the pole, it represents the pillar of Islam; and the handle represents the most trustworthy handhold. You shall remain Muslim until you die.)\nThis Companion was 'Abdullah bin Salam.\"\nThis Hadith was also collected in the Two Sahihs; and Al-Bukhari also recorded it with another chain of narration.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=256","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:257","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:257","text":"Allah is the Wali (Protector or Guardian) of those who believe. He brings them out from darknesses into light. But as for those who disbelieve, their Awliya' (supporters and helpers) are Taghut (false deities and false leaders), they bring them out from light into darknesses. Those are the dwellers of the Fire, and they will abide therein forever (257)\nAllah stated that whoever follows what pleases Him, He will guide him to the paths of peace, that is Islam, or Paradise. Verily, Allah delivers His believing servants from the darkness of disbelief, doubt and hesitation, to the light of the plain, clear, explained, easy and unequivocal truth. He also stated that Shaytan is the supporter of the disbelievers who beautifies the paths of ignorance and misguidance that they follow, thus causing them to deviate from the true path into disbelief and wickedness.\nأُولَٰئِكَ أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ هُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ\n(Those are the dwellers of the Fire, and they will abide therein forever.)\nThis is why Allah mentioned the light in the singular while mentioned the darkness in the plural, because truth is one, while disbelief comes as several types, all of which are false. Similarly, Allah said,\nوَأَنَّ هَٰذَا صِرَاطِي مُسْتَقِيمًا فَاتَّبِعُوهُ وَلَا تَتَّبِعُوا السُّبُلَ فَتَفَرَّقَ بِكُمْ عَن سَبِيلِهِ ذَٰلِكُمْ وَصَّاكُم بِهِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَّقُونَ\n(And verily, this is my straight path, so follow it, and follow not (other) paths, for they will separate you away from His path. This He has ordained for you that you may have Taqwa)[6:153],\nوَجَعَلَ الظُّلُمَاتِ وَالنُّورَ\n(And originated the darknesses and the light)[6:1], and,\nعَنِ الْيَمِينِ وَالشَّمَائِلِ\n(to the right and to the lefts)[16: 48]\nThere are many other Ayat on the subject that mention the truth in the singular and falsehood in the plural, because of falsehood's many divisions and branches.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=257","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:258","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:258","text":"Have you not looked at him who disputed with Ibrahim about his Lord (Allah), because Allah had given him the kingdom? When Ibrahim said (to him): \"My Lord is He Who gives life and causes death.\" He said, \"I give life and cause death.\" Ibrahim said, \"Verily, Allah brings the sun from the east; then bring it you from the west.\" So the disbeliever was utterly defeated. And Allah guides not the people, who are wrongdoers (258)\n\n## The Debate Between Ibrahim Al-Khalil and King Nimrod\n\nThe king who disputed with Ibrahim was King Nimrod, son of Canaan, son of Kush, son of Sam, son of Noah, as Mujahid stated. It was also said that he was Nimrod, son of Falikh, son of 'Abir, son of Shalikh, son of Arfakhshand, son of Sam, son of Noah. Mujahid said, \"The kings who ruled the eastern and western parts of the world are four, two believers and two disbelievers. As for the two believing kings, they were Sulayman bin Dawud and Dhul-Qarnayn. As for the two disbelieving kings, they were Nimrod and Nebuchadnezzar.\" Allah knows best.\nAllah said,\nأَلَمْ تَرَ\n(Have you not looked) meaning, \"With your heart, O Muhammad!\"\nإِلَى الَّذِي حَاجَّ إِبْرَاهِيمَ فِي رَبِّهِ\n(at him who disputed with Ibrahim about his Lord) meaning, about the existence of Allah. Nimrod denied the existence of a god other than himself, as he claimed, just as Fir'awn said later to his people,\nمَا عَلِمْتُ لَكُم مِّنْ إِلَٰهٍ غَيْرِي\n(I know not that you have a god other than me)[28:38].\nWhat made Nimrod commit this transgression, utter disbelief and arrant rebellion was his tyranny and the fact that he ruled for a long time. This is why the Ayah continued,\nأَنْ آتَاهُ اللَّهُ الْمُلْكَ\n(Because Allah had given him the kingdom.)\nIt appears that Nimrod asked Ibrahim to produce proof that Allah exists. Ibrahim replied,\nرَبِّيَ الَّذِي يُحْيِي وَيُمِيتُ\n(My Lord is He Who gives life and causes death) meaning, \"The proof of Allah's existence is the creations that exist after they were nothing and perish after they had existed. This only proves the existence of the Creator, Who does what He wills, for these things could not have occurred on their own without a Creator who created them, and He is the Lord that I call to for worship, Alone without a partner.\"\nThis is when Nimrod said,\nأَنَا أُحْيِي وَأُمِيتُ\n(I give life and cause death.)\nQatadah, Muhammad bin Ishaq and As-Suddi said that he meant, \"Two men who deserved execution were to be brought before me, and I would command that one of them be killed, and he would be killed. I would command that the second man be pardoned, and he would be pardoned. This is how I bring life and death.\" However, it appears that since Nimrod did not deny the existence of a Creator, his statement did not mean what Qatadah said it meant. This explanation does not provide an answer to what Ibrahim said. Nimrod arrogantly and defiantly claimed that he was the creator and pretended that it was he who brings life and death. Later on, Fir'awn imitated him and announced,\nمَا عَلِمْتُ لَكُم مِّنْ إِلَٰهٍ غَيْرِي\n(I know not that you have a god other than me)[28: 38].\nThis is why Ibrahim said to Nimrod,\nفَإِنَّ اللَّهَ يَأْتِي بِالشَّمْسِ مِنَ الْمَشْرِقِ فَأْتِ بِهَا مِنَ الْمَغْرِبِ\n(Verily, Allah brings the sun from the east; then bring it you from the west.)\nThis Ayah means, \"You claim that it is you who brings life and death. He who brings life and death controls the existence and creates whatever is in it, including controlling its planets and their movements. For instance, the sun rises everyday from the east. Therefore, if you were god, as you claimed, bringing life and death, then bring the sun from the west.\" Since the king was aware of his weakness, inadequacy and that he was not able to reply to Ibrahim's request, he was idle, silent and unable to comment. Therefore, the proof was established against him. Allah said,\nوَاللَّهُ لَا يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ الظَّالِمِينَ\n(And Allah guides not the people, who are wrongdoers) meaning, Allah deprives the unjust people of any valid proof or argument. Furthermore, their false proof and arguments are annulled by their Lord, and they have earned His anger and will suffer severe torment.\nThe meaning that we provided is better than the meaning that some philosophers offered, claiming that Ibrahim used the second argument because it was clearer than the first one. Rather, our explanation asserts that Ibrahim refuted both claims of Nimrod, all praise is due to Allah.\nAs-Suddi stated that the debate between Ibrahim and Nimrod occurred after Ibrahim was thrown in the fire, for Ibrahim did not meet the king before that day.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=258","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:259","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:259","text":"Or like the one who passed by a town in ruin up to its roofs. He said: \"How will Allah ever bring it to life after its death?\" So Allah caused him to die for a hundred years, then raised him up (again). He said: \"How long did you remain (dead)?\" He (the man) said: \"(Perhaps) I remained (dead) a day or part of a day.\" He said: \"Nay, you have remained (dead) for a hundred years, look at your food and your drink, they show no change; and look at your donkey! And thus We have made of you a sign for the people. Look at the bones, how We bring them together and clothe them with flesh.\" When this was clearly shown to him, he said, \"I know (now) that Allah is able to do all things. (259)\n\n## The Story of 'Uzayr\n\nAllah's statement,\nأَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِي حَاجَّ إِبْرَاهِيمَ فِي رَبِّهِ\n(Have you not looked at him who disputed with Ibrahim about his Lord?) means, \"Have you seen anyone like the person who disputed with Ibrahim about his Lord\" Then, Allah connected the Ayah,\nأَوْ كَالَّذِي مَرَّ عَلَىٰ قَرْيَةٍ وَهِيَ خَاوِيَةٌ عَلَىٰ عُرُوشِهَا\n(Or like the one who passed by a town in ruin up to its roofs) to the Ayah above by using 'or'.\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that 'Ali bin Abi Talib said that the Ayah [2:259] meant 'Uzayr. Ibn Jarir also reported it, and this explanation was also reported by Ibn Jarir and Ibn Abi Hatim from Ibn 'Abbas, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, As-Suddi and Sulayman bin Buraydah.\nMujahid bin Jabr said that the Ayah refers to a man from the Children of Israel, and the village was Jerusalem, after Nebuchadnezzar destroyed it and killed its people.\nوَهِيَ خَاوِيَةٌ\n(in ruin) means, it became empty of people. Allah's statement,\nعَلَىٰ عُرُوشِهَا\n(up to its roofs) indicates that the roofs and walls (of the village) fell to the ground. 'Uzayr stood contemplating about what had happened to that city, after a great civilization used to inhabit it. He said,\nأَنَّىٰ يُحْيِي هَٰذِهِ اللَّهُ بَعْدَ مَوْتِهَا\n(Oh! How will Allah ever bring it to life after its death) because of the utter destruction he saw and the implausibility of its returning to what it used to be. Allah said,\nفَأَمَاتَهُ اللَّهُ مِائَةَ عَامٍ ثُمَّ بَعَثَهُ\n(So Allah caused him to die for a hundred years, then raised him up (again).)\nThe city was rebuilt seventy years after the man ('Uzayr) died, and its inhabitants increased and the Children of Israel moved back to it. When Allah resurrected 'Uzayr after he died, the first organ that He resurrected were his eyes, so that he could witness what Allah does with him, how He brings life back to his body. When his resurrection was complete, Allah said to him, meaning through the angel,\nكَمْ لَبِثْتَ قَالَ لَبِثْتُ يَوْمًا أَوْ بَعْضَ يَوْمٍ\n(\"How long did you remain (dead)?\" He (the man) said: \"(Perhaps) I remained (dead) a day or part of a day.\")\nThe scholars said that since the man died in the early part of the day and Allah resurrected him in the latter part of the day, when he saw that the sun was still apparent, he thought that it was the sun of that very day. He said,\nأَوْ بَعْضَ يَوْمٍ قَالَ بَل لَّبِثْتَ مِائَةَ عَامٍ فَانظُرْ إِلَىٰ طَعَامِكَ وَشَرَابِكَ لَمْ يَتَسَنَّهْ\n(\"Or part of a day. \" He said: \"Nay, you have remained (dead) for a hundred years, look at your food and your drink, they show no change.\")\nHe had grapes, figs and juice, and he found them as he left them; neither did the juice spoil nor the figs become bitter nor the grapes rot.\nوَانظُرْ إِلَىٰ حِمَارِكَ\n(And look at your donkey!), \"How Allah brings it back to life while you are watching.\"\nوَلِنَجْعَلَكَ آيَةً لِّلنَّاسِ\n(And thus We have made of you a sign for the people) that Resurrection occurs.\nوَانظُرْ إِلَى الْعِظَامِ كَيْفَ نُنشِزُهَا\n(Look at the bones, how We Nunshizuha) meaning, collect them and put them back together. In his Mustadrak, Al-Hakim, recorded that Kharijah bin Zayd bin Thabit said that his father said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ read this Ayah,\nكَيْفَ نُنشِزُهَا\n(how We Nunshizuha.) Al-Hakim said; \"Its chain is Sahih and they (Al-Bukhari and Muslim) did not record it.\" The Ayah was also read,\n(نُنْشِرُهَا)\n\"Nunshiruha\" meaning, bring them back to life, as Mujahid stated.\nثُمَّ نَكْسُوهَا لَحْمًا\n(And clothe them with flesh.)\nAs-Suddi said, \" 'Uzayr observed the bones of his donkey, which were scattered all around him to his right and left, and Allah sent a wind that collected the bones from all over the area. Allah then brought every bone to its place, until they formed a full donkey made of fleshless bones. Allah then covered these bones with flesh, nerves, veins and skin. Allah sent an angel who blew life in the donkeys' nostrils, and the donkey started to bray by Allah's leave.\" All this occurred while 'Uzayr was watching, and this is when he proclaimed,\nقَالَ أَعْلَمُ أَنَّ اللَّهَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ\n(He said, \"I know (now) that Allah is able to do all things,\") meaning, \"I know that, and I did witness it with my own eyes. Therefore, I am the most knowledgeable in this matter among the people of my time.\"","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=259","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:260","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:260","text":"And (remember) when Ibrahim said, \"My Lord! Show me how You give life to the dead.\" He (Allah) said: \"Do you not believe?\" He (Ibrahim) said: \"Yes (I believe), but to be stronger in faith.\" He said: \"Take four birds, then cause them to incline towards you (then slaughter them, cut them into pieces), and then put a portion of them on every hill, and call them, they will come to you in haste. And know that Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise. (260)\n\n## The Khalil Supplicates to Allah to Show Him How He Resurrects the Dead\n\nThe scholars said that there are reasons behind this request by Ibrahim. For instance, when Ibrahim said to Nimrod,\nرَبِّيَ الَّذِي يُحْيِي وَيُمِيتُ\n(My Lord (Allah) is He Who gives life and causes death,) he wanted to solidify his knowledge about resurrection by actually witnessing it with his eyes. Prophet Ibrahim said,\nرَبِّ أَرِنِي كَيْفَ تُحْيِي الْمَوْتَىٰ قَالَ أَوَلَمْ تُؤْمِن قَالَ بَلَىٰ وَلَٰكِن لِّيَطْمَئِنَّ قَلْبِي\n(\"My Lord! Show me how You give life to the dead.\" He (Allah) said: \"Do you not believe?\" He (Ibrahim) said: \"Yes (I believe), but to be stronger in faith.\")\nAl-Bukhari recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nنَحْنُ أَحَقُّ بِالشَّكِّ مِنْ إِبْرَاهِيمَ إِذْ قَالَ\nرَبِّ أَرِنِي كَيْفَ تُحْيِي الْمَوْتَىٰ قَالَ أَوَلَمْ تُؤْمِن قَالَ بَلَىٰ وَلَٰكِن لِّيَطْمَئِنَّ قَلْبِي\n(We are more liable to be in doubt than Ibrahim when he said, \"My Lord! Show me how You give life to the dead.\" Allah said, \"Don't you believe?\" Ibrahim said, \"Yes (I believe), but (I ask) in order to be stronger in faith.\")\nThe Prophet's statement in the Hadith means, \"We are more liable to seek certainty.\"\n\n## The Answer to Al-Khalil's Request\n\nAllah said,\nقَالَ فَخُذْ أَرْبَعَةً مِّنَ الطَّيْرِ فَصُرْهُنَّ إِلَيْكَ\n(He said: \"Take four birds, then cause them to incline towards you.\")\nScholars of Tafsir disagreed over the type of birds mentioned here, although this matter in not relevant due to the fact that the Qur'an did not mention it. Allah's statement,\nفَصُرْهُنَّ إِلَيْكَ\n(cause them to incline towards you) means, cut them to pieces. This is the explanation of Ibn 'Abbas, 'Ikrimah, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Abu Malik, Abu Al-Aswad Ad-Dili, Wahb bin Munabbih, Al-Hasan and As-Suddi. Therefore, Ibrahim caught four birds, slaughtered them, removed the feathers, tore the birds to pieces and mixed the pieces together. He then placed parts of these mixed pieces on four or seven hills. Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Ibrahim kept the heads of these birds in his hand. Next, Allah commanded Ibrahim to call the birds to him, and he did as Allah commanded him. Ibrahim witnessed the feathers, blood and flesh of these birds fly to each other, and the parts flew each to their bodies, until every bird came back to life and came walking at a fast pace towards Ibrahim, so that the example that Ibrahim was witnessing would become more impressive. Each bird came to collect its head from Ibrahim's hand, and if he gave the bird another head the bird refused to accept it. When Ibrahim gave each bird its own head, the head was placed on its body by Allah's leave and power. \" This is why Allah said,\nوَاعْلَمْ أَنَّ اللَّهَ عَزِيزٌ حَكِيمٌ\n(And know that Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise) and no one can overwhelm or resist Him. Whatever Allah wills, occurs without hindrance, because He is the All-Mighty, Supreme above all things, and He is Wise in His statements, actions, legislation and decrees.\nAbdur-Razzaq recorded that Ma'mar said that Ayyub said that Ibn 'Abbas commented on what Ibrahim said,\nوَلَٰكِن لِّيَطْمَئِنَّ قَلْبِي\n(but to be stronger in Faith), \"To me, there is no Ayah in the Qur'an that brings more hope than this Ayah.\" Ibn Abi Hatim recorded that Muhammad bin Al-Munkadir said that 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas met 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As and said to him, \"Which Ayah in the Qur'an carries more hope for you?\" Ibn 'Amr said,\nقُلْ يَا عِبَادِيَ الَّذِينَ أَسْرَفُوا عَلَىٰ أَنفُسِهِمْ لَا تَقْنَطُوا\n(Say: \"O 'Ibadi (My servants) who have transgressed against themselves (by committing evil deeds and sins)! Despair not.)[39:53].\nIbn 'Abbas said, \"But I say that it is Allah's statement,\nوَإِذْ قَالَ إِبْرَاهِيمُ رَبِّ أَرِنِي كَيْفَ تُحْيِي الْمَوْتَىٰ قَالَ أَوَلَمْ تُؤْمِن قَالَ بَلَىٰ\n(And (remember) when Ibrahim said, \"My Lord! Show me how You give life to the dead.\" He (Allah) said: \"Do you not believe?\" He (Ibrahim) said: \"Yes (I believe)...)\nAllah accepted Ibrahim's affirmation when he merely said, 'Yes.' This Ayah refers to the doubts that attack the heart and the thoughts that Shaytan inspires.\" Al-Hakim also recorded this in Al-Mustadrak and said; \"Its chain is Sahih but they did not record it.\"","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=260","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:261","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:261","text":"The parable of those who spend their wealth in the way of Allah, is that of a grain (of corn); it grows seven ears, and each ear has a hundred grains. Allah gives manifold increase to whom He wills. And Allah is All-Sufficient for His creatures' needs, All-Knower (261)\n\n## Rewards of Spending in Allah's Cause\n\nThis is a parable that Allah made of the multiplication of rewards for those who spend in His cause, seeking His pleasure. Allah multiplies the good deed ten to seven hundred times. Allah said,\nمَّثَلُ الَّذِينَ يُنفِقُونَ أَمْوَالَهُمْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ\n(The parable of those who spend their wealth in the way of Allah...)\nSa'id bin Jubayr commented, \"Meaning spending in Allah's obedience.\" Makhul said that the Ayah means, \"Spending on Jihad, on horse stalls, weapons and so forth.\" The parable in the Ayah is more impressive on the heart than merely mentioning the number seven hundred. This Ayah indicates that Allah 'grows' the good deeds for its doers, just as He grows the plant for whoever sows it in fertile land. The Sunnah also mentions that the deeds are multiplied up to seven hundred folds. For instance, Imam Ahmad recorded that Abu Mas'ud said that a man once gave away a camel, with its bridle on, in the cause of Allah and the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nلَتَأْتِيَنَّ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ بِسَبْعِمِائَةِ نَاقَةٍ مَخْطُومَةٍ\n(On the Day of Resurrection, you will have seven hundred camels with their bridles.)\nMuslim and An-Nasa'i also recorded this Hadith, and Muslim's narration reads, \"A man brought a camel with its bridle on and said, 'O Messenger of Allah! This is in the sake of Allah.' The Messenger said,\nلَكَ بِهَا يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ سَبْعُمِائَةِ نَاقَةٍ\n(You will earn seven hundred camels as reward for it on the Day of Resurrection.)\nAnother Hadith: Ahmad recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nكُلُّ عَمَلِ ابْنِ آدَمَ يُضَاعَفُ، الْحَسَنَةُ بِعَشَرِ أَمْثَالِهَا، إِلَى سَبْعِمِائَةِ ضِعْفٍ، إِلى مَا شَاءَ اللهُ، يَقُولُ اللهُ: إِلَّا الصَّوْمَ فَإِنَّهُ لِي، وَأَنَا أَجْزِي بِهِ، يَدَعُ طَعَامَهُ وَشَهْوَتَهُ مِنْ أَجْلِي، وَلِلصَّائِمِ فَرْحَتَانِ: فَرْحَةٌ عِنْدَ فِطْرِهِ وَفَرْحَةٌ عِنْدَ لِقَاءِ رَبِّهِ، وَلَخَلُوفُ فَمِ الصَّائِمِ أَطْيَبُ عِنْدَ اللهِ مِنْ رِيحِ الْمِسْكِ، الصَّوْمُ جُنَّةٌ، الصَّومُ جُنَّةٌ\n(Every good deed that the son of Adam performs will be multiplied ten folds, to seven hundred folds, to many other folds, to as much as Allah wills. Allah said, \"Except the fast, for it is for Me and I will reward for it. One abandons his food and desire in My sake.\" The fasting person has two times of happiness: when he breaks his fast and when he meets his Lord. Verily, the odor that comes from the mouth of whoever fasts is more pure to Allah than the scent of musk. Fasting is a shield (against sinning), fasting is a shield.) Muslim recorded this Hadith.\nAllah's statement,\nوَاللَّهُ يُضَاعِفُ لِمَن يَشَاءُ\n(Allah gives manifold increase to whom He wills) is according to the person's sincerity in his deeds.\nوَاللَّهُ وَاسِعٌ عَلِيمٌ\n(And Allah is All-Sufficient for His creatures' needs, All-Knower) meaning, His Favor is so wide that it encompasses much more than His creation, and He has full knowledge in whoever deserves it, or does not deserve it. All the praise and thanks are due to Allah.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=261","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:262","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:262–264","text":"Those who spend their wealth in the cause of Allah, and do not follow up their gifts with reminders of their generosity or with injury, their reward is with their Lord. On them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve (262)Kind words and forgiving of faults are better than Sadaqah (charity) followed by injury. And Allah is Rich (free of all needs) and He is Most Forbearing (263)O you who believe! Do not render in vain your Sadaqah (charity) by reminders of your generosity or by injury, like him who spends his wealth to be seen of men, and he does not believe in Allah, nor in the Last Day. His likeness is the likeness of a smooth rock on which is a little dust; on it falls heavy rain which leaves it bare. They are not able to do anything with what they have earned. And Allah does not guide the disbelieving people (264)\n\n## To Remind About Charity Given is Forbidden\n\nAllah praises those who spend from their money in His cause, and then refrain from reminding those who received the charity of that fact, whether these hints take the form of words or actions.\nAllah's statement,\nوَلَا أَذًى\n(or with injury), indicates that they do not cause harm to those whom they gave the charity to, for this harm will only annul the charity. Allah next promised them the best rewards for this good deed,\nلَّهُمْ أَجْرُهُمْ عِندَ رَبِّهِمْ\n(their reward is with their Lord), indicating that Allah Himself will reward them for these righteous actions. Further,\nوَلَا خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ\n(On them shall be no fear) regarding the horrors of the Day of Resurrection,\nوَلَا هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ\n(nor shall they grieve) regarding the offspring that they leave behind and the adornment and delights of this world. They will not feel sorry for this, because they will acquire what is far better for them.\nAllah then said,\nقَوْلٌ مَّعْرُوفٌ\n(Kind words) meaning, compassionate words and a supplication for Muslims,\nوَمَغْفِرَةٌ\n(and forgiving) meaning, forgiving an injustice that took the form of actions or words,\nخَيْرٌ مِّن صَدَقَةٍ يَتْبَعُهَا أَذًى\n(are better than Sadaqah (charity) followed by injury.)\nوَاللَّهُ غَنِيٌّ\n(And Allah is Rich) not needing His creation,\nحَلِيمٌ\n(Most Forbearing) forgives, releases and pardons them.\nThere are several Hadiths that prohibit reminding people of acts of charity. For instance, Muslim recorded that Abu Dharr said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nثَلَاثَةٌ لَا يُكَلِّمُهُمُ اللهُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ، وَلَا يَنْظُرُ إِلَيْهِم، وَلَا يُزَكِّيهِمْ، وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ: الْمَنَّانُ بِمَا أَعْطَى، وَالْمُسْبِلُ إِزَارَهُ، وَالْمُنَفِّقُ سِلْعَتَهُ بِالْحَلِفِ الْكَاذِبِ\n(Three persons whom Allah shall neither speak to on the Day of Resurrection nor look at nor purify, and they shall receive a painful torment: he who reminds (the people) of what he gives away, he who lengthens his clothes below the ankles and he who swears an oath while lying, to sell his merchandise.)\nThis is why Allah said,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تُبْطِلُوا صَدَقَاتِكُم بِالْمَنِّ وَالْأَذَىٰ\n(O you who believe! Do not render in vain your Sadaqah (charity) by reminders of your generosity or by injury) stating that the charity will be rendered in vain if it is followed by harm or reminders. In this case, the reward of giving away charity is not sufficient enough to nullify the harm and reminders. Allah then said,\nكَالَّذِي يُنفِقُ مَالَهُ رِئَاءَ النَّاسِ\n(like him who spends his wealth to be seen of men) meaning, \"Do not nullify your acts of charity by following them with reminders and harm, just like the charity of those who give it to show off to people.\" The boasting person pretends to give away charity for Allah's sake, but in reality seeks to gain people's praise and the reputation of being kind or generous, or other material gains of this life. All the while, he does not think about Allah or gaining His pleasure and generous rewards, and this is why Allah said,\nوَلَا يُؤْمِنُ بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الْآخِرِ\n(and he does not believe in Allah, nor in the Last Day.)\nAllah next set the example of whoever gives charity to show off. Ad-Dahhak commented that the example fits one who follows his acts of charity with reminders or harm. Allah said,\nفَمَثَلُهُ كَمَثَلِ صَفْوَانٍ\n(His likeness is the likeness of Safwan) where Safwan, from is Safwanah, meaning 'the smooth rocks,'\nعَلَيْهِ تُرَابٌ فَأَصَابَهُ وَابِلٌ\n(on which is little dust; on it falls a Wabil) meaning, heavy rain,\nفَتَرَكَهُ صَلْدًا\n(which leaves it bare.) This Ayah means that heavy rain left the Safwan completely barren of dust. Such is the case with Allah's action regarding the work of those who show off, as their deeds are bound to vanish and disappear, even though people think that these deeds are as plentiful as specks of dust. So Allah said,\nلَّا يَقْدِرُونَ عَلَىٰ شَيْءٍ مِّمَّا كَسَبُوا وَاللَّهُ لَا يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ الْكَافِرِينَ\n(They are not able to do anything with what they have earned. And Allah does not guide the disbelieving people.)","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=262","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:265","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:265","text":"And the parable of those who spend their wealth seeking Allah's pleasure while they in their own selves are sure and certain that Allah will reward them (for their spending in His cause), is that of a garden on a height; heavy rain falls on it and it doubles its yield of harvest. And if it does not receive heavy rain, light rain suffices it. And Allah is All-Seer (knows well) of what you do.) This is the example of the believers who give away charity seeking only Allah's pleasur (265)\nوَتَثْبِيتًا مِّنْ أَنفُسِهِمْ\n(while they in their own selves are sure and certain) meaning, they are certain that Allah shall reward them for these righteous acts with the best rewards. Similarly, in a Hadith collected by Al-Bukhari and Muslim, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَنْ صَامَ رَمَضَانَ إِيمَانًا وَاحْتِسَابًا\n(Whoever fasts Ramadan with faith and expectation...) meaning, believing that Allah commanded the fast, all the while awaiting His reward for fasting it.\nAllah's statement,\nكَمَثَلِ جَنَّةٍ بِرَبْوَةٍ\n(is that of a garden on a Rabwah) means, the example of a garden on 'a height above the ground', as the majority of scholars have stated. Ibn 'Abbas and Ad-Dahhak added that it also has flowing rivers.\nAllah's statement,\nأَصَابَهَا وَابِلٌ\n(Wabil falls on it) means, heavy rain as we stated, So it produces its,\nأُكُلَهَا\n(yield of harvest) meaning, fruits or produce,\nضِعْفَيْنِ\n(doubles), as compared to other gardens.\nفَإِن لَّمْ يُصِبْهَا وَابِلٌ فَطَلٌّ\n(And if it does not receive Wabil, a Tall suffices it.)\nAd-Dahhak said that the 'Tall' is light rain. The Ayah indicates that the garden on the Rabwah is always fertile, for if heavy rain does not fall on it, light rain will suffice for it. Such is the case regarding the believer's good deeds, for they never become barren. Rather, Allah accepts the believer's righteous deeds and increases them, each according to his deeds. This is why Allah said next,\nوَاللَّهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ بَصِيرٌ\n(And Allah is All-Seer of what you do) meaning, none of His servants' deeds ever escapes His perfect watch.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=265","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:266","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:266","text":"Would any of you wish to have a garden with date palms and vines, with rivers flowing underneath, and all kinds of fruits for him therein, while he is striken with old age, and his children are weak (not able to look after themselves), then it is struck with a fiery whirlwind, so that it is burnt? Thus does Allah make clear His Ayat to you that you may give thought (266)\n\n## The Example of Evil Deeds Nullifying Good Deeds\n\nAl-Bukhari recorded that Ibn 'Abbas and 'Ubayd bin 'Umayr said that 'Umar bin Al-Khattab asked the Companions of the Messenger of Allah, \"According to your opinion, about whom was this Ayah revealed,\nأَيَوَدُّ أَحَدُكُمْ أَن تَكُونَ لَهُ جَنَّةٌ مِّن نَّخِيلٍ وَأَعْنَابٍ\n(Would any of you wish to have a garden with date palms and vines…?).\"\nThey said, \"Allah knows best.\" 'Umar became angry and said, \"Say we know or we do not know.\" Ibn 'Abbas said, \"O Leader of the Faithful! I have an opinion about it.\" 'Umar said, \"O my nephew! Say your opinion and do not belittle yourself.\" Ibn 'Abbas said, \"This is an example set for a deed.\" 'Umar said, \"What type of deed?\" Ibn 'Abbas said, \"For a wealthy man who works in Allah's pleasure and then Allah sends Shaytan to him, and he works in disobedience, until he annuls his good works.\"\nThis Hadith suffices as an explanation for the Ayah, for it explains the example it sets by a person who does good first and then follows it with evil, may Allah save us from this end. So, this man annulled his previous good works with his latter evil works. When he desperately needed the deeds of the former type, there were none. This is why Allah said,\nوَأَصَابَهُ الْكِبَرُ وَلَهُ ذُرِّيَّةٌ ضُعَفَاءُ فَأَصَابَهَا إِعْصَارٌ\n(while he is striken with old age, and his children are weak (not able to look after themselves), then it is struck with a whirlwind) with heavy wind,\nفِيهِ نَارٌ فَاحْتَرَقَتْ\n(that is fiery, so that it is burnt) meaning, its fruits were burnt and its trees were destroyed. Therefore, what will his condition be like?\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that Al-'Awfi said that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Allah has set a good parable, and all His parables are good. He said,\nأَيَوَدُّ أَحَدُكُمْ أَن تَكُونَ لَهُ جَنَّةٌ مِّن نَّخِيلٍ وَأَعْنَابٍ تَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ لَهُ فِيهَا مِن كُلِّ الثَّمَرَاتِ\n(Would any of you wish to have a garden with date palms and vines, with rivers flowing underneath, and all kinds of fruits for him therein.)\nBut he lost all this in his old age,\nوَأَصَابَهُ الْكِبَرُ\n(while he is striken with old age) while his offspring and children are weak just before the end of his life. Then a lightning storm came and destroyed his garden. Then he did not have the strength to grow another garden, nor did his offspring offer enough help. This is the condition of the disbeliever on the Day of Resurrection when he returns to Allah, for he will not have any good deeds to provide an excuse - or refuge - for him, just as the man in the parable had no strength to replant the garden. The disbeliever will not find anything to resort to for help, just as the offspring of the man in the parable did not provide him with help. So he will be deprived of his reward when he most needs it, just as the man in the parable was deprived of Allah's garden when he most needed it, when he became old and his offspring weak.\"\nIn his Mustadrak, Al-Hakim recorded that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to say in his supplication,\nاللَّهُمَّ اجْعَلْ أَوْسَعَ رِزْقِكَ عَلَيَّ عِنْدَ كِبَرِ سِنِّي وَانْقِضَاءِ عُمُرِي\n(O Allah! Make Your biggest provision for me when I am old in age and at the time my life ends.)\nThis is why Allah said,\nكَذَٰلِكَ يُبَيِّنُ اللَّهُ لَكُمُ الْآيَاتِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَفَكَّرُونَ\n(Thus Allah makes clear to you His Laws in order that you may give thought) meaning, comprehend and understand the parables and their intended implications. Similarly, Allah said,\nوَتِلْكَ الْأَمْثَالُ نَضْرِبُهَا لِلنَّاسِ وَمَا يَعْقِلُهَا إِلَّا الْعَالِمُونَ\n(And these similitudes We put forward for mankind; but none will understand them except those who have knowledge (of Allah and His signs))[29:43].","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=266","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:267","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:267–269","text":"O you who believe! Spend of the good things which you have (legally) earned, and of that which We have produced from the earth for you, and do not aim at that which is bad to spend from it, (though) you would not accept it save if you close your eyes and tolerate therein. And know that Allah is Rich (free of all needs), and worthy of all praise (267)Shaytan threatens you with poverty and orders you to commit Fahsha' (evil deeds) whereas Allah promises you forgiveness from Himself and bounty, and Allah is All-Sufficient for His creatures' needs, All-Knower (268)He grants Hikmah to whom He wills, and he, to whom Hikmah is granted, is indeed granted abundant good. But none remember (will receive admonition) except men of understanding (269)\n\n## The Encouragement to Spend Honest Money for Allah's Sake\n\nAllah commands His believing servants to spend in charity, as Ibn 'Abbas stated, from the pure, honest money that they earned and from the fruits and vegetables that He has grown for them in the land. Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Allah commanded them to spend from the purest, finest and best types of their money and prohibited spending from evil and dishonest money, because Allah is pure and good and only accepts that which is pure and good.\" This is why Allah said,\nوَلَا تَيَمَّمُوا الْخَبِيثَ\n(and do not aim at that which is bad) meaning, filthy (impure) money,\nمِنْهُ تُنفِقُونَ وَلَسْتُم بِآخِذِيهِ\n(to spend from it, (though) you would not accept it) meaning, \"If you were given this type, you would not take it, except if you tolerate the deficiency in it. Verily, Allah is far Richer than you, He is in no need of this money, so do not give, for His sake, what you would dislike for yourselves.\" It was reported that,\nوَلَا تَيَمَّمُوا الْخَبِيثَ مِنْهُ تُنفِقُونَ\n(and do not aim at that which is bad to spend from it) means, \"Do not spend from the dishonest, impure money instead of the honest, pure money.\"\nIbn Jarir recorded that Al-Bara' bin 'Azib commented on Allah's statement,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَنفِقُوا مِن طَيِّبَاتِ مَا كَسَبْتُمْ وَمِمَّا أَخْرَجْنَا لَكُم مِّنَ الْأَرْضِ وَلَا تَيَمَّمُوا الْخَبِيثَ مِنْهُ تُنفِقُونَ\n(O you who believe! Spend of the good things which you have (legally) earned, and of that which We have produced from the earth for you, and do not aim at that which is bad to spend from it,) that it was revealed about the Ansar. When the season for harvesting date-trees would start, the Ansar would collect ripe-date branches from their gardens and hang them on a rope erected between two pillars in the Masjid of the Messenger of Allah. The poor emigrant Companions would eat from these dates. However, some of them (Ansar) would also add lesser type of dates in between ripe-date branches, thinking they are allowed to do so. Allah revealed this Ayah about those who did this,\nوَلَا تَيَمَّمُوا الْخَبِيثَ مِنْهُ تُنفِقُونَ\n(and do not aim at that which is bad to spend from it.)\nAli bin Abi Talhah said that Ibn 'Abbas commented on the Ayah,\nوَلَسْتُم بِآخِذِيهِ إِلَّا أَن تُغْمِضُوا فِيهِ\n(you would not accept it save if you close your eyes and tolerate therein) means, \"If you had a right on someone who would pay you less than what you gave them, you would not agree until you require more from them to make up the difference. This is why Allah said,\nإِلَّا أَن تُغْمِضُوا فِيهِ\n(save if you close your eyes and tolerate therein) meaning, 'How do you agree for Me what you do not agree for yourselves, while I have a right to the best and most precious of your possessions?\" Ibn Abi Hatim and Ibn Jarir recorded this Hadith and Ibn Jarir added, \"And this is the meaning of Allah's statement,\nلَن تَنَالُوا الْبِرَّ حَتَّىٰ تُنفِقُوا مِمَّا تُحِبُّونَ\n(By no means shall you attain Al-Birr, unless you spend of that which you love)\" [4:92]\nAllah said next,\nوَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ غَنِيٌّ حَمِيدٌ\n(And know that Allah is Rich (free of all needs), and worthy of all praise) meaning, \"Although Allah commanded you to give away the purest of your money in charity, He is far Richer from needing your charity, but the purpose is that the distance between the rich and the poor becomes less.\" Similarly, Allah said,\nلَن يَنَالَ اللَّهَ لُحُومُهَا وَلَا دِمَاؤُهَا وَلَٰكِن يَنَالُهُ التَّقْوَىٰ مِنكُمْ\n(It is neither their meat nor their blood that reaches Allah, but it is piety from you that reaches Him)[22:37].\nAllah is Rich and free of needing anything from any of His creatures, while all of His creatures stand in need of Him. Allah's bounty encompassing, and what He has never ends. Therefore, whoever gives away good and pure things in charity, let him know that Allah is the Most Rich, His favor is enormous and He is Most Generous, Most Compassionate; and He shall reward him for his charity and multiply it many times. So who would lend to He Who is neither poor nor unjust, Who is worthy of all praise in all His actions, statements, and decisions, of Whom there is neither a deity worthy of worship except Him, nor a Lord other than Him?\n\n## Shaytanic Doubts Concerning Spending in Charity\n\nAllah said,\nالشَّيْطَانُ يَعِدُكُمُ الْفَقْرَ وَيَأْمُرُكُم بِالْفَحْشَاءِ وَاللَّهُ يَعِدُكُم مَّغْفِرَةً مِّنْهُ وَفَضْلًا وَاللَّهُ وَاسِعٌ عَلِيمٌ\n(Shaytan threatens you with poverty and orders you to commit Fahsha'; whereas Allah promises you forgiveness from Himself and bounty, and Allah is All-Sufficient for His creatures' needs, All-Knower.)\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ لِلشَّيْطَانِ لَمَّةً بِابْنِ آدَمَ، وَلِلْمَلَكِ لَمَّةً، فَأَمَّا لَمَّةُ الشَّيطَانِ فَإِيعَادٌ بِالشَّرِّ، وَتَكْذِيبٌ بِالْحَقِّ، وَ أَمَّا لَمَّةُ الْمَلَكِ فَإِيعَادٌ بِالْخَيْرِ، وَتَصْدِيقٌ بِالْحَقِّ، فَمَنْ وَجَدَ ذَلِكَ فَلْيَعْلَمْ أَنَّهُ مِنَ اللهِ، فَلْيَحْمَدِ اللهَ، وَمَنْ وَجَدَ الْأُخْرَى فَلْيَتَعَوَّذْ مِنَ الشَّيْطَانِ\n(Shaytan has an effect on the son of Adam, and the angel also has an effect. As for the effect of Shaytan, it is by his threatening with evil repercussions and rejecting the truth. As for the effect of the angel, it is by his promise of a good end and believing in the truth. Whoever finds the latter, let him know that it is coming from Allah and let him thank Allah for it. Whoever finds the former, let him seek refuge - with Allah - from Shaytan.)\nThe Prophet ﷺ then recited,\nالشَّيْطَانُ يَعِدُكُمُ الْفَقْرَ وَيَأْمُرُكُم بِالْفَحْشَاءِ وَاللَّهُ يَعِدُكُم مَّغْفِرَةً مِّنْهُ وَفَضْلًا\n(Shaytan threatens you with poverty and orders you to commit Fahsha'; whereas Allah promises you forgiveness from Himself and bounty)\nThis is the narration that At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa'i collected in the book of Tafsir in their Sunan collections. Allah said,\nالشَّيْطَانُ يَعِدُكُمُ الْفَقْرَ\n(Shaytan threatens you with poverty), so that you hold on to whatever you have and refrain from spending it in Allah's pleasure.\nوَيَأْمُرُكُم بِالْفَحْشَاءِ\n(And orders you to commit Fahsha'), meaning, \"Shaytan forbids you from spending in charity because of the false fear of becoming poor, and he encourages evil deeds, sins, indulging in what is prohibited, and immoral conduct.\" Allah said,\nوَاللَّهُ يَعِدُكُم مَّغْفِرَةً مِّنْهُ\n(Whereas Allah promises you forgiveness from Himself) instead of the evil that Shaytan enjoins on you,\nوَفَضْلًا\n(And Bounty) as opposed to the poverty that Shaytan frightens you with,\nوَاللَّهُ وَاسِعٌ عَلِيمٌ\n(And Allah is All-Sufficient for His creatures' needs, All-Knower.)\n\n## The Meaning of Al-Hikmah\n\nAllah said,\nيُؤْتِي الْحِكْمَةَ مَن يَشَاءُ\n(He grants Hikmah to whom He wills.)\nAli bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"That is knowledge of the Qur'an. For instance, the abrogating and the abrogated, what is plain and clear and what is not as plain and clear, what it allows, and what it does not allow, and its parables.\" Imam Ahmad recorded that Ibn Mas'ud said that he heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ saying,\nلَا حَسَدَ إِلَّا فِي اثْنَتَيْنِ: رَجُلٌ آتَاهُ اللهُ مَالًا فَسَلَّطَهُ عَلَى هَلَكَتِهِ فِي الْحَقِّ، وَرَجُلٌ آتَاهُ اللهُ حِكْمَةً فَهُوَ يَقْضِي بِهَا وَيُعَلِّمُهَا\n(There is no envy except in two instances: a person whom Allah has endowed with wealth and he spends it righteously, and a person whom Allah has given Hikmah and he judges by it and teaches it to others.)\nThis was also collected by Al-Bukhari, Muslim, An-Nasa'i, Ibn Majah.\nAllah's statement,\nوَمَا يَذَّكَّرُ إِلَّا أُولُو الْأَلْبَابِ\n(But none remember (will receive admonition) except men of understanding.) means, \"Those who will benefit from the advice are those who have sound minds and good comprehension with which they understand the words (of advice and reminder) and their implications.\"","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=267","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:270","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:270–271","text":"And whatever you spend for spendings (e.g., in Sadaqah) or whatever vow you make, be sure Allah knows it all. And for the wrongdoers there are no helpers (270)If you disclose your Sadaqat (almsgiving), it is well; but if you conceal them and give them to the poor, that is better for you. (Allah) will expiate you some of your sins. And Allah is Well-Acquainted with what you do (271)\nAllah states that He has perfect knowledge of the good deeds performed by all of His creation, such as charity and various vows, and He rewards tremendously for these deeds, provided they are performed seeking His Face and His promise. Allah also warns those who do not work in his obedience, but instead disobey His command, reject His revelation and worship others besides Him:\nوَمَا لِلظَّالِمِينَ مِنْ أَنصَارٍ\n(And for the wrongdoers there are no helpers.) meaning, who will save them from Allah's anger and torment on the Day of Resurrection.\n\n## The Virtue of Disclosing or Concealing Charity\n\nAllah said,\nإِن تُبْدُوا الصَّدَقَاتِ فَنِعِمَّا هِيَ\n(If you disclose your Sadaqat, it is well) meaning, \"It is well if you make known the charity that you give away.\"\nAllah's statement,\nوَإِن تُخْفُوهَا وَتُؤْتُوهَا الْفُقَرَاءَ فَهُوَ خَيْرٌ لَّكُمْ\n(But if you conceal them and give them to the poor, that is better for you.) this indicates that concealing charity is better than disclosing it, because it protects one from showing off and boasting. However, if there is an apparent wisdom behind disclosing the charity, such as the people imitating this righteous act, then disclosing it becomes better than concealing it. The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nالْجَاهِرُ بِالْقُرْآنِ كَالْجَاهِرِ بِالصَّدَقَةِ، وَالْمُسِرُّ بِالْقُرآنِ كَالْمُسِرِّ بِالصَّدَقَةِ\n(He who utters aloud Qur'anic recitation is just like he who discloses charity acts. He who conceals Qur'anic recitation is just like he who conceals charity acts.)\nThe Ayah indicates that it is better that acts of charity be concealed, as reiterated by the Hadith that the Two Sahihs recorded from Abu Hurayrah that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nسَبْعَةٌ يُظِلُّهُمُ اللهُ فِي ظِلِّهِ يَوْمَ لَا ظِلَّ إلَّا ظِلُّهُ: إِمَامٌ عَادِلٌ، وَشَابٌّ نَشَأَ فِي عِبَادَةِ اللهِ، وَرَجُلَانِ تَحَابَّا فِي اللهِ، اجْتَمَعَا عَلَيْهِ وَتَفَرَّقَا عَلَيْهِ، وَرَجُلٌ قَلْبُهُ مُعَلَّقٌ بِالْمَسْجِدِ، إِذَا خَرَجَ مِنْهُ حَتَّى يَرْجِعَ إِلَيْهِ، وَرَجُلٌ ذَكَرَ اللهَ خَالِيًا فَفَاضَتْ عَيْنَاهُ، وَرَجُلٌ دَعَتْهُ امْرَأَةٌ ذَاتُ مَنْصِبٍ وَجَمَالٍ، فَقَالَ: إِنِّي أَخَافُ اللهَ رَبَّ الْعَالَمِينَ، وَرَجُلٌ تَصَدَّقَ بِصَدَقَةٍ فَأَخْفَاهَا، حَتَّى لَا تَعْلَمَ شِمَالُهُ مَا تُنْفِقُ يَمِينُهُ\n(Allah will give shade to seven on the Day when there will be no shade but His. (They are:) a just ruler, a youth who has been brought up in the worship of Allah, two persons who love each other only for Allah's sake who meet and part in Allah's cause only, a man whose heart is attached to the Masjids from the time he departs the Masjid until he returns to it, a person who remembers Allah in seclusion and his eyes are then flooded with tears, a man who refuses the call of a charming woman of noble birth for illicit intercourse with her and says, 'I fear Allah, Lord of the worlds', and a man who gives charitable gifts so secretly that his left hand does not know what his right hand has given.)\nAllah's statement,\nوَيُكَفِّرُ عَنكُم مِّن سَيِّئَاتِكُمْ\n((Allah) will expiate you some of your sins) means, in return for giving away charity, especially if it was concealed. Therefore, you will gain goodness by your rank being raised, and your sins being forgiven.\nAllah's statement,\nوَاللَّهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ خَبِيرٌ\n(And Allah is Well-Acquainted with what you do) means, \"No good deed that you perform escapes His knowledge, and He shall reward for it.\"","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=270","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:272","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:272–274","text":"Not upon you (Muhammad ﷺ) is their guidance, but Allah guides whom He wills. And whatever you spend in good, it is for yourselves, when you spend not except seeking Allah's Face. And whatever you spend in good, it will be repaid to you in full, and you shall not be wronged (272)(Charity is) for Fuqara' (the poor), who in Allah's cause are restricted (from travel), and cannot move about in the land (for trade or work). The one who knows them not, thinks that they are rich because of their modesty. You may know them by their mark, they do not beg of people at all. And whatever you spend in good, surely Allah knows it well (273)Those who spend their wealth (in Allah's cause) by night and day, in secret and in public, they shall have their reward with their Lord. On them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve (274)\n\n## Giving Charity to Polytheists\n\nAbu 'Abdur-Rahman An-Nasa'i recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said that they, \"Disliked giving charity to their polytheist relatives, but were later on allowed to give it to them when they inquired about this matter, and this Ayah was revealed,\nلَّيْسَ عَلَيْكَ هُدَاهُمْ وَلَٰكِنَّ اللَّهَ يَهْدِي مَن يَشَاءُ وَمَا تُنفِقُوا مِنْ خَيْرٍ فَلِأَنفُسِكُمْ وَمَا تُنفِقُونَ إِلَّا ابْتِغَاءَ وَجْهِ اللَّهِ وَمَا تُنفِقُوا مِنْ خَيْرٍ يُوَفَّ إِلَيْكُمْ وَأَنتُمْ لَا تُظْلَمُونَ\n(Not upon you (Muhammad ﷺ) is their guidance, but Allah guides whom He wills. And whatever you spend in good, it is for yourselves, when you spend not except seeking Allah's Face. And whatever you spend in good, it will be repaid to you in full, and you shall not be wronged.)\nAllah's statement,\nوَمَا تُنفِقُوا مِنْ خَيْرٍ فَلِأَنفُسِكُمْ\n(And whatever you spend in good, it is for yourselves) is similar to His other statement,\nمَّنْ عَمِلَ صَالِحًا فَلِنَفْسِهِ\n(Whosoever does righteous good deed, it is for (the benefit of) his ownself.)[41:46]\nThere are many other similar Ayat in the Qur'an.\nAllah said next,\nوَمَا تُنفِقُونَ إِلَّا ابْتِغَاءَ وَجْهِ اللَّهِ\n(When you spend not except seeking Allah's Face.)\nAl-Hasan Al-Basri commented, \"Whenever the believer spends, including what he spends on himself, he seeks Allah's Face with it.\" 'Ata' Al-Khurasani said that the Ayah means, \"You give away charity for the sake of Allah. Therefore, you will not be asked about the deeds [or wickedness] of those who receive it.\" This is a sound meaning indicating that when one spends in charity for Allah's sake, then his reward will be with Allah. He will not be asked if the charity unintentionally reached righteous, evil, deserving or undeserving persons, for he will be rewarded for his good intention. The proof to this statement is the Ayah,\nوَمَا تُنفِقُوا مِنْ خَيْرٍ يُوَفَّ إِلَيْكُمْ وَأَنتُمْ لَا تُظْلَمُونَ\n(And whatever you spend in good, it will be repaid to you in full, and you shall not be wronged.)\nThe Two Sahihs recorded a Hadith by Abu Hurayrah that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nقَالَ رَجُلٌ: لَأَتَصَدَّقَنَّ اللَّيْلَةَ بِصَدَقَةٍ، فَخَرجَ بِصَدَقَتِهِ فَوَضَعَهَا فِي يَدِ زَانِيَةٍ، فَأَصْبَحَ النَّاسُ يَتَحَدَّثُونَ: تُصُدِّقَ عَلَى زَانِيَةٍ، فَقَالَ: اللَّهُمَ لَكَ الْحَمْدُ عَلَى زَانِيَةٍ، لَأَتَصَدَّقَنَّ اللَّيْلَةَ بِصَدَقَةٍ، فَخَرَجَ بِصَدَقَتِهِ فَوَضَعَهَا فِي يَدِ غَنِيٍّ، فَأَصْبَحُوا يَتَحَدَّثُونَ: تُصُدِّقَ اللَّيْلَةَ عَلَى غَنِيٍّ، قَالَ: اللَّهُمَّ لَكَ الْحَمْدُ عَلَى غَنِيٍّ، لَأَتَصَدَّقَنَّ اللَّيْلَةَ بِصَدَقَةٍ، فَخَرَجَ بِصَدَقَتِهِ فَوَضَعَهَا فِي يَدِ سَارِقٍ، فَأَصْبَحُوا يَتَحَدَّثُونَ: تُصُدِّقَ اللَّيْلَةَ عَلَى سَارِقٍ، فَقَالَ: اللَّهُمَّ لَكَ الْحَمْدُ عَلَى زَانِيَةٍ، وَعَلَى غَنِيٍّ، وَعَلَى سَارِقٍ. فَأُتِيَ فَقِيلَ لَهُ: أَمَّا صَدَقَتُكَ فَقَدْ قُبِلَتْ، وَأَمَّا الزَّانِيَةُ فَلَعَلَّهَا أَنْ تَسْتَعِفَّ بِهَا عَنْ زِنَاهَا، وَلَعَلَّ الْغَنِيَّ يَعْتَبِرُ فَيُنْفِقُ مِمَّا أَعْطَاهُ اللهُ، وَلَعَلَّ السَّارِقَ أَنْ يَسْتَعِفَّ بِهَا عَنْ سَرِقَتِهِ\n(A man said, \"Tonight, I shall give charity.\" He went out with his charity and (unknowingly) gave it to an adulteress. The next morning the people said that alms were given to an adulteress. The man said, \"O Allah! All the praises are for You. (I gave my alms) to an adulteress. Tonight, I shall give alms again.\" He went out with his charity and (unknowingly) gave it to a rich person. The next morning (the people) said, \"Last night, a wealthy person was given alms.\" He said, \"O Allah! All the praises are for You. (I gave alms) to a wealthy man. Tonight, I shall again give charity.\" So he went out with his charity and (unknowingly) gave it to a thief. The next morning (the people) said, \"Last night, a thief was given alms.\" He said, \"O Allah! All the praises are for You. (I have given alms) to an adulteress, a wealthy man and a thief.\" Then, someone came to him and said, \"The alms that you gave away were accepted. As for the adulteress, the alms might make her abstain from adultery. As for the wealthy man, it might make him take a lesson and spend his wealth that Allah has given him. As for the thief, it might make him abstain from stealing.\")\n\n## Who Deserves Charity\n\nAllah said,\nلِلْفُقَرَاءِ الَّذِينَ أُحْصِرُوا فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ\n((Charity is) for the poor, who in Allah's cause are restricted (from travel)) meaning, the migrants who migrated to Allah and His Messenger, resided in Al-Madinah and did not have resources that sufficiently provided them with their needs,\nلَا يَسْتَطِيعُونَ ضَرْبًا فِي الْأَرْضِ\n(And cannot Darban (move about) in the land) meaning, \"They cannot travel in the land to seek means of livelihood.\" Allah said in other instances [using a variation of the word Darban]\nوَإِذَا ضَرَبْتُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ فَلَيْسَ عَلَيْكُمْ جُنَاحٌ أَن تَقْصُرُوا مِنَ الصَّلَاةِ\n(And when you (Muslims) travel in the land, there is no sin on you if you shorten the Salah (the prayer))[4:101], and,\nعَلِمَ أَن سَيَكُونُ مِنكُم مَّرْضَىٰ وَآخَرُونَ يَضْرِبُونَ فِي الْأَرْضِ يَبْتَغُونَ مِن فَضْلِ اللَّهِ وَآخَرُونَ يُقَاتِلُونَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ\n(He knows that there will be some among you sick, others traveling through the land, seeking of Allah's bounty, yet others fighting in Allah's cause)[73:20].\nAllah then said,\nيَحْسَبُهُمُ الْجَاهِلُ أَغْنِيَاءَ مِنَ التَّعَفُّفِ\n(The one who knows them not, thinks that they are rich because of their modesty) meaning, those who do not know their situation think that they are well-off, because they are modest in their clothes and speech. There is a Hadith with this meaning that the Two Sahihs recorded from Abu Hurayrah that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nلَيْسَ الْمِسْكِينُ بِهذَا الطَّوَّافِ الَّذِي تَرُدُّهُ التَّمْرَةُ وَالتَّمْرَتَانِ، وَاللُّقْمَةُ وَاللُّقْمَتَانِ، وَالْأُكْلَةُ وَالْأُكْلَتَانِ، وَلكِنِ الْمِسْكِينُ الَّذِي لَا يَجِدُ غِنىً يُغْنِيهِ، وَلَا يُفْطَنُ لَهُ فَيُتَصَدَّقَ عَلَيْهِ، وَلَا يَسْأَلُ النَّاسَ شَيْئًا\n(The Miskin (needy) is not he who wanders about and whose need is sufficed by a date or two, a bite or two or a meal or two. Rather, the Miskin is he who neither has enough resources to sustain him, all the while people are unaware of his need so they do not give to him, nor does he ask people for anything.)\nImam Ahmad also recorded this Hadith from Ibn Mas'ud.\nAllah's statement,\nتَعْرِفُهُم بِسِيمَاهُمْ\n(You may know them by their mark) means, \"Those who have good minds discover their situation,\" just as Allah said in other instances,\nسِيمَاهُمْ فِي وُجُوهِهِم\n(The mark of them (i.e. of their faith) is on their faces)[48:29], and,\nوَلَتَعْرِفَنَّهُمْ فِي لَحْنِ الْقَوْلِ\n(But surely, you will know them by the tone of their speech!)[47:30]. Allah's statement,\nلَا يَسْأَلُونَ النَّاسَ إِلْحَافًا\n(they do not beg of people at all) means, they do not beg and, thus, do not require people to provide them with more than what they actually need. Indeed, those who ask people for help, while having what suffices for their needs, have begged.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Abu Sa'id said, \"My mother sent me to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ to ask him for help, but when I came by him I sat down. The Prophet ﷺ faced me and said to me,\nمَنِ اسْتَغْنَى أَغْنَاهُ اللهُ، وَمَنِ اسْتَعَفَّ أَعَفَّهُ اللهُ، وَمَنِ اسْتَكَفَّ كَفَاهُ اللهُ، وَمَنْ سَأَلَ وَلَهُ قِيمَةُ أُوقِيَّةٍ فَقَدْ أَلْـحَفَ\n(Whoever felt satisfied, then Allah will enrich him. Whoever is modest, Allah will make him decent. Whoever is content, then Allah will suffice for him. Whoever asks people, while having a small amout, he will have begged the people.)\nAbu Sa'id said, \"I said to myself, 'I have a camel, Al-Yaqutah, and indeed, it is worth more than a small amount.' And I went back without asking the Prophet ﷺ for anything.\" This is the same wording for this Hadith collected by Abu Dawud and An-Nasa'i.\nAllah's statement,\nوَمَا تُنفِقُوا مِنْ خَيْرٍ فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ بِهِ عَلِيمٌ\n(And whatever you spend in good, surely Allah knows it well) indicates that no charity escapes Him, and He will reward it fully and perfectly on the Day of Resurrection, when it is most desperately needed.\n\n## Praise for those who Spend in Charity\n\nAllah said,\nالَّذِينَ يُنفِقُونَ أَمْوَالَهُم بِاللَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ سِرًّا وَعَلَانِيَةً فَلَهُمْ أَجْرُهُمْ عِندَ رَبِّهِمْ وَلَا خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلَا هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ\n(Those who spend their wealth (in Allah's cause) by night and day, in secret and in public, they shall have their reward with their Lord. On them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve.)\nThis Ayah praises those who spend in charity for Allah's sake, seeking His pleasure, day and night, publicly and in secret, including what one spends on his family. The Two Sahihs recorded that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said to Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas:\nوَإِنَّكَ لَنْ تُنْفِقَ نَفَقَةً تَبْتَغِي بِهَا وَجْهَ اللهِ إِلَّا ازْدَدْتَ بِهَا دَرَجَةً وَرِفْعَةً، حَتَّى مَا تَجْعَلُ فِي فِي امْرَأَتِكَ\n(You will not spend charity with which you seek Allah's Face, but you will ascend a higher degree and status because of it, including what you put in your wife's mouth.)\nImam Ahmad recorded that Abu Mas'ud said that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ الْمُسْلِمَ إِذَا أَنْفَقَ عَلَى أَهْلِهِ نَفَقَةً يَحْتَسِبُهَا، كَانَتْ لَهُ صَدَقَةً\n(When the Muslim spends on his family while awaiting the reward for it from Allah, it will be written as charity for him.)\nAl-Bukhari and Muslim also recorded this Hadith.\nAllah said,\nفَلَهُمْ أَجْرُهُمْ عِندَ رَبِّهِمْ\n(shall have their reward with their Lord), on the Day of Resurrection, as reward for what they spent in acts of obedience. We previously explained the Ayah,\nفَلاَ خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلاَ هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ\n(there shall be no fear on them nor shall they grieve.)[2:38]","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=272","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:275","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:275","text":"Those who eat Riba will not stand (on the Day of Resurrection) except like the standing of a person beaten by Shaytan leading him to insanity. That is because they say: \"Trading is only like Riba,\" whereas Allah has permitted trading and forbidden Riba. So whosoever receives an admonition from his Lord and stops eating Riba, shall not be punished for the past; his case is for Allah (to judge); but whoever returns (to Riba), such are the dwellers of the Fire ـ they will Abide therein (275)\n\n## The Punishment for Dealing with Riba (Interest and Usury)\n\nAfter Allah mentioned the righteous believers who give charity, pay Zakah and spend on their relatives and families at various times and conditions, He then mentioned those who deal in usury and illegally acquire people's money, using various evil methods and wicked ways. Allah describes the condition of these people when they are resurrected from their graves and brought back to life on the Day of Resurrection:\nالَّذِينَ يَأْكُلُونَ الرِّبَا لَا يَقُومُونَ إِلَّا كَمَا يَقُومُ الَّذِي يَتَخَبَّطُهُ الشَّيْطَانُ مِنَ الْمَسِّ\n(Those who eat Riba will not stand (on the Day of Resurrection) except like the standing of a person beaten by Shaytan leading him to insanity.)\nThis Ayah means, on the Day of Resurrection, these people will get up from their graves just as the person afflicted by insanity or possesed by a demon would. Ibn 'Abbas said, \"On the Day of Resurrection, those who consume Riba will be resurrected while insane and suffering from seizures.\" Ibn Abi Hatim also recorded this and then commented, \"This Tafsir was reported from 'Awf bin Malik, Sa'id bin Jubayr, As-Suddi, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, Qatadah and Muqatil bin Hayyan.\" Al-Bukhari recorded that Samurah bin Jundub said in the long Hadith about the dream that the Prophet ﷺ had,\nفَأَتينَا عَلَى نَهْرٍ - حَسِبْتُ أَنَّهُ كَانَ يَقُولُ: أَحْمَرَ مِثْلَ الدَّمِ، وَإِذَا فِي النَّهْرِ رَجُلٌ سَابِحٌ يَسْبَحُ، وَإِذَا عَلَى شَطِّ النَّهْرِ رَجُلٌ قَدْ جَمَعَ عِنْدَهُ حِجَارَةً كَثِيرَةً، وَإِذَا ذَلِكَ السَّابِحُ يَسْبَحُ مَا يَسْبَحُ، ثُمَّ يَأْتِي ذَلِكَ الَّذِي قَدْ جَمَعَ الْحِجَارَةَ عِنْدَهُ، فَيَفْغَرُ لَهُ فَاهُ فَيُلْقِمُهُ حَجَرًا\n(We reached a river -the narrator said, \"I thought he said that the river was as red as blood\"- and found that a man was swimming in the river, and on its bank there was another man standing with a large collection of stones next to him. The man in the river would swim, then come to the man who had collected the stones and open his mouth, and the other man would throw a stone in his mouth.)\nThe explanation of this dream was that the person in the river was one who consumed Riba.\nAllah's statement,\nذَٰلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ قَالُوا إِنَّمَا الْبَيْعُ مِثْلُ الرِّبَا وَأَحَلَّ اللَّهُ الْبَيْعَ وَحَرَّمَ الرِّبَا\n(That is because they say: \"Trading is only like Riba,\" whereas Allah has permitted trading and forbidden Riba) indicates that the disbelievers claimed that Riba was allowed due to the fact that they rejected Allah's commandments, not that they equated Riba with regular trade. The disbelievers did not recognize that Allah allowed trade in the Qur'an, for if they did, they would have said, \"Riba is trade.\" Rather, they said,\nإِنَّمَا الْبَيْعُ مِثْلُ الرِّبَا\n(Trading is only like Riba) meaning, they are similar, so why did Allah allow this, but did not allow that, they asked in defiance of Allah's commandments.\nAllah's statement,\nوَأَحَلَّ اللَّهُ الْبَيْعَ وَحَرَّمَ الرِّبَا\n(Whereas Allah has permitted trading and forbidden Riba) might be a continuation of the answer to the disbelievers' claim, who uttered it, although they knew that Allah decided that ruling on trade is different from that of Riba. Indeed, Allah is the Most Knowledgeable, Most Wise, Whose decision is never resisted. Allah is never asked about what He does, while they will be asked. He is knowledgeable of the true reality of all things and the benefits they carry. He knows what benefits His servants, so He allows it for them, and what harms them, so He forbids them from it. He is more merciful with them than the mother with her own infant.\nThereafter, Allah said,\nفَمَن جَاءَهُ مَوْعِظَةٌ مِّن رَّبِّهِ فَانتَهَىٰ فَلَهُ مَا سَلَفَ وَأَمْرُهُ إِلَى اللَّهِ\n(So whosoever receives an admonition from his Lord and stops eating Riba, shall not be punished for the past; his case is for Allah (to judge),) meaning, those who have knowledge that Allah made usury unlawful, and refrain from indulging in it as soon as they acquire this knowledge, then Allah will forgive their previous dealings in Riba,\nعَفَا اللَّهُ عَمَّا سَلَفَ\n(Allah has forgiven what is past.)\nOn the day Makkah was conquered the Prophet ﷺ said,\nوَكُلُّ رِبًا فِي الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ مَوْضُوعٌ تَحْتَ قَدَمَيَّ هَاتَيْنِ، وَأَوَّلُ رِبًا أَضَعُ، رِبَا الْعَبَّاسِ\n(All cases of Riba during the time of Jahiliyyah (pre-Islamic period of ignorance) is annulled and under my feet, and the first Riba I annul is the Riba of Al-'Abbas (the Prophet's uncle).)\nWe should mention that the Prophet ﷺ did not require the return of the interest that they gained on their Riba during the time of Jahiliyyah. Rather, he pardoned the cases of Riba that occured in the past, just as Allah said,\nفَلَهُ مَا سَلَفَ وَأَمْرُهُ إِلَى اللَّهِ\n(shall not be punished for the past; his case is for Allah (to judge).)\nSa'id bin Jubayr and As-Suddi said that,\nفَلَهُ مَا سَلَفَ\n(shall not be punished for the past) refers to the Riba one consumed before it was prohibited. Allah then said,\nوَمَنْ عَادَ\n(But whoever returns) meaning, deals in Riba after gaining knowledge that Allah prohibited it, then that warrants punishment, and in this case, the proof will have been established against such person. This is why Allah said,\nفَأُولَٰئِكَ أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ هُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ\n(such are the dwellers of the Fire ـ they will abide therein forever.)\nAbu Dawud recorded that Jabir said, \"When\nالَّذِينَ يَأْكُلُونَ الرِّبَا لَا يَقُومُونَ إِلَّا كَمَا يَقُومُ الَّذِي يَتَخَبَّطُهُ الشَّيْطَانُ مِنَ الْمَسِّ\n(Those who eat Riba will not stand (on the Day of Resurrection) except like a person beaten by Shaytan leading him to insanity) was revealed, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَنْ لَمْ يَذَرِ الْمُخَابَرَةَ فَلْيُؤْذِنْ بِحَرْبٍ مِنَ اللهِ وَرَسُولِهِ\n(Whoever does not refrain from Mukhabarah, then let him receive a notice of war from Allah and His Messenger.)\"\nAl-Hakim also recorded this in his Mustadrak, and he said, \"It is Sahih according to the criteria of Muslim, and he did not record it.\" Mukhabarah (sharecropping), farming land in return for some of its produce, was prohibited. Muzabanah, trading fresh dates still on trees with dried dates already on the ground, was prohibited. Muhaqalah, which refers to trading produce not yet harvested, with crops already harvested, was also prohibited. These were prohibited to eradicate the possibility that Riba might be involved, for the quality and equity of such items are only known after they become dry.\nThe subject of Riba is a difficult subject for many scholars. We should mention that the Leader of the Faithful, 'Umar bin Al-Khattab, said, \"I wished that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ had made three matters clearer for us, so that we could refer to his decision: the grandfather (regarding inheriting from his grandchildren), the Kalalah (those who leave neither descendants nor ascendants as heirs) and some types of Riba.\" 'Umar was refering to the types of transactions where it is not clear whether they involve Riba or not. The Shari'ah supports the rule that for any matter that is unlawful, then the means to it are also unlafwful, because whatever results in the unlawful is unlawful, in the same way that whenever an obligation will not be complete except with something, then that something is itself an obligation.\nThe Two Sahihs recorded that An-Nu'man bin Bashir said that he heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ say,\nإِنَّ الْحَلَالَ بَيِّنٌ وَإِنَّ الْحَرَامَ بَيِّنٌ، وَبَيْنَ ذَلِكَ أُمُورٌ مُشْتَبِهَاتٌ، فَمَنِ اتَّقَى الشُّبُهَاتِ اسْتَبْرَأَ لِدِينِهِ وَعِرْضِهِ، وَمَنْ وَقَعَ فِي الشُّبُهَاتِ وَقَعَ فِي الْحَرَامِ، كَالرَّاعِي يَرْعَى حَولَ الْحِمَى يُوشِكُ أَنْ يَرْتَعَ فِيهِ\n(Both lawful and unlawful things are evident, but in between them there are matters that are not clear. So whoever saves himself from these unclear matters, he saves his religion and his honor. And whoever indulges in these unclear matters, he will have fallen into the prohibitions, just like a shepherd who grazes (his animals) near a private pasture, at any moment he is liable to enter it.)\nThe Sunan records that Al-Hasan bin 'Ali said that he heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ say,\n«دَعْ مَا يَرِيبُكَ إِلَى مَا لَا يَرِيبُكَ»\n(Leave that which makes you doubt for that which does not make you doubt.)\nAhmad recorded that Sa'id bin Al-Musayyib said that 'Umar said, \"The Ayah about Riba was one of the last Ayat to be revealed, and the Messenger of Allah ﷺ died before he explained it to us. So leave that which makes you doubt for that which does not make you doubt.\"\nIbn Majah recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nالرِّبَا سَبْعُونَ حُوبًا، أَيْسَرُهَا أَنْ يَنْكِحَ الرَّجُلُ أُمَّهُ\n(Riba is seventy types, the least of which is equal to one having sexual intercourse with his mother.)\nContinuing on the subject of prohibiting the means that lead to the unlawful, there is a Hadith that Ahmad recorded in which 'A'ishah said, \"When the Ayat in Surat Al-Baqarah about Riba were revealed, the Messenger of Allah ﷺ went out to the Masjid and recited them and also prohibited trading in alcohol.\" The Six collections recorded this Hadith, with the exception of At-Tirmidhi. The Two Sahihs recorded that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nلَعَنَ اللهُ الْيَهُودَ، حُرِّمَتْ عَلَيْهِمُ الشُّحُومُ فَجَمَلُوهَا فَبَاعُوهَا، وَأَكَلُوا أَثْمَانَهَا\n(May Allah curse the Jews! Allah forbade them to eat animal fat, but they melted it and sold it, eating its price.)\nAli and Ibn Mas'ud narrated that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nلَعَنَ اللهُ آكِلَ الرِّبَا وَمُوكِلَهُ وَشَاهِدَيْهِ وَكَاتِبَهُ\n(May Allah curse whoever consumes Riba, whoever pays Riba, the two who are witnesses to it, and the scribe who records it.)\nThey say they only have witnesses and a scribe to write the Riba contract when they want it to appear to be a legitimate agreement, but it is still invalid because the ruling is applied to the agreement itself, not the form that it appears in. Verily, deeds are judged by their intentions.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=275","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:276","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:276–277","text":"Allah will destroy Riba and will give increase for Sadaqat. And Allah likes not the disbelievers, sinners (276)Truly, those who believe, and do deeds of righteousness, and perform the Salah and give Zakah, they will have their reward with their Lord. On them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve (277)\n\n## Allah Does Not Bless Riba\n\nAllah states that He destroys Riba, either by removing this money from those who eat it, or by depriving them of the blessing, and thus the benefit of their money. Because of their Riba, Allah will torment them in this life and punish them for it on the Day of Resurrection. Allah said,\nقُل لَّا يَسْتَوِي الْخَبِيثُ وَالطَّيِّبُ وَلَوْ أَعْجَبَكَ كَثْرَةُ الْخَبِيثِ\n(Say: \"Not equal are Al-Khabith (evil things) and At-Tayyib (good things), even though the abundance of Al-Khabith may please you\")[5:100]\nوَيَجْعَلَ الْخَبِيثَ بَعْضَهُ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ فَيَرْكُمَهُ جَمِيعًا فَيَجْعَلَهُ فِي جَهَنَّمَ\n(And put the wicked (disbelievers and doers of evil deeds) one over another, heap them together and cast them into Hell)[8:37], and,\nوَمَا آتَيْتُم مِّن رِّبًا لِّيَرْبُوَ فِي أَمْوَالِ النَّاسِ فَلَا يَرْبُو عِندَ اللَّهِ\n(And that which you give in gift (to others), in order that it may increase (your wealth by expecting to get a better one in return) from other people's property, has no increase with Allah)[30:39].\nIbn Jarir said that Allah's statement,\nيَمْحَقُ اللَّهُ الرِّبَا\n(Allah will destroy Riba) is similar to the statement reported of 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud, \"Riba will end up with less, even if it was substantial.\" Imam Ahmad recorded a similar statement in Al-Musnad.\n\n## Allah Increases Charity, Just as One Raises His Animal\n\nAllah's statement,\nوَيُرْبِي الصَّدَقَاتِ\n(And will give increase for Sadaqat) means, Allah makes charity grow, or He increases it. Al-Bukhari recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَنْ تَصَدَّقَ بِعَدْلِ تَمْرَةٍ مِنْ كَسْبٍ طَيِّبٍ، وَلَا يَقْبَلُ اللهُ إِلَّا الطَّيِّبَ، فَإِنَّ اللهَ يَتَقَبَّلُهَا بِيَمِينِهِ، ثُمَّ يُرَبِّيهَا لِصَاحِبِهِ، كَمَا يُرَبِّي أَحَدُكُمْ فَلُوَّهُ حَتَّى تَكُونَ مِثْلَ الْجَبَلِ\n(Whoever gives in charity what equals a date from honest resources, and Allah only accepts that which is good and pure, then Allah accepts it with His right (Hand) and raises it for its giver, just as one of you raises his animal, until it becomes as big as a mountain.)\nThis was recorded in the book of Zakah.\n\n## Allah Does not Like the Disbelieving Sinners\n\nAllah's statement,\nوَاللَّهُ لَا يُحِبُّ كُلَّ كَفَّارٍ أَثِيمٍ\n(And Allah likes not the disbelievers, sinners) indicates that Allah does not like he who has a disbelieving heart, who is a sinner in tongue and action. There is a connection between the beginning of the Ayah on Riba and what Allah ended it with. Those who consume Riba are not satisfied with the permissible and pure resources that Allah provided them. Instead, they try to illegally acquire people's money by relying on evil methods. This demonstrates their lack of appreciation for the bounty that Allah provides.\n\n## Praising Those Who Thank Allah\n\nAllah praised those who believe in His Lordship, obey His commands, thank Him and appreciate Him. They are those who are kind to His creation, establish prayer and give charity due on their money. Allah informed them of the honor that He has prepared for them and that they will be safe from the repercussions of the Day of Resurrection. Allah said,\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ وَأَقَامُوا الصَّلَاةَ وَآتَوُا الزَّكَاةَ لَهُمْ أَجْرُهُمْ عِندَ رَبِّهِمْ وَلَا خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلَا هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ\n(Truly, those who believe, and do deeds of righteousness, and perform the Salah and give Zakah, they will have their reward with their Lord. On them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve.)","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=276","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:278","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:278–281","text":"O you who believe! Have Taqwa of Allah and give up what remains from Riba, if you are (really) believers (278)And if you do not do it, then take a notice of war from Allah and His Messenger but if you repent,you shall have your capital sums. Deal not unjustly, and you shall not be dealt with unjustly (279)And if the debtor is having a hard time, then grant him time till it is easy for him to repay; but if you remit it by way of charity, that is better for you if you did but know (280)And have Taqwa the Day when you shall be brought back to Allah. Then every person shall be paid what he earned, and they shall not be dealt with unjustly (281)\n\n## The Necessity of Taqwa and Avoiding Riba\n\nAllah commands His believing servants to fear Him and warns them against what would bring them closer to His anger and drive them away from His pleasure. Allah said,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اتَّقُوا اللَّهَ\n(O you who believe! Have Taqwa of Allah) meaning, fear Him and remember that He is watching all that you do.\nوَذَرُوا مَا بَقِيَ مِنَ الرِّبَا\n(And give up what remains of Riba) meaning, abandon the Riba that people still owe you upon hearing this warning,\nإِن كُنتُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ\n(if you indeed have been believers) believing in the trade that He allowed you and the prohibition of Riba. Zayd bin Aslam, Ibn Jurayj, Muqatil bin Hayyan and As-Suddi said that this Ayah was revealed about Bani 'Amr bin 'Umayr, a sub-tribe of Thaqif, and Bani Al-Mughirah, from the tribe of Bani Makhzum, between whom were outstanding transactions of Riba leftover from time of Jahiliyyah. When Islam came and both tribes became Muslims, Thaqif required Bani Al-Mughirah to pay the Riba of that transaction, but Bani Al-Mughirah said, \"We do not pay Riba in Islam.\" 'Attab bin Usayd, the Prophet's deputy on Makkah, wrote to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ about this matter. This Ayah was then revealed and the Messenger of Allah ﷺ conveyed it to 'Attab,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَذَرُوا مَا بَقِيَ مِنَ الرِّبَا إِن كُنتُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ - فَإِن لَّمْ تَفْعَلُوا فَأْذَنُوا بِحَرْبٍ مِّنَ اللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ\n(O you who believe! Be afraid of Allah and give up what remains (due to you) from Riba (from now onward), if you are (really) believers. And if you do not do it, then take a notice of war from Allah and His Messenger.)\nThey said, \"We repent to Allah and abandon whatever is left of our Riba\", and they all abandoned it This Ayah serves as a stern threat to those who continue to deal in Riba after Allah revealed this warning.\n\n## Riba Constitutes War Against Allah and His Messenger (ﷺ)\n\nIbn Jurayj said that Ibn 'Abbas said that,\nفَأْذَنُوا بِحَرْبٍ\n(then take a notice of war) means, \"Be sure of a war from Allah and His Messenger.\" He also said, \"On the Day of Resurrection, those who eat Riba will be told, 'take up arms for war.'\" He then recited,\nفَإِن لَّمْ تَفْعَلُوا فَأْذَنُوا بِحَرْبٍ مِّنَ اللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ\n(And if you do not do it, then take a notice of war from Allah and His Messenger.)\nAli bin Abi Talhah said that Ibn 'Abbas said about,\nفَإِن لَّمْ تَفْعَلُوا فَأْذَنُوا بِحَرْبٍ مِّنَ اللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ\n(And if you do not do it, then take a notice of war from Allah and His Messenger,) \"Whoever kept dealing with Riba and did not refrain from it, then the Muslim Leader should require him to repent. If he still did not refrain from Riba, the Muslim Leader should cut off his head.\"\nAllah then said,\nوَإِن تُبْتُمْ فَلَكُمْ رُءُوسُ أَمْوَالِكُمْ لَا تَظْلِمُونَ\n(But if you repent, you shall have your capital sums. Deal not unjustly) by taking the Riba,\nوَلَا تُظْلَمُونَ\n(And you shall not be dealt with unjustly) meaning, your original capital will not diminish. Rather, you will receive only what you lent without increase or decrease. Ibn Abi Hatim recorded that 'Amr bin Al-Ahwas said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ gave a speech during the Farewell Hajj saying;\nأَلَا إِنَّ كُلَّ رِبًا كَانَ فِي الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ، مَوْضُوعٌ عَنْكُمْ كُلُّهُ، لَكُمْ رُؤُوسُ أَمْوَالِكُم لَا تَظْلِمُونَ وَلَاتُظْلَمُونَ، وَأَوَّلُ رِبًا مَوْضُوعٍ، رِبَا الْعَبَّاسِ بْنِ عَبْدِ الْمُطَّلِبِ مَوْضُوعٌ كُلُّهُ\n(Verily, every case of Riba from the Jahiliyyah is completely annulled. You will only take back your capital, without increase or decrease. The first Riba that I annul is the Riba of Al-'Abbas bin 'Abdul-Muttalib, all of it is annulled.)\n\n## Being Kind to Debtors Who Face Financial Difficulties\n\nAllah said,\nوَإِن كَانَ ذُو عُسْرَةٍ فَنَظِرَةٌ إِلَىٰ مَيْسَرَةٍ وَأَن تَصَدَّقُوا خَيْرٌ لَّكُمْ إِن كُنتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ\n(And if the debtor is having a hard time, then grant him time till it is easy for him to repay; but if you remit it by way of charity, that is better for you if you did but know.) Allah commands creditors to be patient with debtors who are having a hard time financially,\nوَإِن كَانَ ذُو عُسْرَةٍ فَنَظِرَةٌ إِلَىٰ مَيْسَرَةٍ\n(And if the debtor is having a hard time (has no money), then grant him time till it is easy for him to repay.)\nDuring the time of Jahiliyyah, when the debt came to term, the creditor would say to the debtor, \"Either pay now or interest will be added to the debt.\"\nAllah encouraged creditors to give debtors respite regarding their debts and promised all that is good, and a great reward from Him for this righteous deed,\nوَأَن تَصَدَّقُوا خَيْرٌ لَّكُمْ إِن كُنتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ\n(But if you remit it by way of charity, that is better for you if you did but know) meaning, if you forfeit your debts and cancel them completely.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Sulayman bin Buraydah said that his father said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ say,\nمَنْ أَنْظَرَ مُعْسِرًا، فَلَهُ بِكُلِّ يَوْمٍ مِثْلُهُ صَدَقَةٌ\n(Whoever gives time to a debtor facing hard times, will gain charity of equal proportions for each day he gives.)\nI also heard the Prophet ﷺ say,\nمَنْ أَنْظَرَ مُعْسِرًا، فَلَهُ بِكُلِّ يَوْمٍ مِثْلُهُ صَدَقَةٌ\n(Whoever gives time to a debtor facing hard times, will earn charity multiplied two times for each day he gives.) I said, 'O Messenger of Allah! I heard you say, 'Whoever gives time to a debtor facing hard times, will gain charity of equal proportions for each day he gives.' I also heard you say, 'Whoever gives time to a debtor facing hard times, will earn charity multiplied by two times for each day he gives.' He ﷺ said,\nلَهُ بِكُلِّ يَومٍ مِثْلُهُ صَدَقَةٌ قَبْلَ أَنْ يَحِلَّ الدَّيْنُ، فَإِذَا حَلَّ الدَّيْنُ فَأَنْظَرَهُ، فَلَهُ بِكُلِّ يَوْمٍ مِثْلَاهُ صَدَقَةٌ\n(He will earn charity of equal proportions for each day (he gives time) before the term of the debt comes to an end, and when the term comes to an end, he will again acquire charity multiplied by two times for each day if he gives more time.)\"\nAhmad recorded that Muhammad bin Ka'b Al-Qurazi said that Abu Qatadah had a debt on a man, who used to hide from Abu Qatadah when he looked for him to pay what he owed him. One day, Abu Qatadah came looking for the debtor and a young boy came out, and he asked him about the debtor and found out that he was in the house eating. Abu Qatadah said in a loud voice, \"O Fellow! Come out, for I was told that you are in the house.\" The man came out and Abu Qatadah asked him, \"Why are you hiding from me?\" The man said, \"I am having a hard time financially, and I do not have any money.\" Abu Qatadah said, \"By Allah, are you truly facing a hard time?\" He said, \"Yes.\" Abu Qatadah cried and said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ say,\nمَنْ نَفَّسَ عَنْ غَرِيمِهِ أَوْ مَحَا عَنْهُ،كَانَ فِي ظِلِّ الْعَرْشِ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ\n(Whoever gives time to his debtor, or forgives the debt, will be in the shade of the Throne (of Allah) on the Day of Resurrection.)\"\nMuslim also recorded this Hadith in his Sahih.\nAl-Hafiz Abu Ya'la Al-Mawsili recorded that Hudhayfah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nأُتِيَ اللهُ بِعَبْدٍ مِنْ عَبِيدِهِ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ قَالَ: مَاذَا عَمِلْتَ لِي فِي الدُّنْيَا؟ فَقَالَ: مَا عَمِلْتُ لَكَ يَا رَبِّ مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ فِي الدُّنْيَا أَرْجُوكَ بِهَا - قَالَهَا ثَلَاثَ مَرَّاتٍ - قَالَ الْعَبْدُ عِنْدَ آخِرِهَا: يَا رَبِّ إِنَّكَ كُنْتَ أَعْطَيْتَنِي فَضْلَ مَالٍ، وَكُنْتُ رَجُلًا أُبَايِعُ النَّاسَ، وَكَانَ مِنْ خُلُقِي الْجَوازُ، فَكُنْتُ أُيَسِّرُ عَلَى الْمُوسِرِ وَأُنْظِرُ الْمُعْسِرَ، قَالَ: فَيَقُولُ اللهُ عَزَّوَجَلَّ: أَنَا أَحَقُّ مَنْ يُيَسِّرُ، ادْخُلِ الْجَنَّةَ\n(On the Day of Resurrection, one of Allah's servants will be summoned before Him and He will ask him, \"What deeds did you perform for Me in your life?\" He will say, \"O Lord! In my life, I have not performed a deed for Your sake that equals an atom,\" three times. The third time, the servant will add, \"O Lord! You granted me wealth and I used to be a merchant. I used to be lenient, giving easy terms to those well-off and giving time to the debtors who faced hard times.\" Allah will say, \"I Am the Most Worthy of giving easy terms. Therefore, enter Paradise.\")\nAl-Bukhari, Muslim and Ibn Majah also recorded this Hadith from Hudhayfah, and Muslim recorded a similar wording from 'Uqbah bin 'Amir and Abu Mas'ud Al-Badri.\nAllah further advised His servants, by reminding them that this life will soon end and all the wealth in it will vanish. He also reminded them that the Hereafter will surely come, when the Return to Him will occur, and that He will hold His creation accountable for what they did, rewarding them or punishing them accordingly. Allah also warned them against His torment,\nوَاتَّقُوا يَوْمًا تُرْجَعُونَ فِيهِ إِلَى اللَّهِ ثُمَّ تُوَفَّىٰ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَّا كَسَبَتْ وَهُمْ لَا يُظْلَمُونَ\n(And have Taqwa for the Day when you shall be brought back to Allah. Then every person shall be paid what he earned, and they shall not be dealt with unjustly.)\nIt was reported that this was the last Ayah revealed from the Glorious Qur'an. An-Nasa'i recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"The last Ayah to be revealed from the Qur'an was,\nوَاتَّقُوا يَوْمًا تُرْجَعُونَ فِيهِ إِلَى اللَّهِ ثُمَّ تُوَفَّىٰ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَّا كَسَبَتْ وَهُمْ لَا يُظْلَمُونَ\n(And have Taqwa for the Day when you shall be brought back to Allah. Then every person shall be paid what he earned, and they shall not be dealt with unjustly.\")\nThis is the same narration reported by Ad-Dahhak and Al-'Awfi from Ibn 'Abbas.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=278","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:282","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:282","text":"O you who believe! When you contract a debt for a fixed period, write it down. Let a scribe write it down in justice between you. Let not the scribe refuse to write, as Allah has taught him, so let him write. Let him (the debtor) who incurs the liability dictate, and he must have Taqwa of Allah, his Lord, and diminish not anything of what he owes. But if the debtor is of poor understanding, or weak, or is unable to dictate for himself, then let his guardian dictate in justice. And get two witnesses out of your own men. And if there are not two men (available), then a man and two women, such as you agree for witnesses, so that if one of them (two women) errs, the other can remind her. And the witnesses should not refuse when they are called (for evidence). You should not become weary to write it (your contract), whether it be small or big, for its fixed term, that is more just with Allah; more solid as evidence, and more convenient to prevent doubts among yourselves, save when it is a present trade which you carry out on the spot among yourselves, then there is no sin on you if you do not write it down. But take witnesses whenever you make a commercial contract. Let neither scribe nor witness suffer any harm, but if you do (such harm), it would be wickedness in you. So have Taqwa of Allah; and Allah teaches you. And Allah is the All-Knower of everything (282)\n\n## The Necessity of Writing Transactions That Take Effect Later on\n\nThis Ayah is the longest in the Glorious Qur'an. Imam Abu Ja'far bin Jarir recorded that Sa'id bin Al-Musayyib said that he was told that the Ayah most recently revealed from above the Throne – the last Ayah to be revealed in the Qur'an – was the Ayah about debts.\nAllah's statement,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِذَا تَدَايَنتُم بِدَيْنٍ إِلَىٰ أَجَلٍ مُّسَمًّى فَاكْتُبُوهُ\n(O you who believe! When you contract a debt for a fixed period, write it down) directs Allah's believing servants to record their business transactions when their term is delayed, to preserve the terms and timing of these transactions, and the memory of witnesses, as mentioned at the end of the Ayah,\nذَٰلِكُمْ أَقْسَطُ عِندَ اللَّهِ وَأَقْوَمُ لِلشَّهَادَةِ وَأَدْنَىٰ أَلَّا تَرْتَابُوا\n(that is more just with Allah; more solid as evidence, and more convenient to prevent doubts among yourselves.)\nThe Two Sahihs recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"Allah's Messenger ﷺ came to Al-Madinah, while the people were in the habit of paying in advance for fruits to be delivered within one or two years. The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَنْ أَسْلَفَ، فَلْيُسْلِفْ فِي كَيْلٍ مَعْلُومٍ، وَوَزْنٍ مَعْلُومٍ، إِلَى أَجَلٍ مَعْلُومٍ\n(Whoever pays money in advance (for dates to be delivered later) should pay it for known specified measure and weight (of the dates) for a specified date.)\nAllah's statement,\nفَاكْتُبُوهُ\n(write it down) is a command from Him to record such transactions to endorse and preserve their terms. Ibn Jurayj said, \"Whoever borrowed should write the terms, and whoever bought should have witnesses.\" Abu Sa'id, Ash-Sha'bi, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, Al-Hasan, Ibn Jurayj and Ibn Zayd said that recording such transactions was necessary before, but was then abrogated by Allah's statement,\nفَإِنْ أَمِنَ بَعْضُكُم بَعْضًا فَلْيُؤَدِّ الَّذِي اؤْتُمِنَ أَمَانَتَهُ\n(Then if one of you entrusts the other, let the one who is entrusted discharge his trust (faithfully).)[2:283]\nAllah's statement,\nوَلْيَكْتُب بَّيْنَكُم كَاتِبٌ بِالْعَدْلِ\n(Let a scribe write it down in justice between you) and in truth. Therefore, the scribe is not allowed to cheat any party of the contract and is to only record what the parties of the contract agreed to, without addition or deletion. Allah's statement,\nوَلَا يَأْبَ كَاتِبٌ أَن يَكْتُبَ كَمَا عَلَّمَهُ اللَّهُ فَلْيَكْتُبْ\n(Let not the scribe refuse to write, as Allah has taught him, so let him write) means, \"Those who know how to write should not refrain from writing transaction contracts when asked to do so.\" Further, let writing such contracts be a type of charity from the scribe for those who are not lettered, just as Allah taught him what he knew not. Therefore, let him write, just as the Hadith stated,\nإِنَّ مِنَ الصَّدَقَةِ أَنْ تُعِينَ صَانِعًا، أَوْ تَصْنَعَ لِأَخْرَقَ\n(It is a type of charity to help a worker and to do something for a feeble person.)\nIn another Hadith, the Prophet ﷺ said,\nمَنْ كَتَمَ عِلْمًا يَعْلَمُهُ، أُلْجِمَ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ بِلِجَامٍ مِنْ نَارٍ\n(Whoever kept knowledge to himself will be restrained by a bridle made of fire on the Day of Resurrection.) Mujahid and 'Ata' said that if asked to do so, \"The scribe is required to record.\"\nAllah's statement,\nوَلْيُمْلِلِ الَّذِي عَلَيْهِ الْحَقُّ وَلْيَتَّقِ اللَّهَ رَبَّهُ\n(Let him (the debtor) who incurs the liability dictate, and he must have Taqwa of Allah, his Lord) indicates that the debtor should dictate to the scribe what he owes, so let him fear Allah,\nوَلَا يَبْخَسْ مِنْهُ شَيْئًا\n(And diminish not anything of what he owes,) meaning, not hide any portion of what he owes.\nفَإِن كَانَ الَّذِي عَلَيْهِ الْحَقُّ سَفِيهًا\n(But if the debtor is of poor understanding) and is not allowed to decide on such matters, because he used to waste money, for instance,\nأَوْ ضَعِيفًا\n(Or weak), such as being too young or insane,\nأَوْ لَا يَسْتَطِيعُ أَن يُمِلَّ هُوَ\n(Or is unable to dictate for himself) because of a disease, or ignorance about such matters,\nفَلْيُمْلِلْ وَلِيُّهُ بِالْعَدْلِ\n(then let his guardian dictate in justice.)\n\n## Witnesses Should Attend the Dictation of Contracts\n\nAllah said,\nوَاسْتَشْهِدُوا شَهِيدَيْنِ مِن رِّجَالِكُمْ\n(And get two witnesses out of your own men) requiring witnesses to attend the dictation of contracts to further preserve the contents,\nفَإِن لَّمْ يَكُونَا رَجُلَيْنِ فَرَجُلٌ وَامْرَأَتَانِ\n(And if there are not two men (available), then a man and two women) this requirement is only for contracts that directly or indirectly involve money. Allah requires that two women take the place of one man as witness, because of the woman's shortcomings, as the Prophet ﷺ described. Muslim recorded in his Sahih that Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nيَا مَعْشَرَ النِّسَاءِ تَصَدَّقْنَ وَأَكْثِرْنَ الْاسْتِغْفَارَ، فَإِنِّي رَأَيْتُكُنَّ أَكْثَرَ أَهْلِ النَّارِ\n(O women! Give away charity and ask for forgiveness, for I saw that you comprise the majority of the people of the Fire.)\nOne eloquent woman said, \"O Messenger of Allah! Why do we comprise the majority of the people of the Fire?\" He said,\nتُكْثِرْنَ اللَّعْنَ، وَتَكْفُرْنَ الْعَشِيرَ، وَمَا رَأَيْتُ مِنْ نَاقِصَاتِ عَقْلٍ وَدِينٍ، أَغْلَبَ لِذِي لُبٍّ مِنْكُنَّ\n(You curse a lot and you do not appreciate your mate. I have never seen those who have shortcoming in mind and religion controlling those who have sound minds, other than you.)\nShe said, \"O Messenger of Allah! What is this shortcoming in mind and religion?\" He said,\nأَمَّا نُقْصَانُ عَقْلِهَا، فَشَهَادَةُ امْرَأَتَيْنِ تَعْدِلُ شَهَادَةَ رَجُلٍ، فَهَذَا نُقْصَانُ الْعَقْلِ، وَتَمْكُثُ اللَّيَالِي لَا تُصَلِّي وَتُفْطِرُ فِي رَمَضَانَ، فَهَذَا نُقْصَانُ الدِّينِ\n(As for the shortcoming in her mind, the testimony of two women equals the testimony of one man, and this is the shortcoming in the mind. As for the shortcoming in the religion, woman remains for nights at a time when she does not pray and breaks the fast in Ramadan.)\nAllah's statement,\nمِمَّن تَرْضَوْنَ مِنَ الشُّهَدَاءِ\n(such as you agree for witnesses) requires competency in the witnesses. Further, Allah's statement,\nأَن تَضِلَّ إِحْدَاهُمَا\n(so that if one of them errs) refers to the two women witnesses; whenever one of them forgets a part of the testimony,\nفَتُذَكِّرَ إِحْدَاهُمَا الْأُخْرَىٰ\n(the other can remind her) meaning, the other woman's testimony mends the shortcoming of forgetfulness in the first woman.\nAllah's statement,\nوَلَا يَأْبَ الشُّهَدَاءُ إِذَا مَا دُعُوا\n(And the witnesses should not refuse when they are called) means, when people are called to be witnesses, they should agree, as Qatadah and Ar-Rabi' bin Anas stated. Similarly, Allah said,\nوَلَا يَأْبَ كَاتِبٌ أَن يَكْتُبَ كَمَا عَلَّمَهُ اللَّهُ فَلْيَكْتُبْ\n(Let not the scribe refuse to write as Allah has taught him, so let him write.)\nSome say that this Ayah indicates that agreeing to become a witness is Fard Kifayah (required on at least a part of the Muslim Ummah). However, the majority of the scholars say that the Ayah,\nوَلَا يَأْبَ الشُّهَدَاءُ إِذَا مَا دُعُوا\n(And the witnesses should not refuse when they are called) is referring to testifying to what the witnesses actually witnessed, thus befitting their description of being 'witnesses'. Therefore, when the witness is called to testify to what he witnessed, he is required to give testimony, unless this obligation was already fulfilled, in which case such testimony becomes Fard Kifayah. Mujahid and Abu Mijlaz said, \"If you are called to be a witness, then you have the choice to agree. If you witnessed and were called to testify, then come forward.\" It was reported that Ibn 'Abbas and Al-Hasan Al-Basri said that the obligation includes both cases, agreeing to be a witness and testifying to what one witnessed.\nAllah's statement,\nوَلَا تَسْأَمُوا أَن تَكْتُبُوهُ صَغِيرًا أَوْ كَبِيرًا إِلَىٰ أَجَلِهِ\n(You should not become weary to write it (your contract), whether it be small or large, for its fixed term) perfects this direction from Allah by commanding that the debt be written, whether the amount is large or small. Allah said,\nوَلَا تَسْأَمُوا\n(You should not become weary) meaning, do not be discouraged against writing transactions and their terms, whether the amount involved is large or small. Allah's statement,\nذَٰلِكُمْ أَقْسَطُ عِندَ اللَّهِ وَأَقْوَمُ لِلشَّهَادَةِ وَأَدْنَىٰ أَلَّا تَرْتَابُوا\n(that is more just with Allah; more solid as evidence, and more convenient to prevent doubts among yourselves) means, writing transactions that will be fulfillled at a later date is more just with Allah meaning better and more convenient in order to preserve the terms of the contract. Therefore, recording such agreements helps the witnesses, when they see their handwriting - or signatures - later on and thus remember what they witnessed, for it is possible that the witnesses might forget what they witnessed.\nوَأَدْنَىٰ أَلَّا تَرْتَابُوا\n(And more convenient to prevent doubts among yourselves) meaning, this helps repel any doubt. Since if you need to refer to the contract that you wrote and the doubt will end.\nAllah's statement,\nإِلَّا أَن تَكُونَ تِجَارَةً حَاضِرَةً تُدِيرُونَهَا بَيْنَكُمْ فَلَيْسَ عَلَيْكُمْ جُنَاحٌ أَلَّا تَكْتُبُوهَا\n(save when it is a present trade which you carry out on the spot among yourselves, then there is no sin on you if you do not write it down) indicates that if the transaction will be fulfilled immediately, then there is no harm if it is not recorded.\nAs for requiring witnesses to be present in trading transactions, Allah said,\nوَأَشْهِدُوا إِذَا تَبَايَعْتُمْ\n(But take witnesses whenever you make a commercial contract.)\nHowever, this command was abrogated by,\nفَإِنْ أَمِنَ بَعْضُكُم بَعْضًا فَلْيُؤَدِّ الَّذِي اؤْتُمِنَ أَمَانَتَهُ\n(Then if one of you entrusts the other, let the one who is entrusted discharge his trust (faithfully).)\nOr, it could be that having witnesses in such cases is only recommended and not obligatory, as evident from the Hadith that Khuzaymah bin Thabit Al-Ansari narrated which Imam Ahmad collected. 'Umarah bin Khuzaymah Al-Ansari said that his uncle, who was among the Prophet's Companions, told him that the Prophet ﷺ was making a deal for a horse with a bedouin man. The Prophet ﷺ asked the bedouin to follow him so that he could pay him the price of the horse. The Prophet ﷺ went ahead of the bedouin. The bedouin met several men who tried to buy his horse, not knowing if the Prophet ﷺ was actually determined to buy it. Some people offered more money for the horse than the Prophet ﷺ had. The bedouin man said to the Prophet ﷺ, \"If you want to buy this horse, then buy it or I will sell it to someone else.\" When he heard the bedouin man's words, the Prophet ﷺ stood up and said, \"Have I not bought that horse from you?\" The bedouin said, \"By Allah! I have not sold it to you.\" The Prophet ﷺ said, \"Rather, I did buy it from you.\" The people gathered around the Prophet ﷺ and the Bedouin while they were disputing, and the bedouin said, \"Bring forth a witness who testifies that I sold you the horse.\" Meanwhile, the Muslims who came said to the bedouin, \"Woe to you! The Prophet only says the truth.\" When Khuzaymah bin Thabit came and heard the dispute between the Prophet ﷺ and the bedouin who was saying, \"Bring forth a witness who testifies that I sold you the horse, \" Khuzaymah said, \"I bear witness that you sold him the horse.\" The Prophet ﷺ said to Khuzaymah, \"What is the basis of your testimony?\" Khuzaymah said, \"That I entrusted you, O Messenger of Allah!\" Therefore, the Messenger ﷺ made Khuzaymah's testimony equal to the testimony of two men. This was also recorded by Abu Dawud and An-Nasa. Allah's statement,\nوَلَا يُضَارَّ كَاتِبٌ وَلَا شَهِيدٌ\n(Let neither scribe nor witness suffer (or cause) any harm) also indicates that the scribe and the witness must not cause any harm, such as, when the scribe writes other than what he is being dictated, or the witness testifies to other than what he heard or conceals his testimony. This is the explanation of Al-Hasan and Qatadah.\"\nAllah's statement,\nوَإِن تَفْعَلُوا فَإِنَّهُ فُسُوقٌ بِكُمْ\n(But if you do (such harm), it would be wickedness in you) means, \"If you defy what you were commanded and commit what you were prohibited, then it is because of the sin that resides and remains with you; sin that you never release or rid yourselves from.\"\nAllah's statement,\nوَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ\n(So have Taqwa of Allah) means, fear Him, remember His watch over you, implement His command and avoid what He prohibited,\nوَيُعَلِّمُكُمُ اللَّهُ\n(And Allah teaches you.) Similarly, Allah said,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِن تَتَّقُوا اللَّهَ يَجْعَل لَّكُمْ فُرْقَانًا\n(O you who believe! If you have Taqwa of Allah, He will grant you Furqan [(a criterion to judge between right and wrong)))[8:29], and,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَآمِنُوا بِرَسُولِهِ يُؤْتِكُمْ كِفْلَيْنِ مِن رَّحْمَتِهِ وَيَجْعَل لَّكُمْ نُورًا تَمْشُونَ بِهِ\n(O you who believe! Have Taqwa of Allah, and believe in His Messenger, He will give you a double portion of His mercy, and He will give you a light by which you shall walk (straight))[57:28].\nAllah said;\nوَاللَّهُ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ عَلِيمٌ\n(And Allah is the All-Knower of everything) stating that Allah has perfect knowledge in all matters and in their benefits or repercussions, and nothing escapes His perfect watch, for His knowledge encompasses everything in existence.","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=282","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:283","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:283","text":"And if you are on a journey and cannot find a scribe, then let there be a pledge taken (mortgaging), then if one of you entrusts the other, let the one who is entrusted discharge his trust, and let him have Taqwa of Allah, his Lord. And conceal not the evidence, for he who hides it, surely, his heart is sinful. And Allah is All-Knower of what you do (283)\n\n## What is the 'Mortgaging' Mentioned in the Ayah?\n\nAllah said,\nوَإِن كُنتُمْ عَلَىٰ سَفَرٍ\n(And if you are on a journey) meaning, traveling and some of you borrowed some money to be paid at a later date,\nوَلَمْ تَجِدُوا كَاتِبًا\n(and cannot find a scribe) who would record the debt for you. Ibn 'Abbas said, \"And even if they find a scribe, but did not find paper, ink or pen.\" Then,\nفَرِهَانٌ مَّقْبُوضَةٌ\n(let there be a pledge taken (mortgaging)) given to the creditor in lieu of writing the transaction. The Two Sahihs recorded that Anas said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ died while his shield was mortgaged with a Jew in return for thirty Wasq (approximately 180 kg) of barley, which the Prophet bought on credit as provisions for his household. In another narration, the Hadith stated that this Jew was among the Jews of Al-Madinah.\nAllah said,\nفَإِنْ أَمِنَ بَعْضُكُم بَعْضًا فَلْيُؤَدِّ الَّذِي اؤْتُمِنَ أَمَانَتَهُ\n(then if one of you entrusts the other, let the one who is entrusted discharge his trust (faithfully).)\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded, with a sound chain of narration, that Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri said, \"This Ayah abrogated what came before it (i.e. that which required recording the transaction and having witnesses present).\" Ash-Sha'bi said, \"If you trust each other, then there is no harm if you do not write the loan or have witnesses present.\" Allah's statement,\nوَلْيَتَّقِ اللَّهَ رَبَّهُ\n(And let him have Taqwa of Allah) means, the debtor.\nImam Ahmad and the Sunan recorded that Qatadah said that Al-Hasan said that Samurah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nعَلَى الْيَدِ مَا أَخَذَتْ، حَتَّى تُؤَدِّيَهُ\n(The hand (of the debtor) will carry the burden of what it took until it gives it back.)\nAllah's statement,\nوَلَا تَكْتُمُوا الشَّهَادَةَ\n(And conceal not the evidence) means, do not hide it or refuse to announce it. Ibn 'Abbas and other scholars said, \"False testimony is one of the worst of the major sins, and such is the case with hiding the true testimony. This is why Allah said,\nوَمَن يَكْتُمْهَا فَإِنَّهُ آثِمٌ قَلْبُهُ\n(For he who hides it, surely, his heart is sinful).\nAs-Suddi commented, \"Meaning he is a sinner in his heart.\"\nThis is similar to Allah's statement,\nوَلَا نَكْتُمُ شَهَادَةَ اللَّهِ إِنَّا إِذًا لَّمِنَ الْآثِمِينَ\n(We shall not hide testimony of Allah, for then indeed we should be of the sinful)[5:106].\nAllah said,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا كُونُوا قَوَّامِينَ بِالْقِسْطِ شُهَدَاءَ لِلَّهِ وَلَوْ عَلَىٰ أَنفُسِكُمْ أَوِ الْوَالِدَيْنِ وَالْأَقْرَبِينَ إِن يَكُنْ غَنِيًّا أَوْ فَقِيرًا فَاللَّهُ أَوْلَىٰ بِهِمَا فَلَا تَتَّبِعُوا الْهَوَىٰ أَن تَعْدِلُوا وَإِن تَلْوُوا أَوْ تُعْرِضُوا فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ كَانَ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ خَبِيرًا\n(O you who believe! Stand out firmly for justice, as witnesses to Allah, even though it be against yourselves, or your parents, or your kin, be he rich or poor, Allah is a better Protector to both (than you). So follow not the lusts (of your hearts), lest you avoid justice; and if you distort your witness or refuse to give it, verily, Allah is Ever Well-Acquainted with what you do)[4:135] and in this Ayah [2:283] He said,\nوَلَا تَكْتُمُوا الشَّهَادَةَ وَمَن يَكْتُمْهَا فَإِنَّهُ آثِمٌ قَلْبُهُ وَاللَّهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ عَلِيمٌ\n(And conceal not the evidence, for he who hides it, surely, his heart is sinful. And Allah is All-Knower of what you do.)","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=283","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:284","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:284","text":"To Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is on the earth, and whether you disclose what is in yourselves or conceal it, Allah will call you to account for it. Then He forgives whom He wills and punishes whom He wills. And Allah is able to do all things (284)\n\n## Would the Servants be Accountable for What They Conceal in Their Hearts?\n\nAllah states that His is the kingship of the heavens and earth and of what and whoever is on or between them, that He has perfect watch over them. No apparent matter or secret that the heart conceals is ever a secret to Him, however minor it is. Allah also states that He will hold His servants accountable for what they do and what they conceal in their hearts. In similar statements, Allah said,\nقُلْ إِن تُخْفُوا مَا فِي صُدُورِكُمْ أَوْ تُبْدُوهُ يَعْلَمْهُ اللَّهُ وَيَعْلَمُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ وَاللَّهُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ\n(Say (O Muhammad ﷺ): \"Whether you hide what is in your breasts or reveal it, Allah knows it, and He knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth. And Allah is able to do all things)[3:29], and,\nيَعْلَمُ السِّرَّ وَأَخْفَى\n(He knows the secret and that which is yet more hidden.)[20:7]\nThere are many other Ayat on this subject. In this Ayah [2:284], Allah states that He has knowledge of what the hearts conceal, and consequently, He will hold the creation accountable for whatever is in their hearts. This is why when this Ayah was revealed, it was hard on the Companions, since out of their strong faith and conviction, they were afraid that such reckoning would diminish their good deeds.\nImam Ahmad recorded that Abu Hurayrah said, \"When\nلِّلَّهِ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ وَإِن تُبْدُوا مَا فِي أَنفُسِكُمْ أَوْ تُخْفُوهُ يُحَاسِبْكُم بِهِ اللَّهُ فَيَغْفِرُ لِمَن يَشَاءُ وَيُعَذِّبُ مَن يَشَاءُ وَاللَّهُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ\n(To Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is on the earth, and whether you disclose what is in yourselves or conceal it, Allah will call you to account for it. Then He forgives whom He wills and punishes whom He wills. And Allah is able to do all things)\nwas revealed to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ, it was very hard for the Companions of the Messenger ﷺ. The Companions came to the Messenger and fell to their knees saying, 'O Messenger of Allah! We were asked to perform what we can bear of deeds: the prayer, the fast, Jihad and charity. However, this Ayah was revealed to you, and we cannot bear it.' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nأَتُرِيدُونَ أَنْ تَقُولُوا كَما قَالَ أَهْلُ الْكِتَابَيْنِ مِنْ قَبْلِكُمْ: سَمِعْنَا وَعَصَيْنَا؟ بَلْ قُولُوا: سَمِعْنَا وَأَطَعْنَا غُفْرَانَكَ رَبَّنَا وَإِلَيْكَ الْمَصِيرُ\n(Do you want to repeat what the People of the Two Scriptures before you said, that is, 'We hear and we disobey?' Rather, say, 'We hear and we obey, and we seek Your forgiveness, O our Lord, and the Return is to You.)\nWhen the people accepted this statement and their tongues recited it, Allah sent down afterwards,\nآمَنَ الرَّسُولُ بِمَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْهِ مِن رَّبِّهِ وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ كُلٌّ آمَنَ بِاللَّهِ وَمَلَائِكَتِهِ وَكُتُبِهِ وَرُسُلِهِ لَا نُفَرِّقُ بَيْنَ أَحَدٍ مِّن رُّسُلِهِ وَقَالُوا سَمِعْنَا وَأَطَعْنَا غُفْرَانَكَ رَبَّنَا وَإِلَيْكَ الْمَصِيرُ\n(The Messenger believes in what has been sent down to him from his Lord, and (so do)the believers. Each one believes in Allah, His Angels, His Books, and His Messengers. (They say,) \"We make no distinction between one another of His Messengers ـ and they say, \"We hear, and we obey. (We seek) Your forgiveness, our Lord, and to You is the return (of all).\")\nWhen they did that, Allah abrogated the Ayah [2:284] and sent down the Ayah,\nلَا يُكَلِّفُ اللَّهُ نَفْسًا إِلَّا وُسْعَهَا لَهَا مَا كَسَبَتْ وَعَلَيْهَا مَا اكْتَسَبَتْ رَبَّنَا لَا تُؤَاخِذْنَا إِن نَّسِينَا أَوْ أَخْطَأْنَا\n(Allah burdens not a person beyond his scope. He gets reward for that (good) which he has earned, and he is punished for that (evil) which he has earned. \"Our Lord! Punish us not if we forget or fall into error.\") until the end.\"\nMuslim recorded it with the wording; \"When they did that, Allah abrogated it [2:284] and sent down,\nلَا يُكَلِّفُ اللَّهُ نَفْسًا إِلَّا وُسْعَهَا لَهَا مَا كَسَبَتْ وَعَلَيْهَا مَا اكْتَسَبَتْ رَبَّنَا لَا تُؤَاخِذْنَا إِن نَّسِينَا أَوْ أَخْطَأْنَا\n(Allah burdens not a person beyond his scope. He gets reward for that (good) which he has earned, and he is punished for that (evil) which he has earned. \"Our Lord! Punish us not if we forget or fall into error\".)\nAllah said, 'I shall (accept your supplication),'\nرَبَّنَا وَلَا تَحْمِلْ عَلَيْنَا إِصْرًا كَمَا حَمَلْتَهُ عَلَى الَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِنَا\n(\"Our Lord! Lay not on us a burden like that which You did lay on those before us (Jews and Christians)\")\nAllah said, 'I shall (accept your supplication),'\nرَبَّنَا وَلاَ تُحَمِّلْنَا مَا لاَ طَاقَةَ لَنَا بِهِ\n(\"Our Lord! Put not on us a burden greater than we have strength to bear.\")\nAllah said, 'I shall (accept your supplication),'\nوَاعْفُ عَنَّا وَاغْفِرْ لَنَا وَارْحَمْنَا أَنتَ مَوْلَانَا فَانصُرْنَا عَلَى الْقَوْمِ الْكَافِرِينَ\n(\"Pardon us and grant us forgiveness. Have mercy on us. You are our Mawla (Supporter and Protector) and give us victory over the disbelieving people.\")\nAllah said, 'I shall.'\"\nImam Ahmad recorded that Mujahid said, \"I saw Ibn 'Abbas and said to him, 'O Abu Abbas! I was with Ibn 'Umar, and he read this Ayah and cried.' He asked, 'Which Ayah?' I said,\nوَإِن تُبْدُواْ مَا فِي أَنفُسِكُمْ أَوْ تُخْفُوهُ\n(And whether you disclose what is in yourselves or conceal it.)'\nIbn 'Abbas said, 'When this Ayah was revealed, it was very hard on the Companions of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and worried them tremendously. They said: O Messenger of Allah! We know that we would be punished according to our statements and our actions, but as for what occurs in our hearts, we do not control what is in them.' The Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nقُولُوا: سَمِعْنَا وَأَطَعْنَا\n(Say, 'We hear and we obey.') They said, 'We hear and we obey.' Thereafter, this Ayah abrogated the previous Ayah,\nآمَنَ الرَّسُولُ بِمَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْهِ مِن رَّبِّهِ وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ كُلٌّ آمَنَ بِاللَّهِ\n(The Messenger believes in what has been sent down to him from his Lord, and (so do) the believers. Each one believes in Allah), until,\nلَا يُكَلِّفُ اللَّهُ نَفْسًا إِلَّا وُسْعَهَا لَهَا مَا كَسَبَتْ وَعَلَيْهَا مَا اكْتَسَبَتْ\n(Allah burdens not a person beyond his scope. He gets reward for that (good) which he has earned, and he is punished for that (evil) which he has earned.)\nTherefore, they were pardoned what happens in their hearts, and were held accountable only for their actions.\"\nThe Group recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ اللهَ تَجَاوَزَ لِي عَنْ أُمَّتِي مَا حَدَّثَتْ بِهِ أَنْفُسَهَا مَالَمْ تَكَلَّمْ أَوْ تَعْمَل\n(Allah has pardoned my Ummah for what they say to themselves, as long as they do not utter it or act on it.)\nThe Two Sahihs recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nقَالَ اللهُ: إِذَا هَمَّ عَبْدِي بِسَيِّئَةٍ فَلَا تَكْتُبُوهَا عَلَيهِ، فَإِنْ عَمِلَهَا فَاكْتُبُوهَا سَيِّئَةً، وَإِذَا هَمَّ بِحَسَنَةٍ فَلَمْ يَعْمَلْهَا فَاكْتُبُوهَ حَسَنَةً، فَإِنْ عَمِلَهَا فَاكْتُبُوهَا عَشْرًا\n(Allah said (to His angels), \"If My servant intends to commit an evil deed, do not record it as such for him, and if he commits it, write it for him as one evil deed. If he intends to perform a good deed, but did not perform it, then write it for him as one good deed, and if he performs it, write it for him as ten good deeds.\")","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=284","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:2:285","title":"Ibn Kathir · 2:285–286","text":"The Messenger believes in what has been sent down to him from his Lord, and (so do) the believers. Each one believes in Allah, His Angels, His Books, and His Messengers. (They say,) \"We make no distinction between one another of His Messengers ـ and they say, \"We hear, and we obey. (We seek) Your forgiveness, our Lord, and to You is the return (of all). (285)Allah burdens not a person beyond his scope. He gets reward for that (good) which he has earned, and he is punished for that (evil) which he has earned. \"Our Lord! Punish us not if we forget or fall into error, our Lord! Lay not on us a burden like that which You did lay on those before us (Jews and Christians); our Lord! Put not on us a burden greater than we have strength to bear. Pardon us and grant us forgiveness. Have mercy on us. You are our Mawla (Patron, Supporter and Protector) and give us victory over the disbelieving people. (286)\nThe Hadiths on the Virtue of These Two Ayat, May Allah Benefit Us by Them\nAl-Bukhari recorded that Abu Mas'ud said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَنْ قَرَأَ بِالْآيَتَيْنِ مِنْ آخِرِ سُورَةِ الْبَقَرَةِ فِي لَيْلَةٍ، كَفَتَاهُ\n(Whoever recites the last two Ayat in Surat Al-Baqarah at night, they will suffice for him.)\nThe rest of the six also recorded similar wording for this Hadith. The Two Sahihs recorded this Hadith using various chains of narration, and Imam Ahmad also recorded it.\nMuslim recorded that 'Abdullah said, \"When the Messenger of Allah ﷺ went on the Isra journey, he ascended to the Sidrat Al-Muntaha in the sixth heaven, where whatever ascends from the earth ends at, and whatever descends from above it ends at.\nإِذْ يَغْشَى السِّدْرَةَ مَا يَغْشَىٰ\n(When that covered the lote tree which did cover it!)[53:16] meaning, a mat made of gold.\nThe Messenger of Allah ﷺ was then given three things: the five prayers, the last Ayat in Surat Al-Baqarah and forgiveness for whoever did not associate anything or anyone with Allah from his Ummah.\"\nEarlier we mentioned the Hadith regarding the virtues of Surat Al-Fatihah from Ibn 'Abbas which stated, \"While the Messenger of Allah ﷺ was with Jibil, he heard a noise from above. Jibil lifted his sight to the sky and said, 'This is a door that was opened just now in heaven, and it was never opened before.' An angel came down through the door to the Prophet ﷺ and said, 'Receive the good news of two lights that you have been given and which no Prophet before you was given: the Opener of the Book (Al-Fatihah) and the last Ayat in Surat Al-Baqarah. You will not read a letter of them, but you will be granted its benefit.'\" This Hadith was collected by Muslim and An-Nasa'i, and this is the wording collected by An-Nasa'i.\n\n## The Tafsir of the Last Two Ayat of Surat Al-Baqarah\n\nAllah said,\nكُلٌّ آمَنَ بِاللَّهِ وَمَلَائِكَتِهِ وَكُتُبِهِ وَرُسُلِهِ لَا نُفَرِّقُ بَيْنَ أَحَدٍ مِّن رُّسُلِهِ\n(Each one believes in Allah, His Angels, His Books, and His Messengers. (They say,) \"We make no distinction between one another of His Messengers.\")\nTherefore, each of the believers believes that Allah is the One and Only and the Sustainer, there is no deity worthy of worship except Him and there is no Lord except Him. The believers also believe in all Allah's Prophets and Messengers, in the Books that were revealed from heaven to the Messengers and Prophets, who are indeed the servants of Allah. Further, the believers do not differentiate between any of the Prophets, such as, believing in some of them and rejecting others. Rather, all of Allah's Prophets and Messengers are, to the believers, truthful, righteous, and they were each guided to the path of righteousness, even when some of them bring what abrogates the Law of some others by Allah's leave. Later on, the Law of Muhammad, the Final Prophet and Messenger from Allah, abrogated all the laws of the Prophets before him. So the Last Hour will commence while Muhammad's Law remains the only valid Law, and all the while a group of his Ummah will always be on the path of truth, apparent and dominant. Allah's statement,\nوَقَالُوا سَمِعْنَا وَأَطَعْنَا\n(And they say, \"We hear, and we obey\") means, we heard Your statement, O our Lord, comprehended and implemented it, and adhered to its implications.\nغُفْرَانَكَ رَبَّنَا\n((We seek) Your forgiveness, our Lord) contains a plea and supplication for Allah's forgiveness, mercy and kindness.\nAllah's statement,\nلَا يُكَلِّفُ اللَّهُ نَفْسًا إِلَّا وُسْعَهَا\n(Allah burdens not a person beyond his scope) means, Allah does not ask a soul what is beyond its ability. This only demonstrates Allah's kindness, compassion and generosity towards His creation. This Ayah is the Ayah that abrogated the Ayah that worried the Companions, that is, Allah's statement,\nوَإِن تُبْدُوا مَا فِي أَنفُسِكُمْ أَوْ تُخْفُوهُ يُحَاسِبْكُم بِهِ اللَّهُ\n(And whether you disclose what is in yourselves or conceal it, Allah will call you to account for it.)[2:284]\nThis indicates that although Allah will question His servants and judge them, He will only punish for what one is able to protect himself from. As for what one cannot protect himself from, such as what one says to himself - or passing thoughts - they will not be punished for that. We should state here that to dislike the evil thoughts that cross one's mind is a part of faith. Allah said next,\nلَهَا مَا كَسَبَتْ\n(He gets reward for that which he has earned) of good,\nوَعَلَيْهَا مَا اكْتَسَبَتْ\n(And he is punished for that which he has earned) of evil, that is, concerning the acts that one is responsible for.\nAllah then said, [mentioning what the believers said] while directing His servants to supplicate to Him, all the while promising them that He will answer their supplication:\nرَبَّنَا لَا تُؤَاخِذْنَا إِن نَّسِينَا أَوْ أَخْطَأْنَا\n(\"Our Lord! Push us not if we forget or fall into error,\") meaning, \"If we forgot an obligation or fell into a prohibition, or made an error while ignorant of its ruling.\" We mentioned the Hadith by Abu Hurayrah, that Muslim collected, wherein Allah said, \"I shall (accept your supplication).\" There is also the Hadith by Ibn 'Abbas that Allah said, \"I did (accept your supplication).\"\nرَبَّنَا وَلَا تَحْمِلْ عَلَيْنَا إِصْرًا كَمَا حَمَلْتَهُ عَلَى الَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِنَا\n(Our Lord! Lay not on us a burden like that which You did lay on those before us (Jews and Christians),) means, \"Even if we were able to perform them, do not require us to perform the difficult deeds as You required the previous nations before us, such as the burdens that were placed on them. You sent Your Prophet Muhammad ﷺ, the Prophet of mercy, to abrogate these burdens through the Law that You revealed to him, the Hanifi (Islamic Monotheism), easy religion.\" Muslim recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said that Allah said, \"I shall (accept your supplication).\" Ibn 'Abbas narrated that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said that Allah said, \"I did (accept your supplication).\" There is the Hadith recorded through various chains of narration that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nبُعِثْتُ بِالْحَنِيفِيَّةِ السَّمْحَةِ\n(I was sent with the easy Hanifiyyah way.)\nرَبَّنَا وَلَا تُحَمِّلْنَا مَا لَا طَاقَةَ لَنَا بِهِ\n(Our Lord! Put not on us a burden greater than we have strength to bear) of obligations, hardships and afflictions, do not make us bear what we cannot bear of this.\nرَبَّنَا وَلَا تُحَمِّلْنَا مَا لَا طَاقَةَ لَنَا بِهِ\n(Our Lord! Put not on us a burden greater than we have strength to bear.)\nWe mentioned that Allah said, \"I shall (accept your supplication)\" in one narration, and, \"I did (accept your supplication),\" in another narration.\nوَاعْفُ عَنَّا\n(Pardon us) meaning, between us and You regarding what You know of our shortcomings and errors.\nوَاغْفِرْ لَنَا\n(And grant us forgiveness) concerning what is between us and Your servants. So do not expose our errors and evil deeds to them.\nوَارْحَمْنَا\n(Have mercy on us) in what will come thereafter. Therefore, do not allow us to fall into another error. They say that those who commit error need three things: Allah's forgiveness for what is between Him and them, that He conceals these errors from His other servants, and thus does not expose them before the servants, and that He grants them immunity from further error.\" We mentioned before that Allah answered these pleas, \"I shall,\" in one narration and, \"I did,\" in another narration.\nأَنتَ مَوْلَانَا\n(You are our Mawla) meaning, You are our supporter and helper, our trust is in You, You are sought for each and every type of help and our total reliance is on You. There is no power or strength except from You.\nفَانصُرْنَا عَلَى الْقَوْمِ الْكَافِرِينَ\n(And give us victory over the disbelieving people) those who rejected Your religion, denied Your Oneness, refused the Message of Your Prophet ﷺ, worshipped other than You and associated others in Your worship. Give us victory and make us prevail above them in this and the Hereafter. Allah said, \"I shall,\" in one narration, and, \"I did,\" in the Hadith that Muslim collected from Ibn 'Abbas.\nFurther, Ibn Jarir recorded that Abu Ishaq said that whenever Mu'adh would finish reciting this Surah,\nفَانصُرْنَا عَلَى الْقَوْمِ الْكَافِرِينَ\n(And give us victory over the disbelieving people), he would say \"Amin.\"","href":"/tafsir/2?verse=285","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:3:1","title":"Ibn Kathir · 3:1–4","text":"## The Tafsir of Surah Āl 'Imrān\n\n## (Chapter 3)\n\nSurah Āl-'Imrān was revealed in Al-Madinah, as evident by the fact that the first eighty-three Ayat in it relate to the delegation from Najran that arrived in Al-Madinah on the ninth year of Hijrah (632 CE). We will elaborate on this subject when we explain the Ayah about the Mubahalah [3:61] in this Surah, Allah willing. We should also state that we mentioned the virtues of Surah Āl-'Imrān along with the virtues of Surat Al-Baqarah in the beginning of the Tafsir of Surat Al-Baqarah.\nبِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ\nالم - اللَّهُ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ الْحَيُّ الْقَيُّومُ - نَزَّلَ عَلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ بِالْحَقِّ مُصَدِّقًا لِّمَا بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ وَأَنزَلَ التَّوْرَاةَ وَالْإِنجِيلَ - مِن قَبْلُ هُدًى لِّلنَّاسِ وَأَنزَلَ الْفُرْقَانَ إِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِآيَاتِ اللَّهِ لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ شَدِيدٌ وَاللَّهُ عَزِيزٌ ذُو انتِقَامٍ\n(In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful)(1. Alif-Lam-Mim.)(2. Allah! None has the right to be worshipped but He, the Ever Living, the One Who sustains and protects all that exists.)(3. It is He Who has sent down the Book to you with truth, confirming what came before it. And He sent down the Tawrah and the Injil,)(4. Aforetime, as a guidance to mankind. And He sent down the criterion. Truly, those who disbelieve in the Ayat of Allah, for them there is a severe torment; and Allah is All-Mighty, All-Able of Retribution.)\nWe mentioned the Hadith in the Tafsir of Ayat Al-Kursi [2:255] that mentions that Allah's Greatest Name is contained in these two Ayat,\nاللَّهُ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ الْحَيُّ الْقَيُّومُ\n(Allah! None has the right to be worshipped but He, the Ever Living, the One Who sustains and protects all that exists) and,\nالم - اللَّهُ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ الْحَيُّ الْقَيُّومُ\n(Alif-Lam-Mim. Allah! None has the right to be worshipped but He, the Ever Living, the One Who sustains and protects all that exists.)\nWe also explained the Tafsir of,\nالم\n(Alif-Lam-Mim) in the beginning of Surat Al-Baqarah, and the meaning of,\nاللَّهُ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ الْحَيُّ الْقَيُّومُ\n(Allah! La ilaha illa Huwa, Al-Hayyul-Qayyum) in the Tafsir of Ayat Al-Kursi. Allah's statement,\nنَزَّلَ عَلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ بِالْحَقِّ\n(It is He Who has sent down the Book to you with truth,) means, revealed the Qur'an to you, O Muhammad, in truth, meaning there is no doubt or suspicion that it is revealed from Allah. Verily, Allah revealed the Qur'an with His knowledge, and the angels testify to this fact, Allah is sufficient as a Witness. Allah's statement,\nمُصَدِّقًا لِّمَا بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ\n(Confirming what came before it) means, from the previous divinely revealed Books, sent to the servants and Prophets of Allah. These Books testify to the truth of the Qur'an, and the Qur'an also testifies to the truth these Books contained, including the news and glad tidings of Muhammad's prophethood and the revelation of the Glorious Qur'an.\nAllah said,\nوَأَنزَلَ التَّوْرَاةَ\n(And He sent down the Tawrah) to Musa (Musa) son of 'Imran,\nوَالْإِنجِيلَ\n(And the Injil), to 'Isa, son of Mary,\nمِن قَبْلُ\n(Aforetime) meaning, before the Qur'an was revealed,\nهُدًى لِّلنَّاسِ\n(As a guidance to mankind) in their time.\nوَأَنزَلَ الْفُرْقَانَ\n(And He sent down the criterion) which is the distinction between misguidance, falsehood and deviation on one hand, and guidance, truth and piety on the other hand. This is because of the indications, signs, plain evidences and clear proofs that it contains, and because of its explanations, clarifications, etc.\nAllah's statement,\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِآيَاتِ اللَّهِ\n(Truly, those who disbelieve in the Ayat of Allah) means they denied, refused and unjustly rejected them,\nلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ شَدِيدٌ\n(For them there is a severe torment) on the Day of Resurrection,\nوَاللَّهُ عَزِيزٌ\n(And Allah is All-Mighty) meaning, His grandeur is invincible and His sovereignty is infinite,\nذُو انتِقَامٍ\n(All-Able of Retribution.) from those who reject His Ayat and defy His honorable Messengers and great Prophets.","href":"/tafsir/3?verse=1","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:3:5","title":"Ibn Kathir · 3:5–6","text":"Truly, nothing is hidden from Allah, in the earth or in the heaven (5)He it is Who shapes you in the wombs as He wills. None has the right to be worshipped but He, the Almighty, the All-Wise (6)\nAllah states that He has perfect knowledge in the heavens and earth and that nothing in them is hidden from His watch.\nهُوَ الَّذِي يُصَوِّرُكُمْ فِي الْأَرْحَامِ كَيْفَ يَشَاءُ\n(He it is Who shapes you in the wombs as He wills.) meaning, He creates you in the wombs as He wills, whether male or female, handsome or otherwise, happy or miserable.\nلَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ\n(La ilaha illa Huwa (none has the right to be worshipped but He), the Almighty, the All-Wise.) meaning, He is the Creator and thus is the only deity worthy of worship, without partners, and His is the perfect might, wisdom and decision. This Ayah refers to the fact that 'Isa, son of Mary, is a created servant, just as Allah created the rest of mankind. Allah created 'Isa in the womb (of his mother) and shaped him as He willed. Therefore, how could 'Isa be divine, as the Christians, may Allah's curses descend on them, claim? 'Isa was created in the womb and his creation changed from stage to stage, just as Allah said,\nيَخْلُقُكُمْ فِي بُطُونِ أُمَّهَاتِكُمْ خَلْقًا مِّن بَعْدِ خَلْقٍ فِي ظُلُمَاتٍ ثَلَاثٍ\n(He creates you in the wombs of your mothers, creation after creation in three veils of darkness.)[39:6].","href":"/tafsir/3?verse=5","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:3:7","title":"Ibn Kathir · 3:7–9","text":"It is He Who has sent down to you the Book. In it are verses that are entirely clear, they are the foundations of the Book; and others not entirely clear. So as for those in whose hearts there is a deviation (from the truth) they follow (only) that which is not entirely clear thereof, seeking Al-Fitnah, and seeking its Ta'wil, but none knows its Ta'wil except Allah. And those who are firmly grounded in knowledge say: \"We believe in it; all of it is from our Lord.\" And none receive admonition except men of understanding (7)(They say): \"Our Lord! Let not our hearts deviate (from the truth) after You have guided us, and grant us mercy from You. Truly, You are the Bestower. (8)\"Our Lord! Verily, it is You Who will gather mankind together on the Day about which there is no doubt. Verily, Allah never breaks His Promise. (9)\n\n## The Mutashabihat and Muhkamat Ayat\n\nAllah states that in the Qur'an, there are Ayat that are Muhkamat, entirely clear and plain, and these are the foundations of the Book which are plain for everyone. And there are Ayat in the Qur'an that are Mutashabihat not entirely clear for many, or some people. So those who refer to the Muhkam Ayat to understand the Mutashabih Ayat, will have acquired the correct guidance, and vice versa. This is why Allah said,\nهُنَّ أُمُّ الْكِتَابِ\n(They are the foundations of the Book), meaning, they are the basis of the Qur'an, and should be referred to for clarification, when warranted,\nوَأُخَرُ مُتَشَابِهَاتٌ\n(And others not entirely clear) as they have several meanings, some that agree with the Muhkam and some that carry other literal indications, although these meaning might not be desired.\nThe Muhkamat are the Ayat that explain the abrogating rulings, the allowed, prohibited, laws, limits, obligations and rulings that should be believed in and implemented. As for the Mutashabihat Ayat, they include the abrogated Ayat, parables, oaths, and what should be believed in, but not implemented.\nMuhammad bin Ishaq bin Yasar commented on,\nمِنْهُ آيَاتٌ مُّحْكَمَاتٌ\n(In it are verses that are entirely clear) as \"Containing proof of the Lord, immunity for the servants and a refutation of opponents and of falsehood. They cannot be changed or altered from what they were meant for.\" He also said, \"As for the unclear Ayat, they can (but must not) be altered and changed, and this is a test from Allah to the servants, just as He tested them with the allowed and prohibited things. So these Ayat must not be altered to imply a false meaning or be distorted from the truth.\"\nTherefore, Allah said,\nفَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ زَيْغٌ\n(So as for those in whose hearts there is a deviation) meaning, those who are misguided and deviate from truth to falsehood,\nفَيَتَّبِعُونَ مَا تَشَابَهَ مِنْهُ\n(they follow that which is not entirely clear thereof) meaning, they refer to the Mutashabih, because they are able to alter its meanings to conform with their false interpretation since the wordings of the Mutashabihat encompass such a wide area of meanings. As for the Muhkam Ayat, they cannot be altered because they are clear and, thus, constitute unequivocal proof against the misguided people. This is why Allah said,\nابْتِغَاءَ الْفِتْنَةِ\n(seeking Al-Fitnah) meaning, they seek to misguide their following by pretending to prove their innovation by relying on the Qur'an – the Mutashabih of it – but, this is proof against and not for them. For instance, Christians might claim that ('Isa is divine because) the Qur'an states that he is Ruhullah and His Word, which He gave to Mary, all the while ignoring Allah's statements,\nإِنْ هُوَ إِلَّا عَبْدٌ أَنْعَمْنَا عَلَيْهِ\n(He ['Isa] was not more than a servant. We granted Our favor to him.)[43:59], and,\nإِنَّ مَثَلَ عِيسَىٰ عِندَ اللَّهِ كَمَثَلِ آدَمَ خَلَقَهُ مِن تُرَابٍ ثُمَّ قَالَ لَهُ كُن فَيَكُونُ\n(Verily, the likeness of 'Isa before Allah is the likeness of Adam. He created him from dust, then (He) said to him: \"Be!\" and he was.)[3:59].\nThere are other Ayat that clearly assert that 'Isa is but one of Allah's creatures and that he is the servant and Messenger of Allah, among other Messengers.\nAllah's statement,\nوَابْتِغَاءَ تَأْوِيلِهِ\n(And seeking for its Ta'wil,) to alter them as they desire. Imam Ahmad recorded that 'A'ishah said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ recited,\nهُوَ الَّذِي أَنزَلَ عَلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ مِنْهُ آيَاتٌ مُّحْكَمَاتٌ هُنَّ أُمُّ الْكِتَابِ وَأُخَرُ مُتَشَابِهَاتٌ\n(It is He Who has sent down to you the Book. In it are verses that are entirely clear, they are the foundations of the Book; and others not entirely clear,), until,\nأُولُو الْأَلْبَابِ\n(Men of understanding) and he said,\nفَإِذَا رَأَيْتُمُ الَّذِين يُجَادِلُونَ فِيهِ، فَهُمُ الَّذِينَ عَنَى اللهُ، فَاحْذَرُوهُم\n(When you see those who argue in it (using the Mutashabihat), then they are those whom Allah meant. Therefore, beware of them.)\"\nAl-Bukhari recorded a similar Hadith in the Tafsir of this Ayah [3:7], as did Muslim in the book of Qadar (the Divine Will) in his Sahih, and Abu Dawud in the Sunnah section of his Sunan, from 'A'ishah; \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ recited this Ayah,\nهُوَ الَّذِي أَنزَلَ عَلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ مِنْهُ آيَاتٌ مُّحْكَمَاتٌ\n(It is He Who has sent down to you the Book. In it are verses that are entirely clear,) until,\nوَمَا يَذَّكَّرُ إِلَّا أُولُو الْأَلْبَابِ\n(And none receive admonition except men of understanding.)\nHe then said,\nفَإِذَا رَأَيْتِ الَّذِينَ يَتَّبِعُونَ مَا تَشَابَهَ مِنْهُ فَأُولئِكَ الَّذِينَ سَمَّى اللهُ فَاحْذَرُوهُم\n(When you see those who follow what is not so clear of the Qur'an, then they are those whom Allah described, so beware of them.)\"\nThis is the wording recorded by Al-Bukhari.\n\n## Only Allah Knows the True Ta'wil (Interpretation) of the Mutashabihat\n\nAllah said,\nوَمَا يَعْلَمُ تَأْوِيلَهُ إِلَّا اللَّهُ\n(But none knows its Ta'wil except Allah.)\nSimilarly, as preceded in what has been reported from Ibn 'Abbas, \"Tafsir is of four types: Tafsir that the Arabs know in their language; Tafsir that no one is excused of being ignorant of; Tafsir that the scholars know; and Tafsir that only Allah knows.\" Scholars of Qur'an recitation have different opinions about pausing at Allah's Name in this Ayah. This stop was reported from 'A'ishah, 'Urwah, Abu Ash-Sha'tha' and Abu Nahik.\nSome pause after reciting,\nوَالرَّاسِخُونَ فِي الْعِلْمِ\n(And those who are firmly grounded in knowledge) saying that the Qur'an does not address the people with what they cannot understand. Ibn Abi Najih said that Mujahid said that Ibn 'Abbas said, \"I am among those who are firmly grounded in its Ta'wil interpretation.\" The Messenger of Allah ﷺ supplicated for the benefit of Ibn 'Abbas,\nاللَّهُمَّ فَقِّهْهُ فِي الدِّينِ وَعَلِّمْهُ التَّأْوِيلَ\n(O Allah! Bestow on him knowledge in the religion and teach him the Ta'wil (interpretation).)\nTa'wil has two meanings in the Qur'an, the true reality of things, and what they will turn out to be. For instance, Allah said,\nوَقَالَ يَا أَبَتِ هَٰذَا تَأْوِيلُ رُؤْيَايَ مِن قَبْلُ\n(And he said: \"O my father! This is the Ta'wil of my dream aforetime!\".)[12:100], and,\nهَلْ يَنظُرُونَ إِلَّا تَأْوِيلَهُ يَوْمَ يَأْتِي تَأْوِيلُهُ\n(Await they just for it's Ta'wil? On the Day (Day of Resurrection) it's Ta'wil is finally fulfillled.)(7:53) refers to the true reality of Resurrection that they were told about. If this is the meaning desired in the Ayah above (3:7), then pausing after reciting Allah's Name is warranted, because only Allah knows the true reality of things. In this case, Allah's statement,\nوَالرَّاسِخُونَ فِي الْعِلْمِ\n(And those who are firmly grounded in knowledge) is connected to His statement,\nيَقُولُونَ آمَنَّا بِهِ\n(say: \"We believe in it\") If the word Ta'wil means the second meaning, that is, explaining and describing, such as what Allah said,\nنَبِّئْنَا بِتَأْوِيلِهِ\n((They said): \"Inform us of the Ta'wil of this\")[12:36] meaning its explanation, then pausing after reciting,\nوَالرَّاسِخُونَ فِي الْعِلْمِ\n(And those who are firmly grounded in knowledge) is warranted. This is because the scholars have general knowledge in, and understand what they were addressed with, even though they do not have knowledge of the true reality of things. Therefore, Allah's statement,\nيَقُولُونَ آمَنَّا بِهِ\n(say: \"We believe in it\") describes the conduct of the scholars. Similarly, Allah said,\nوَجَاءَ رَبُّكَ وَالْمَلَكُ صَفًّا صَفًّا\n(And your Lord comes, and the angels, in rows.)[89:22] means, your Lord will come, and the angels will come in rows.\nAllah's statement that the knowledgeable people proclaim,\nيَقُولُونَ آمَنَّا بِهِ\n(We believe in it) means, they believe in the Mutashabih.\nكُلٌّ مِّنْ عِندِ رَبِّنَا\n(all of it is from our Lord) meaning, both the Muhkam and the Mutashabih are true and authentic, and each one of them testifies to the truth of the other. This is because they both are from Allah and nothing that comes from Allah is ever met by contradiction or discrepancy. Allah said,\nأَفَلَا يَتَدَبَّرُونَ الْقُرْآنَ وَلَوْ كَانَ مِنْ عِندِ غَيْرِ اللَّهِ لَوَجَدُوا فِيهِ اخْتِلَافًا كَثِيرًا\n(Do they not then consider the Qur'an carefully? Had it been from other than Allah, they would surely have found therein many a contradiction.)[4:82].\nAllah said in his Ayah [3:7],\nوَمَا يَذَّكَّرُ إِلَّا أُولُو الْأَلْبَابِ\n(And none receive admonition except men of understanding.) meaning, those who have good minds and sound comprehension, understand, contemplate and comprehend the meaning in the correct manner. Further, Ibn Al-Mundhir recorded in his Tafsir that Nafi' bin Yazid said, \"Those firmly grounded in knowledge are those who are modest for Allah's sake, humbly seek His pleasure, and do not exaggerate regarding those above them, or belittle those below them.\"\nAllah said that they supplicate to their Lord,\nرَبَّنَا لَا تُزِغْ قُلُوبَنَا بَعْدَ إِذْ هَدَيْتَنَا\n(Our Lord! Let not our hearts deviate (from the truth) after You have guided us.) meaning, \"Do not deviate our hearts from the guidance after You allowed them to acquire it. Do not make us like those who have wickedness in their hearts, those who follow the Mutashabih in the Qur'an. Rather, make us remain firmly on Your straight path and true religion.\"\nوَهَبْ لَنَا مِن لَّدُنكَ\n(And grant us from Ladunka) meaning, from You,\nرَحْمَةً\n(Mercy) with which You make our hearts firm, and increase in our Faith and certainty,\nإِنَّكَ أَنتَ الْوَهَّابُ\n(Truly, You are the Bestower)\nIbn Abi Hatim and Ibn Jarir recorded that Umm Salamah said that the Prophet ﷺ used to supplicate,\nيَا مُقَلِّبَ الْقُلُوبِ ثَبِّتْ قَلْبِي عَلَى دِينِكَ\n(O You Who changes the hearts, make my heart firm on Your religion.)\nHe then recited,\nرَبَّنَا لَا تُزِغْ قُلُوبَنَا بَعْدَ إِذْ هَدَيْتَنَا وَهَبْ لَنَا مِن لَّدُنكَ رَحْمَةً إِنَّكَ أَنتَ الْوَهَّابُ\n(\"Our Lord! Let not our hearts deviate (from the truth) after You have guided us, and grant us mercy from You. Truly, You are the Bestower.\") The Ayah continues,\nرَبَّنَا إِنَّكَ جَامِعُ النَّاسِ لِيَوْمٍ لَّا رَيْبَ فِيهِ\n(\"Our Lord! Verily, it is You Who will gather mankind together on the Day about which there is no doubt\") meaning, they say in their supplication: O our Lord! You will gather Your creation on the Day of Return, judge between them and decide over what they disputed about. Thereafter, You will reward or punish each according to the deeds they did in this life.","href":"/tafsir/3?verse=7","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:3:10","title":"Ibn Kathir · 3:10–11","text":"Verily, those who disbelieve, neither their properties nor their offspring will avail them whatsoever against Allah; and it is they who will be fuel of the Fire (10)Like the behavior of the people of Fir'awn and those before them; they belied Our Ayat. So Allah punished them for their sins. And Allah is severe in punishment (11)\n\n## On the Day of Resurrection, No Wealth or Offspring Shall Avail\n\nAllah states that the disbelievers shall be fuel for the Fire,\nيَوْمَ لَا يَنفَعُ الظَّالِمِينَ مَعْذِرَتُهُمْ وَلَهُمُ اللَّعْنَةُ وَلَهُمْ سُوءُ الدَّارِ\n(The Day when their excuses will be of no profit to wrongdoers. Theirs will be the curse, and theirs will be the evil abode (i.e. painful torment in Hell-fire).)[40:52].\nFurther, what they were granted in this life of wealth and offspring shall not avail them with Allah, or save them from His punishment and severe torment. Similarly, Allah said,\nفَلَا تُعْجِبْكَ أَمْوَالُهُمْ وَلَا أَوْلَادُهُمْ إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُعَذِّبَهُم بِهَا فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَتَزْهَقَ أَنفُسُهُمْ وَهُمْ كَافِرُونَ\n(So let not their wealth nor their children amaze you; in reality Allah's plan is to punish them with these things in the life of this world, and that their souls shall depart (die) while they are disbelievers.)[9:55], and,\nلَا يَغُرَّنَّكَ تَقَلُّبُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا فِي الْبِلَادِ - مَتَاعٌ قَلِيلٌ ثُمَّ مَأْوَاهُمْ جَهَنَّمُ وَبِئْسَ الْمِهَادُ\n(Let not the free disposal (and affluence) of the disbelievers throughout the land deceive you. A brief enjoyment; then, their ultimate abode is Hell; and worst indeed is that place for rest.)[3:196-197].\nAllah said in this Ayah [3:10],\nإِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا\n(Verily, those who disbelieve) meaning, disbelieved in Allah's Ayat, denied His Messengers, defied His Books and did not benefit from His revelation to His Prophets,\nلَن تُغْنِيَ عَنْهُمْ أَمْوَالُهُمْ وَلَا أَوْلَادُهُم مِّنَ اللَّهِ شَيْئًا وَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمْ وَقُودُ النَّارِ\n(Neither their properties nor their offspring will avail them whatsoever against Allah; and it is they who will be fuel of the Fire.) meaning, they will be the wood with which the Fire is kindled and fed. Similarly, Allah said,\nإِنَّكُمْ وَمَا تَعْبُدُونَ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ حَصَبُ جَهَنَّمَ\n(Certainly you (disbelievers) and that which you are worshipping now besides Allah, are (but) fuel for Hell!)[21:98].\nAllah said next,\nكَدَأْبِ آلِ فِرْعَوْنَ\n(Like the Da'b of the people of Fira'wn.) Ad-Dahhak said that Ibn 'Abbas said that the Ayah means, \"Like the behavior of the people of Fir'awn.\" This is the same Tafsir of 'Ikrimah, Mujahid, Abu Malik, Ad-Dahhak, and others. Other scholars said that the Ayah means, \"Like the practice, conduct, likeness of the people of Fir'awn.\" These meanings are all plausible, for the Da'b means practice, behavior, tradition and habit. The Ayah indicates that the disbelievers will not benefit from their wealth or offspring. Rather, they will perish and be punished. This is the same end the people of Fir'awn and the previous nations met, those who rejected the Messengers, the Ayat, and proofs of Allah that they were sent with.\nوَاللَّهُ شَدِيدُ الْعِقَابِ\n(And Allah is severe in punishment.) meaning, His punishment is severe and His torment is painful. None can escape Allah's grasp, nor does anything escape His knowledge. Allah does what He wills and prevails over all things, it is He to Whom everything is humbled and there is no deity worthy of worship, nor any Lord except Him.","href":"/tafsir/3?verse=10","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:3:12","title":"Ibn Kathir · 3:12–13","text":"Say to those who disbelieve: \"You will be defeated and gathered together to Hell, and worst indeed is that place of rest. (12)There has already been a sign for you in the two armies that met. One was fighting in the cause of Allah, and as for the other, in disbelief. They saw them with their own eyes twice their number. And Allah supports with His aid whom He wills. Verily, in this is a lesson for those who understand (13)\n\n## Threatening the Jews With Defeat and Encouraging Them to Learn a Lesson From the Battle of Badr\n\nAllah commanded the Prophet Muhammad ﷺ to proclaim to the disbelievers,\nسَتُغْلَبُونَ\n(You will be defeated) in this life,\nوَتُحْشَرُونَ\n(And gathered together) on the Day of Resurrection,\nإِلَىٰ جَهَنَّمَ وَبِئْسَ الْمِهَادُ\n(to Hell, and worst indeed is that place of rest)\nMuhammad bin Ishaq bin Yasar recorded that 'Asim bin 'Umar bin Qatadah said that when the Messenger of Allah ﷺ gained victory in the battle of Badr and went back to Al-Madinah, he gathered the Jews in the marketplace of Bani Qaynuqa'.\nTherefore, Allah said,\nقَدْ كَانَ لَكُمْ آيَةٌ\n(There has already been a sign for you) meaning, O Jews, who said what you said! You have an Ayah, meaning proof, that Allah will make His religion prevail, award victory to His Messenger, make His Word apparent and His religion the highest.\nفِي فِئَتَيْنِ\n(In the two armies) meaning, two camps,\nالْتَقَتَا\n(that met) in combat (in Badr),\nفِئَةٌ تُقَاتِلُ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ\n(One was fighting in the Cause of Allah) the Muslims,\nوَأُخْرَىٰ كَافِرَةٌ\n(And as for the other, in disbelief) meaning, the idolators of Quraysh at Badr. Allah's statement,\nيَرَوْنَهُم مِّثْلَيْهِمْ رَأْيَ الْعَيْنِ\n(They saw them with their own eyes twice their number) means, the idolators thought that the Muslims were twice as many as they were, for Allah made this illusion a factor in the victory that Islam had over them.\nIt was said that the meaning of Allah's statement,\nيَرَوْنَهُم مِّثْلَيْهِمْ رَأْيَ الْعَيْنِ\n(They saw them with their own eyes twice their number) is that the Muslims saw twice as many idolators as they were, yet Allah gave them victory over the disbelievers. 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud said, \"When we looked at the disbelievers' forces, we found that they were twice as many as we were. When we looked at them again, we thought they did not have one man more than we had. So Allah's statement,\nوَإِذْ يُرِيكُمُوهُمْ إِذِ الْتَقَيْتُمْ فِي أَعْيُنِكُمْ قَلِيلًا وَيُقَلِّلُكُمْ فِي أَعْيُنِهِمْ\n(And (remember) when you met, He showed them to you as few in your eyes and He made you appear as few in their eyes.)[8:44]\".\nWhen the two camps saw each other, the Muslims thought that the idolators were twice as many as they were, so that they would trust in Allah and seek His help. The idolators thought that the believers were twice as many as they were, so that they would feel fear, horror, fright and despair. When the two camps stood in lines and met in battle, Allah made each camp look smaller in the eyes of the other camp, so that they would be encouraged to fight each other,\nلِيَقْضِيَ اللَّهُ أَمْرًا كَانَ مَفْعُولًا\n(so that Allah might accomplish a matter already ordained.)[8:42] meaning, so that the truth and falsehood are distinguishable, and thus the word of faith prevails over disbelief and deviation, so that the believers prevail and the disbelievers are humiliated. In a similar statement, Allah said;\nوَلَقَدْ نَصَرَكُمُ اللَّهُ بِبَدْرٍ وَأَنتُمْ أَذِلَّةٌ\n(And Allah has already made you victorious at Badr, when you were a weak little force)[3:123]. In this Ayah [3:13] Allah said,\nوَاللَّهُ يُؤَيِّدُ بِنَصْرِهِ مَن يَشَاءُ إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَعِبْرَةً لِّأُولِي الْأَبْصَارِ\n(And Allah supports with His victory whom He wills. Verily, in this is a lesson for those who understand.) meaning, this should be an example for those who have intelligence and sound comprehension. They should contemplate about Allah's wisdom, decisions and decree, that He gives victory to His believing servants in this life and on the Day the witnesses stand up to testify.","href":"/tafsir/3?verse=12","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:3:14","title":"Ibn Kathir · 3:14–15","text":"Beautified for men is the love of things they covet; women, children, Qanatir Al-Muqantarah of gold and silver, branded beautiful horses (Musawwamah), cattle and fertile land. This is the pleasure of the present world's life; but Allah has the excellent return with Him (14)Say: \"Shall I inform you of things far better than those? For those who have Taqwa there are Gardens (Paradise) with their Lord, underneath which rivers flow. Therein (is their) eternal (home) and Azwajun Mutahharatun (purified mates or wives). And Allah will be pleased with them. And Allah is All-Seer of the servants. (15)\n\n## The True Value of This Earthly Life\n\nAllah mentions the delights that He put in this life for people, such as women and children, and He started with women, because the test with them is more tempting. For instance, the Sahih recorded that the Messenger ﷺ said,\nمَا تَرَكْتُ بَعْدِي فِتْنَةً أَضَرَّ عَلَى الرِّجَالِ مِنَ النِّسَاءِ\n(I did not leave behind me a test more tempting to men than women.)\nWhen one enjoys women for the purpose of having children and preserving his chastity, then he is encouraged to do so. There are many Hadiths that encourage getting married, such as,\nوَإِنَّ خَيْرَ هذِهِ الْأُمَّةِ مَنْ كَانَ أَكْثَرَهَا نِسَاءً\n(Verily, the best members of this Ummah are those who have the most wives) He ﷺ also said,\nالدُّنْيَا مَتَاعٌ، وَخَيْرُ مَتَاعِهَا الْمَرْأَةُ الصَّالِحَةُ\n(This life is a delight, and the best of its delight is a righteous wife)\nThe Prophet ﷺ said in another Hadith,\nحُبِّبَ إِلَيَّ النِّسَاءُ وَالطِّيبُ، وَجُعِلَتْ قُرَّةُ عَيْنِي فِي الصَّلَاةِ\n(I was made to like women and perfume, and the comfort of my eye is the prayer.)\nA'ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, said, \"Nothing was more beloved to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ than women, except horses,\" and in another narration, \"...than horses except women.\"\nThe desire to have children is sometimes for the purpose of pride and boasting, and as such, is a temptation. When the purpose for having children is to reproduce and increase the Ummah of Muhammad ﷺ with those who worship Allah alone without partners, then it is encouraged and praised. A Hadith states,\nتَزَوَّجُوا الْوَدُودَ الْوَلُودَ، فَإِنِّي مُكَاثِرٌ بِكُمُ الْأُمَمَ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ\n(Marry the Wadud (kind) and Walud (fertile) woman, for I will compare your numbers to the rest of the nations on the Day of Resurrection.)\nThe desire of wealth sometimes results out of arrogance, and the desire to dominate the weak and control the poor, and this conduct is prohibited. Sometimes, the want for more money is for the purpose of spending it on acts of worship, being kind to the family, the relatives, and spending on various acts of righteousness and obedience; this behavior is praised and encouraged in the religion.\nScholars of Tafsir have conflicting opinions about the amount of the Qintar, all of which indicate that the Qintar is a large amount of money, as Ad-Dahhak and other scholars said. Abu Hurayrah said \"The Qintar is twelve thousand Uwqiyah, each Uwqiyah is better than what is between the heavens and earth.\" [This was recorded by Ibn Jarir].\nThe desire to have horses can be one of three types. Sometimes, owners of horses collect them to be used in the cause of Allah, and when warranted, they use their horses in battle. This type of owner shall be rewarded for this good action. Another type collects horses to boast, and out of enmity to the people of Islam, and this type earns a burden for his behavior. Another type collects horses to fulfill their needs and to collect their offspring, and they do not forget Allah's right due on their horses. This is why in this case, these horses provide a shield of sufficiency for their owner, as evident by a Hadith that we will mention, Allah willing, when we explain Allah's statement,\nوَأَعِدُّوا لَهُم مَّا اسْتَطَعْتُم مِّن قُوَّةٍ وَمِن رِّبَاطِ الْخَيْلِ\n(And make ready against them all you can of power, including steeds of war.)[8:60]\nAs for the Musawwamah horses, Ibn 'Abbas said that they are the branded, beautiful horses. This is the same explanation of Mujahid, 'Ikrimah, Sa'id bin Jubayr, 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Abdullah bin Abza, As-Suddi, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas and Abu Sinan and others. Makhul said the Musawwamah refers to the horse with a white spotted faced, and the horse with white feet. Imam Ahmad recorded that Abu Dharr said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nلَيْسَ مِنْ فَرَسٍ عَرَبِيٍّ إِلَّا يُؤْذَنُ لَهُ مَعَ كُلِّ فَجْرٍ يَدْعُو بِدَعْوَتَيْنِ يَقُولُ: اللَّهُمَّ إِنَّكَ خَوَّلْتَنِي مِنْ بَنِي آدَمَ، فَاجْعَلْنِي مِنْ أَحَبِّ مَالِهِ وَأَهْلِهِ إِلَيْهِ أَوْ أَحَبَّ أَهْلِهِ وَمَالِهِ إِلَيْهِ\n(Every Arabian horse is allowed to have two supplications every dawn, and the horse supplicates, 'O Allah! You made me subservient to the son of Adam. Therefore, make me among the dearest of his wealth and household to him, or, ...make me the dearest of his household and wealth to him.)\nAllah's statement,\nوَالْأَنْعَامِ\n(Cattle) means, camels, cows and sheep.\nوَالْحَرْثِ\n(And fertile land) meaning, the land that is used to farm and grow plants.\nAllah then said,\nذَٰلِكَ مَتَاعُ الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا\n(This is the pleasure of the present world's life) meaning, these are the delights of this life and its short lived joys,\nوَاللَّهُ عِندَهُ حُسْنُ الْمَآبِ\n(But Allah has the excellent return with Him) meaning, the best destination and reward.\n\n## The Reward of the Those Who Have Taqwa is Better Than All Joys of This World\n\nThis is why Allah said,\nقُلْ أَؤُنَبِّئُكُم بِخَيْرٍ مِّن ذَٰلِكُمْ\n(Say: \"Shall I inform you of things far better than those?\")\nThis Ayah means, \"Say, O Muhammad, to the people, 'Should I tell you about what is better than the delights and joys of this life that will soon perish?'\" Allah informed them of what is better when He said,\nلِلَّذِينَ اتَّقَوْا عِندَ رَبِّهِمْ جَنَّاتٌ تَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ\n(For those who have Taqwa there are Gardens (Paradise) with their Lord, underneath which rivers flow) meaning, rivers run throughout it. These rivers carry various types of drinks: honey, milk, wine and water such that no eye has ever seen, no ear has ever heard, and no heart has ever imagined,\nخَالِدِينَ فِيهَا\n(Therein (is their) eternal (home)) meaning, they shall remain in it forever and ever and will not want to be removed from it.\nوَأَزْوَاجٌ مُّطَهَّرَةٌ\n(And Azwajun Mutahharatun (purified mates or wives)) meaning, from filth, dirt, harm, menstruation, post birth bleeding, and other things that affect women in this world.\nوَرِضْوَانٌ مِّنَ اللَّهِ\n(And Allah will be pleased with them) meaning, Allah's pleasure will descend on them and He shall never be angry with them after that. This is why Allah said in in Surah Bara'ah,\nوَرِضْوَانٌ مِّنَ اللَّهِ أَكْبَرُ\n(But the pleasure of Allah is greater)[9:72], meaning, greater than the eternal delight that He has granted them. Allah then said,\nوَاللَّهُ بَصِيرٌ بِالْعِبَادِ\n(And Allah is All-Seer of the (His) servants) and, He gives each provisions according to what they deserve.","href":"/tafsir/3?verse=14","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:3:16","title":"Ibn Kathir · 3:16–17","text":"Those who say: \"Our Lord! We have indeed believed, so forgive us our sins and save us from the punishment of the Fire. (16)(They are) the patient, the true believers, and obedient with sincere devotion in worship to Allah. Those who spend [in good] and those who pray and beg Allah's pardon in the last hours of the night (17)\n\n## The Supplication and Description of Al-Muttaqin\n\nAllah describes the Muttaqin, His pious servants, whom He promised tremendous rewards,\nالَّذِينَ يَقُولُونَ رَبَّنَا إِنَّنَا آمَنَّا\n(Those who say: \"Our Lord! We have indeed believed\") in You, Your Book and Your Messenger.\nفَاغْفِرْ لَنَا ذُنُوبَنَا\n(so forgive us our sins) because of our faith in You and in what You legislated for us. Therefore, forgive us our errors and shortcomings, with Your bounty and mercy,\nوَقِنَا عَذَابَ النَّارِ\n(and save us from the punishment of the Fire.)\nAllah then said,\nالصَّابِرِينَ\n((They are) those who are patient) while performing acts of obedience and abandoning the prohibitions.\nوَالصَّادِقِينَ\n(those who are true) concerning their proclamation of faith, by performing the difficult deeds.\nوَالْقَانِتِينَ\n(and obedient) meaning, they submit and obey Allah,\nوَالْمُنفِقِينَ\n(those who spend) from their wealth on all the acts of obedience they were commanded, being kind to kith and kin, helping the needy, and comforting the destitute.\nوَالْمُسْتَغْفِرِينَ بِالْأَسْحَارِ\n(and those who pray and beg Allah's pardon in the last hours of the night) and this testifies to the virtue of seeking Allah's forgiveness in the latter part of the night. It was reported that when Ya'qub said to his children,\nسَوْفَ أَسْتَغْفِرُ لَكُمْ رَبِّي\n(I will ask my Lord for forgiveness for you)[12:98] he waited until the latter part of the night to say his supplication.\nFurthermore, the Two Sahihs, the Musnad and Sunan collections recorded through several Companions that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nيَنْزِلُ اللهُ تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالى فِي كُلِّ لَيْلَةٍ إِلى سَمَاءِ الدُّنْيَا حِينَ يَبْقَى ثُلُثُ اللَّيْلِ الْآخِرُ، فَيَقُولُ: هَلْ مِنْ سَائِلٍ فَأُعْطِيَهُ؟ هَلْ مِنْ دَاعٍ فَأَسْتَجِيبَ لَهُ؟ هَلْ مِنْ مُسْتَغْفِرٍ فَأَغْفِرَ لَهُ؟\n(Every night, when the last third of it remains, our Lord, the Blessed, the Superior, descends to the lowest heaven saying, \"Is there anyone to ask Me, so that I may grant him his request? Is there anyone to invoke Me, so that I may respond to his invocation? Is there anyone seeking My forgiveness, so that I may forgive him?\")\nThe Two Sahihs recorded that 'A'ishah said, \"The Messenger of Allah ﷺ performed Witr during the first part, the middle and latter parts of the night. Then, later (in his life), he would perform it (only) during the latter part.\" 'Abdullah bin 'Umar used to pray during the night and would ask, \"O Nafi'! Is it the latter part of the night yet?\" and if Nafi' said, \"Yes,\" Ibn 'Umar would start supplicating to Allah and seeking His forgiveness until dawn. This Hadith was collected by Ibn Abi Hatim.","href":"/tafsir/3?verse=16","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:3:18","title":"Ibn Kathir · 3:18–20","text":"Allah bears witness that none has the right to be worshipped but He, and the angels, and those having knowledge (also bear witness to this); (He always) maintains His creation in justice. None has the right to be worshipped but He, the Almighty, the All-Wise (18)Truly, the religion with Allah is Islam. Those who were given the Scripture (Jews and Christians) did not differ except out of rivalry, after knowledge had come to them. And whoever disbelieves in the Ayat of Allah, then surely, Allah is Swift in reckoning (19)So if they dispute with you say: \"I have submitted myself to Allah, and (so have) those who follow me.\" And say to those who were given the Scripture (Jews and Christians) and to those who are illiterate (Arab pagans): \"Do you (also) submit yourselves?\" If they do, they are rightly guided; but if they turn away, your duty is only to convey the Message; and Allah sees the servants (20)\n\n## The Testimony of Tawhid\n\nAllah bears witness, and verily, Allah is sufficient as a Witness, and He is the Most Truthful and Just Witness there is; His statement is the absolute truth,\nأَنَّهُ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ\n(that La ilaha illa Huwa) meaning, He Alone is the Lord and God of all creation; everyone and everything are His servants, creation and in need of Him. Allah is the Most Rich, Free from needing anyone or anything. Allah said in another Ayah,\nلَّٰكِنِ اللَّهُ يَشْهَدُ بِمَا أَنزَلَ إِلَيْكَ\n(But Allah bears witness to that which He has sent down (the Qur'an) unto you (O Muhammad ﷺ))[4:166].\nAllah then mentioned the testimony of His angels and those who have knowledge after he mentioned His own testimony,\nشَهِدَ اللَّهُ أَنَّهُ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ وَالْمَلَائِكَةُ وَأُولُو الْعِلْمِ\n(Allah bears witness that none has the right to be worshipped but He), and the angels, and those having knowledge (also bear witness to this)). This Ayah emphasizes the great virtue of those who have knowledge.\nقَائِمًا بِالْقِسْطِ\n((He) maintains His creation in justice) in all that He does,\nلَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ\n(None has the right to be worshipped but He) thus emphasizing this fact,\nالْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ\n(the Almighty, the All-Wise.) the Mighty that does not submit to weakness due to His might and greatness, the Wise in all His statements, actions, legislation and decrees.\n\n## The Religion with Allah is Islam\n\nAllah said,\nإِنَّ الدِّينَ عِندَ اللَّهِ الْإِسْلَامُ\n(Truly, the religion with Allah is Islam.) Allah states that there is no religion accepted with Him from any person, except Islam. Islam includes obeying all of the Messengers until Muhammad ﷺ who finalized their commission, thus closing all paths to Allah except through Muhammad ﷺ. Therefore, after Allah sent Muhammad ﷺ, whoever meets Allah following a path other than Muhammad's, it will not be accepted of him. In another Ayah, Allah said,\nوَمَن يَبْتَغِ غَيْرَ الْإِسْلَامِ دِينًا فَلَن يُقْبَلَ مِنْهُ\n(And whoever seeks a religion other than Islam, it will never be accepted of him)[3:85].\nIn this Ayah [3:19], Allah said, asserting that the only religion accepted with Him is Islam,\nإِنَّ الدِّينَ عِندَ اللَّهِ الْإِسْلَامُ\n(Truly, the religion with Allah is Islam.)\nAllah then states that those who were given the Scripture beforehand divided in the religion after Allah sent the Messengers and revealed the Books to them providing them the necessary proofs to not do so. Allah said,\nوَمَا اخْتَلَفَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ إِلَّا مِن بَعْدِ مَا جَاءَهُمُ الْعِلْمُ بَغْيًا بَيْنَهُمْ\n(Those who were given the Scripture (Jews and Christians) did not differ except out of rivalry, after knowledge had come to them.) meaning, some of them wronged others. Therefore, they differed over the truth, out of envy, hatred and enmity for each other. This hatred made some of them defy those whom they hated even if they were correct. Allah then said,\nوَمَن يَكْفُرْ بِآيَاتِ اللَّهِ\n(And whoever disbelieves in the Ayat of Allah) meaning, whoever rejects what Allah sent down in His Book,\nفَإِنَّ اللَّهَ سَرِيعُ الْحِسَابِ\n(then surely, Allah is Swift in reckoning.) Allah will punish him for his rejection, reckon him for his denial, and torment him for defying His Book. Thereafter, Allah said.\nفَإِنْ حَاجُّوكَ\n(So if they dispute with you (Muhammad ﷺ)) so if they argue with you about Tawhid,\nفَقُلْ أَسْلَمْتُ وَجْهِيَ لِلَّهِ وَمَنِ اتَّبَعَنِ\n(Say: \"I have submitted myself to Allah (in Islam), and (so have) those who follow me\") meaning, Say, 'I have made my worship sincere for Allah Alone without partners, rivals, offspring or companion,\nوَمَنِ اتَّبَعَنِ\n(and those who follow me) who followed my religion and embraced my creed.' In another Ayah, Allah said,\nقُلْ هَٰذِهِ سَبِيلِي أَدْعُو إِلَى اللَّهِ عَلَىٰ بَصِيرَةٍ أَنَا وَمَنِ اتَّبَعَنِي\n(Say (O Muhammad ﷺ): \"This is my way; I invite unto Allah with sure knowledge, I and whosoever follows me...\")[12:108].\n\n## Islam is the Religion of Mankind and the Prophet (ﷺ) Was Sent to all Mankind\n\nAllah commanded His servant and Messenger, Muhammad ﷺ, to call the People of the Two Scriptures and the unlettered idolators to his religion, way, Law and all that Allah sent him with. Allah said,\nوَقُل لِّلَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ وَالْأُمِّيِّينَ أَأَسْلَمْتُمْ فَإِنْ أَسْلَمُوا فَقَدِ اهْتَدَوا وَّإِن تَوَلَّوْا فَإِنَّمَا عَلَيْكَ الْبَلَاغُ\n(And say to those who were given the Scripture (Jews and Christians) and to those who are illiterates (Arab pagans): \"Do you (also) submit yourselves?\" If they do, they are rightly guided; but if they turn away, your duty is only to convey the Message.) meaning, their reckoning is with Allah and their return and final destination is to Him. It is He Who guides whom He wills and allows whom He wills to stray, and He has the perfect wisdom and the unequivocal proof for all of this. This is why Allah said,\nوَاللَّهُ بَصِيرٌ بِالْعِبَادِ\n(And Allah sees the servants.) for He has perfect knowledge of who deserves to be guided and who does not deserve to be guided. Verily,\nلَا يُسْأَلُ عَمَّا يَفْعَلُ وَهُمْ يُسْأَلُونَ\n(He cannot be questioned for what He does, while they will be questioned.)[21:23] because of His perfect wisdom and mercy. This and similar Ayat are clear proofs that the Message of Muhammad ﷺ is universal to all creation, as it is well established in the religion, according to the various texts of the Book and Sunnah. For instance, Allah said,\nقُلْ يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنِّي رَسُولُ اللَّهِ إِلَيْكُمْ جَمِيعًا\n(Say (O Muhammad ﷺ): \"O mankind! Verily, I am sent to you all as the Messenger of Allah.\")[7:158], and,\nتَبَارَكَ الَّذِي نَزَّلَ الْفُرْقَانَ عَلَىٰ عَبْدِهِ لِيَكُونَ لِلْعَالَمِينَ نَذِيرًا\n(Blessed be He Who sent down the criterion to His servant that he may be a warner to the 'Alamin (mankind and Jinn).)[25:1].\nThe Two Sahihs and other collections of Hadith recorded that the Prophet ﷺ sent letters to the kings of the earth during his time and to different peoples, Arabs and non-Arabs, People of the Book and the unlettered, just as Allah had commanded him. 'Abdur-Razzaq recorded that Ma'mar said, that Hammam said that Abu Hurayrah said that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nوَالَّذِي نَفْسِي بِيَدِهِ، لَا يَسْمَعُ بِي أَحَدٌ مِنْ هَذِهِ الْأُمَّةِ: يَهُودِيٌّ وَلَا نَصْرَانِيٌّ، وَمَاتَ وَلَمْ يُؤْمِنْ بِالَّذِي أُرْسِلْتُ بِهِ، إِلَّا كَانَ مِنْ أَهْلِ النَّارِ\n(By He in Whose Hand is my soul! No member of this Ummah, no Jew or Christian, hears of me but dies without believing in what I was sent with, but will be among the people of the Fire.) Muslim recorded this Hadith.\nThe Prophet ﷺ said,\nبُعِثْتُ إِلَى الْأَحْمَرِ وَالْأَسْوَدِ\n(I was sent to the red and black.) and,\nكَانَ النَّبِيُّ يُبْعَثُ إِلى قَوْمِهِ خَاصَّةً، وَبُعِثْتُ إِلَى النَّاسِ عَامَّةً\n(A Prophet used to be sent to his people, but I was sent to all mankind.)","href":"/tafsir/3?verse=18","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:3:21","title":"Ibn Kathir · 3:21–22","text":"Verily, those who disbelieve in the Ayat of Allah and kill the Prophets without right, and kill those men who order just dealings, then announce to them a painful torment (21)They are those whose works will be lost in this world and in the Hereafter, and they will have no helpers (22)\n\n## Chastising the Jews for Their Disbelief and for Killing the Prophets and Righteous People\n\nThis Ayah chastises the People of the Book for the transgression and prohibitions they committed by their denials in the past and more recent times, of Allah's Ayat and the Messengers. They did this due to their defiance and rejection of the Messengers, denial of the truth and refusal to follow it. They also killed many Prophets when they conveyed to them what Allah legislated for them, without cause or criminal behavior committed by these Prophets, for they only called them to the truth,\nوَيَقْتُلُونَ الَّذِينَ يَأْمُرُونَ بِالْقِسْطِ مِنَ النَّاسِ\n(And kill those men who order just dealings) thus, demonstrating the worst type of arrogance. Indeed, the Prophet ﷺ said,\nالْكِبْرُ بَطَرُ الْحَقِّ وَغَمْطُ النَّاسِ\n(Kibr (arrogance) is refusing the truth and degrading people)\nThis is why when they rejected the truth and acted arrogantly towards the creation, Allah punished them with humiliation and disgrace in this life, and humiliating torment in the Hereafter. Allah said,\nفَبَشِّرْهُم بِعَذَابٍ أَلِيمٍ\n(then announce to them a painful torment) meaning, painful and humiliating,\nأُولَٰئِكَ الَّذِينَ حَبِطَتْ أَعْمَالُهُمْ فِي الدُّنْيَا وَالْآخِرَةِ وَمَا لَهُم مِّن نَّاصِرِينَ\n(They are those whose works will be lost in this world and in the Hereafter, and they will have no helpers.).","href":"/tafsir/3?verse=21","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:3:23","title":"Ibn Kathir · 3:23–25","text":"Have you not seen those who have been given a portion of the Scripture? They are being invited to the Book of Allah to settle their dispute, then a party of them turned away, and they are averse (23)This is because they say: \"The Fire shall not touch us but for a number of days.\" And that which they used to invent in their religion has deceived them (24)How (will it be) when We gather them together on the Day about which there is no doubt (i.e. the Day of Resurrection). And each person will be paid in full what he has earned And they will not be dealt with unjustly (25)\n\n## Chastising the People of the Book for Not Referring to the Book of Allah for Judgment\n\nAllah criticizes the Jews and Christians who claim to follow their Books, the Tawrah and the Injil, because when they are called to refer to these Books where Allah commanded them to follow Muhammad ﷺ, they turn away with aversion. This censure and criticism from Allah was all because of their defiance and rejection. Allah said next,\nذَٰلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ قَالُوا لَن تَمَسَّنَا النَّارُ إِلَّا أَيَّامًا مَّعْدُودَاتٍ\n(This is because they say: \"The Fire shall not touch us but for a number of days.\") meaning, what made them dare to challenge and defy the truth is their false claim that Allah will only punish them for seven days in the Fire, a day for every one thousand years in this life. We mentioned this subject in the Tafsir of Surat Al-Baqarah.\nAllah then said,\nوَغَرَّهُمْ فِي دِينِهِم مَّا كَانُوا يَفْتَرُونَ\n(And that which they used to invent regarding their religion has deceived them.) meaning, what caused them to remain on their false creed is that they deceived themselves, believing that the Fire will only touch them for a few days for their errors. However, it is they who have invented this notion, and Allah did not grant them authority to support this claim. Allah said, while threatening and warning them,\nفَكَيْفَ إِذَا جَمَعْنَاهُمْ لِيَوْمٍ لَّا رَيْبَ فِيهِ\n(How (will it be) when We gather them together on the Day about which there is no doubt (i. e. the Day of Resurrection).) meaning, what will their condition be like after they have uttered this lie about Allah, rejected His Messengers and killed His Prophets and their scholars who enjoined righteousness and forbade evil? Allah will ask them about all this and punish them for what they have done. This is why Allah said,\nفَكَيْفَ إِذَا جَمَعْنَاهُمْ لِيَوْمٍ لَّا رَيْبَ فِيهِ\n(How (will it be) when We gather them together on the Day about which there is no doubt.) meaning, there is no doubt that this Day will come,\nوَوُفِّيَتْ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَّا كَسَبَتْ وَهُمْ لَا يُظْلَمُونَ\n(And each person will be paid in full what he has earned? And they will not be dealt with unjustly.)","href":"/tafsir/3?verse=23","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:3:26","title":"Ibn Kathir · 3:26–27","text":"Say: \"O Allah! Possessor of the power, You give power to whom You will, and You take power from whom You will, and You endue with honor whom You will, and You humiliate whom You will. In Your Hand is the good. Verily, You are able to do all things (26)You make the night to enter into the day, and You make the day to enter into the night, You bring the living out of the dead, and You bring the dead out of the living. And You give wealth and sustenance to whom You will, without limit (27)\n\n## Encouraging Gratitude\n\nAllah said,\nقل\n(Say) O Muhammad ﷺ, while praising your Lord, thanking Him, relying in all matters upon Him and trusting in Him.\nاللَّهُمَّ مَالِكَ الْمُلْكِ\n(O Allah! Possessor of the power) meaning, all sovereignty is Yours,\nتُؤْتِي الْمُلْكَ مَن تَشَاءُ وَتَنزِعُ الْمُلْكَ مِمَّن تَشَاءُ وَتُعِزُّ مَن تَشَاءُ وَتُذِلُّ مَن تَشَاءُ\n(You give power to whom You will, and You take power from whom You will, and You endue with honor whom You will, and You humiliate whom You will.)\nmeaning, You are the Giver, You are the Taker, it is Your will that occurs and whatever You do not will, does not occur. This Ayah encourages thanking Allah for the favors He granted His Messenger ﷺ and his Ummah. Allah transferred the prophethood from the Children of Israel to the Arab, Qurashi, Makkan, unlettered Prophet, the Final and Last of all Prophets and the Messenger of Allah ﷺ to all mankind and Jinn. Allah endowed the Prophet ﷺ with the best of qualities from the prophets before him. Allah also granted him extra qualities that no other Prophet or Messenger before him was endowed with, such as granting him (more) knowledge of Allah and His Law, knowledge of more of the matters of the past and the future, such as what will occur in the Hereafter. Allah allowed Muhammad's Ummah to reach the eastern and western parts of the world and gave dominance to his religion and Law over all other religions and laws. May Allah's peace and blessings be on the Prophet ﷺ until the Day of Judgment, and as long as the day and night succeed each other. This is why Allah said,\nقُلِ اللَّهُمَّ مَالِكَ الْمُلْكِ\n(Say: \"O Allah! Possessor of the power,\") meaning, You decide what You will concerning Your creation and You do what you will. Allah refutes those who thought that they could decide for Allah,\nوَقَالُوا لَوْلَا نُزِّلَ هَٰذَا الْقُرْآنُ عَلَىٰ رَجُلٍ مِّنَ الْقَرْيَتَيْنِ عَظِيمٍ\n(And they say: \"Why is not this Qur'an sent down to some great man of the two towns (Makkah and Ta'if)?\")[43:31].\nAllah refuted them by saying,\nأَهُمْ يَقْسِمُونَ رَحْمَتَ رَبِّكَ\n(Is it they who would portion out the Mercy of your Lord?)[43:32], meaning, \"We decide for Our creation what We will, without resistance or hindrance by anyone. We have the perfect wisdom and the unequivocal proof in all of this, and We give the prophethood to whom We will.\" Similarly, Allah said,\nاللَّهُ أَعْلَمُ حَيْثُ يَجْعَلُ رِسَالَتَهُ\n(Allah knows best with whom to place His Message)[6:124] and,\nانظُرْ كَيْفَ فَضَّلْنَا بَعْضَهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ\n(See how We prefer one above another (in this world))[17: 21]\nAllah said,\nتُولِجُ اللَّيْلَ فِي النَّهَارِ وَتُولِجُ النَّهَارَ فِي اللَّيْلِ\n(You make the night enter into the day, and You make the day enter into the night) meaning, You take from the length of one of them and add it to the shortness of the other, so that they become equal, and take from the length of one of them and add it to the other so that they are not equal. This occurs throughout the seasons of the year: spring, summer, fall and winter. Allah's statement,\nوَتُخْرِجُ الْحَيَّ مِنَ الْمَيِّتِ وَتُخْرِجُ الْمَيِّتَ مِنَ الْحَيِّ\n(You bring the living out of the dead, and You bring the dead out of the living.) means, You bring out the seed from the plant and the plant from the seed; the date from its seed and the date's seed from the date; the faithful from the disbeliever and the disbeliever from the faithful; the chicken from the egg and the egg from the chicken, etc.\nوَتَرْزُقُ مَن تَشَاءُ بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ\n(And You give wealth and sustenance to whom You will, without limit.) meaning, You give whomever You will innumerable amounts of wealth while depriving others from it, out of wisdom, and justice.","href":"/tafsir/3?verse=26","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:3:28","title":"Ibn Kathir · 3:28","text":"Let not the believers take the disbelievers as friends instead of the believers, and whoever does that, will never be helped by Allah in any way, unless you indeed fear a danger from them. And Allah warns you against Himself, and to Allah is the final return (28)\n\n## The Prohibition of Supporting the Disbelievers\n\nAllah prohibited His believing servants from becoming supporters of the disbelievers, or to take them as comrades with whom they develop friendships, rather than the believers. Allah warned against such behavior when He said,\nوَمَن يَفْعَلْ ذَٰلِكَ فَلَيْسَ مِنَ اللَّهِ فِي شَيْءٍ\n(And whoever does that, will never be helped by Allah in any way) meaning, whoever commits this act that Allah has prohibited, then Allah will discard him. Similarly, Allah said,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَتَّخِذُوا عَدُوِّي وَعَدُوَّكُمْ أَوْلِيَاءَ تُلْقُونَ إِلَيْهِم بِالْمَوَدَّةِ\n(O you who believe! Take not My enemies and your enemies as friends, showing affection towards them), until,\nوَمَن يَفْعَلْهُ مِنكُمْ فَقَدْ ضَلَّ سَوَاءَ السَّبِيلِ\n(And whosoever of you does that, then indeed he has gone astray from the straight path.)[60:1]. Allah said,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَتَّخِذُوا الْكَافِرِينَ أَوْلِيَاءَ مِن دُونِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَتُرِيدُونَ أَن تَجْعَلُوا لِلَّهِ عَلَيْكُمْ سُلْطَانًا مُّبِينًا\n(O you who believe! Take not for friends disbelievers instead of believers. Do you wish to offer Allah a manifest proof against yourselves?)[4:144], and,\nيَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَتَّخِذُوا الْيَهُودَ وَالنَّصَارَىٰ أَوْلِيَاءَ ۘ بَعْضُهُمْ أَوْلِيَاءُ بَعْضٍ وَمَن يَتَوَلَّهُم مِّنكُمْ فَإِنَّهُ مِنْهُمْ\n(O you who believe! Take not the Jews and the Christians as friends, they are but friends of each other. And whoever befriends them, then surely, he is one of them.)[5:51].\nAllah said, after mentioning the fact that the faithful believers gave their support to the faithful believers among the Muhajirin, Ansar and Bedouins,\nوَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بَعْضُهُمْ أَوْلِيَاءُ بَعْضٍ إِلَّا تَفْعَلُوهُ تَكُن فِتْنَةٌ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَفَسَادٌ كَبِيرٌ\n(And those who disbelieve are allies of one another, (and) if you do not behave the same, there will be Fitnah and oppression on the earth, and a great mischief and corruption.)[8:73].\nAllah said next,\nإِلَّا أَن تَتَّقُوا مِنْهُمْ تُقَاةً\n(unless you indeed fear a danger from them) meaning, except those believers who in some areas or times fear for their safety from the disbelievers. In this case, such believers are allowed to show friendship to the disbelievers outwardly, but never inwardly. For instance, Al-Bukhari recorded that Abu Ad-Darda' said, \"We smile in the face of some people although our hearts curse them.\" Al-Bukhari said that Al-Hasan said, \"The Tuqyah is allowed until the Day of Resurrection.\" Allah said,\nوَيُحَذِّرُكُمُ اللَّهُ نَفْسَهُ\n(And Allah warns you against Himself.) meaning, He warns you against His anger and the severe torment He prepared for those who give their support to His enemies, and those who have enmity with His friends,\nوَإِلَى اللَّهِ الْمَصِيرُ\n(And to Allah is the final return) meaning, the return is to Him and He will reward or punish each person according to their deeds.","href":"/tafsir/3?verse=28","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:3:29","title":"Ibn Kathir · 3:29–30","text":"Say: \"Whether you hide what is in your breasts or reveal it, Allah knows it, and He knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth. And Allah is able to do all things. (29)On the Day when every person will be confronted with the good he has done, and all the evil he has done, he will wish that there were a great distance between him and his evil. And Allah warns you against Himself and Allah is full of kindness with the servants (30)\n\n## Allah Knows What the Hearts Conceal\n\nAllah tells His servants that He knows the secrets and apparent matters and that nothing concerning them escapes His observation. Rather, His knowledge encompasses them in all conditions, time frames, days and instances. His knowledge encompasses all that is in heaven and earth, and nothing not even the weight of an atom, or what is smaller than that in the earth, seas and mountains, escapes His observation. Indeed,\nوَاللَّهُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ\n(And Allah is able to do all things.) and His ability encompasses everything. This Ayah alerts Allah's servants that they should fear Him enough to not commit what He prohibits and dislikes, for He has perfect knowledge in all they do and is able to punish them promptly. And He gives respite to some of them, then He punishes them, and He is Swift and Mighty in taking account. This is why Allah said afterwards,\nيَوْمَ تَجِدُ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَّا عَمِلَتْ مِنْ خَيْرٍ مُّحْضَرًا\n(On the Day when every person will be confronted with all the good he has done,) meaning, on the Day of Resurrection, Allah brings the good and evil deeds before the servant, just as He said,\nيُنَبَّأُ الْإِنسَانُ يَوْمَئِذٍ بِمَا قَدَّمَ وَأَخَّرَ\n(On that Day man will be informed of what he sent forward, and what he left behind.)[75:13].\nWhen the servant sees his good deeds, he becomes happy and delighted. When he sees the evil deeds he committed, he becomes sad and angry. Then he will wish that he could disown his evil work and that a long distance separated it from him. He will also say to the devil who used to accompany him in this life, and who used to encourage him to do evil;\nيَا لَيْتَ بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَكَ بُعْدَ الْمَشْرِقَيْنِ فَبِئْسَ الْقَرِينُ\n(\"Would that between me and you were the distance of the two easts ـ a horrible companion (indeed)!)[43:38].\nAllah then said, while threatening and warning,\nوَيُحَذِّرُكُمُ اللَّهُ نَفْسَهُ\n(And Allah warns you against Himself) meaning, He warns you against His punishment. Allah then said, while bringing hope to His servants, so that they do not despair from His mercy or feel hopeless of His kindness,\nوَاللَّهُ رَءُوفٌ بِالْعِبَادِ\n(And Allah is full of kindness with the servants)\nAl-Hasan Al-Basri said, \"Allah is so kind with them that He warns them against Himself.\" Others commented, \"He is merciful with His creation and likes for them to remain on His straight path and chosen religion, and to follow His honorable Messenger.\"","href":"/tafsir/3?verse=29","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:3:31","title":"Ibn Kathir · 3:31–32","text":"Say (O Muhammad ﷺ to mankind): \"If you (really) love Allah, then follow me (i.e. Muhammad), Allah will love you and forgive you your sins. And Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful. (31)Say: \"Obey Allah and the Messenger.\" But if they turn away, then Allah does not like the disbelievers (32)\n\n## Allah's Love is Attained by Following the Messenger (ﷺ)\n\nThis honorable Ayah judges against those who claim to love Allah, yet do not follow the way of Muhammad ﷺ. Such people are not true in their claim until they follow the Shari'ah (Law) of Muhammad ﷺ and his religion in all his statements, actions and conditions. It is recorded in the Sahih that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَنْ عَمِلَ عَمَلًا لَيْسَ عَلَيْهِ أَمْرُنَا فَهُوَ رَدٌّ\n(Whoever commits an act that does not conform with our matter (religion), then it will be rejected of him.)\nThis is why Allah said here,\nقُلْ إِن كُنتُمْ تُحِبُّونَ اللَّهَ فَاتَّبِعُونِي يُحْبِبْكُمُ اللَّهُ\n(Say (O Muhammad ﷺ to mankind): \"If you (really) love Allah, then follow me, Allah will love you...\") meaning, what you will earn is much more than what you sought in loving Him, for Allah will love you. Al-Hasan Al-Basri and several scholars among the Salaf commented, \"Some people claimed that they love Allah. So Allah tested them with this Ayah;\nقُلْ إِن كُنتُمْ تُحِبُّونَ اللَّهَ فَاتَّبِعُونِي يُحْبِبْكُمُ اللَّهُ\n(Say (O Muhammad ﷺ to mankind): \"If you (really) love Allah, then follow me, Allah will love you...\"). \"\nAllah then said,\nوَيَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ ذُنُوبَكُمْ وَاللَّهُ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ\n(\"And forgive you your sins. And Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.\") meaning, by your following the Messenger ﷺ, you will earn all this with the blessing of his mission. Allah next commands everyone,\nقُلْ أَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَالرَّسُولَ فَإِن تَوَلَّوْا\n(Say: \"Obey Allah and the Messenger.\" But if they turn away) by defying the Prophet ﷺ)\nفَإِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يُحِبُّ الْكَافِرِينَ\n(then Allah does not like the disbelievers.) thus, testifying that defiance of the Messenger's way constitutes Kufr. Indeed, Allah does not like whoever does this, even if he claims that he loves Allah and seeks a means of approach to Him, unless, and until, he follows the unlettered Prophet, the Final Messenger ﷺ from Allah to the two creations: mankind and the Jinn. This is the Prophet ﷺ who, if the previous Prophets and mighty Messengers were to have been alive during his time, they would have no choice but to follow, obey him, and to abide by his Law. We will mention this fact when we explain the Ayah,\nوَإِذْ أَخَذَ اللَّهُ مِيثَاقَ النَّبِيِّينَ\n(And (remember) when Allah took the Covenant of the Prophets)[3:81], Allah willing.","href":"/tafsir/3?verse=31","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:3:33","title":"Ibn Kathir · 3:33–34","text":"Allah chose Adam, Nuh (Noah), the family of Ibrahim and the family of 'Imran above the nations (33)Offspring, one of the other, and Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower (34)\n\n## The Chosen Ones Among the People of the Earth\n\nAllah states that He has chosen these households over the people of the earth. For instance, Allah chose Adam, created him with His Hand and blew life into him. Allah commanded the angels to prostrate before Adam, taught him the names of everything and allowed him to dwell in Paradise, but then sent him down from it out of His wisdom. Allah chose Nuh and made him the first Messenger to the people of the earth, when the people worshipped idols and associated others with Allah in worship. Allah avenged the way Nuh was treated, for he kept calling his people day and night, in public and in secret, for a very long time. However, his calling them only made them shun him more, and this is when Nuh supplicated against them. So Allah caused them to drown, and none among them was saved, except those who followed the religion that Allah sent to Nuh. Allah also chose the household of Ibrahim, including the master of all mankind, and the Final Prophet, Muhammad, peace be upon him. Allah also chose the household of 'Imran, the father of Marym bint 'Imran, the mother of 'Isa, peace be upon them. So 'Isa is from the offspring of Ibrahim, as we will mention in the Tafsir of Surat Al-An'am, Allah willing, and our trust is in Him.","href":"/tafsir/3?verse=33","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:3:35","title":"Ibn Kathir · 3:35–36","text":"(Remember) when the wife of 'Imran said: \"O my Lord! I have vowed to You what is in my womb to be dedicated for Your services, so accept this from me. Verily, You are the All-Hearer, the All-Knowing. (35)Then when she gave birth to her, she said: \"O my Lord! I have given birth to a female child, ـ and Allah knew better what she bore, ـ \"And the male is not like the female, and I have named her Maryam, and I seek refuge with You for her and for her offspring from Shaytan, the outcast. (36)\n\n## The Story of Maryam's Birth\n\nThe wife of 'Imran mentioned here is the mother of Maryam, and her name is Hannah bint Faqudh. Muhammad bin Ishaq mentioned that Hannah could not have children and that one day, she saw a bird feeding its chick. She wished she could have children and supplicated to Allah to grant her offspring. Allah accepted her supplication, and when her husband slept with her, she became pregnant. She vowed to make her child concentrate on worship and serving Bayt Al-Maqdis (the Masjid in Jerusalem), when she became aware that she was pregnant. She said,\nرَبِّ إِنِّي نَذَرْتُ لَكَ مَا فِي بَطْنِي مُحَرَّرًا فَتَقَبَّلْ مِنِّي إِنَّكَ أَنتَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ\n(O my Lord! I have vowed to You what is in my womb to be dedicated for Your services, so accept this from me. Verily, You are the All-Hearer, the All-Knowing.) meaning, You hear my supplication and You know my intention. She did not know then what she would give birth to, a male or a female.\nفَلَمَّا وَضَعَتْهَا قَالَتْ رَبِّ إِنِّي وَضَعْتُهَا أُنثَىٰ وَاللَّهُ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا وَضَعَتْ\n(Then when she gave birth to her, she said: \"O my Lord! I have given birth to a female child, ـ and Allah knew better what she bore.)\nوَلَيْسَ الذَّكَرُ كَالْأُنثَىٰ\n(And the male is not like the female,) in strength and the commitment to worship Allah and serve the Masjid in Jerusalem.\nوَإِنِّي سَمَّيْتُهَا مَرْيَمَ\n(And I have named her Maryam,) thus, testifying to the fact that it is allowed to give a name to the newly born the day it is born, as is apparent from the Ayah, which is also a part of the law of those who were before us. Further, the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ mentioned that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nوُلِدَ لِيَ اللَّيْلَةَ وَلَدٌ، سَمَّيْتُهُ بِاسْمِ أَبِي إِبْرَاهِيمَ\n(This night, a son was born for me and I called him by my father's name, Ibrahim.) Al-Bukhari and Muslim collected this Hadith.\nThey also recorded that Anas bin Malik brought his newborn brother to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ who chewed a piece of date and put it in the child's mouth and called him 'Abdullah. Other new born infants were also given names on the day they were born.\nQatadah narrated that Al-Hasan Al-Basri said, that Samurah bin Jundub said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nكُلُّ غُلَامٍ رَهِينٌ بِعَقِيقَتِهِ، يُذْبَحُ عَنْهُ يَوْمَ سَابِعِهِ، وَيُسَمَّى وَيُحْلَقُ رَأَسُهُ\n(Every new born boy held in security by his 'Aqiqah, until his seventh day, a sacrifice is offered on his behalf, he is given a name, and the hair on his head is shaved.)\nThis Hadith was collected by Ahmad and the collectors of the Sunan, and was graded Sahih by At-Tirmidhi. We should mention that another narration for this Hadith contained the wording, \"and blood is offered on his behalf,\" which is more famous and established than the former narration, and Allah knows best.\nAllah's statement that Maryam's mother said,\nوَإِنِّي أُعِيذُهَا بِكَ وَذُرِّيَّتَهَا مِنَ الشَّيْطَانِ الرَّجِيمِ\n(\"...And I seek refuge with You for her and for her offspring from Shaytan, the outcast.\") means, that she sought refuge with Allah from the evil of Shaytan, for her and her offspring, i.e., 'Isa, peace be upon him. Allah accepted her supplication, for 'Abdur-Razzaq recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَا مِنْ مَوْلُودٍ يُولَدُ إِلَّا مَسَّهُ الشَّيْطَانُ حِينَ يُولَدُ، فَيَسْتَهِلُّ صَارِخًا مِنْ مَسِّهِ إِيَّاهُ، إِلَّا مَرْيَمَ وَابْنَهَا\n(Every newly born baby is touched by Shaytan when it is born, and the baby starts crying because of this touch, except Maryam and her son.)\nAbu Hurayrah then said, \"Read if you will,\nوَإِنِّي أُعِيذُهَا بِكَ وَذُرِّيَّتَهَا مِنَ الشَّيْطَانِ الرَّجِيمِ\n(And I seek refuge with You for her and for her offspring from Shaytan, the outcast).\" The Two Sahihs recorded this Hadith.","href":"/tafsir/3?verse=35","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:3:37","title":"Ibn Kathir · 3:37","text":"So her Lord (Allah) accepted her with goodly acceptance. He made her grow in a good manner and put her under the care of Zakariyya. Every time he entered the Mihrab to (visit) her, he found her supplied with sustenance. He said: \"O Maryam! From where have you gotten this?\" She said, \"This is from Allah.\" Verily, Allah provides sustenance to whom He wills, without limit (37)\n\n## Maryam Grows Up; Her Honor is with Allah\n\nAllah states that He has accepted Maryam as a result of her mother's vow and that He,\nوَأَنبَتَهَا نَبَاتًا حَسَنًا\n(made her grow in a good manner) meaning, made her conduct becoming, her mannerism delightful and He made her well liked among people. He also made her accompany the righteous people, so that she learned righteousness, knowledge and religion.\nوَكَفَّلَهَا زَكَرِيَّا\n(And put her under the care of Zakariyya) meaning, Allah made Zakariyya her sponsor. Allah made Zakariyya Maryam's guardian for her benefit, so that she would learn from his tremendous knowledge and righteous conduct. He was the husband of her maternal aunt, as Ibn Ishaq and Ibn Jarir stated, or her brother-in-law, as mentioned in the Sahih,\nفَإِذَا بِيَحْيَى وَعِيسىٰ، وَهُمَا ابْنَا الْخَالَةِ\n(I saw John and 'Isa, who are maternal cousins.)\nWe should state that in general terms, what Ibn Ishaq said is plausible, and in this case, Maryam was under the care of her maternal aunt. The Two Sahihs recorded that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ decided that 'Amarah, the daughter of Hamzah, be raised by her maternal aunt, the wife of Ja'far bin Abi Talib, saying,\nالْخَالَةُ بِمَنْزِلَةِ الْأُمِّ\n(The maternal aunt is just like the mother.)\nAllah then emphasizes Maryam's honor and virtue at the place of worship she attended,\nكُلَّمَا دَخَلَ عَلَيْهَا زَكَرِيَّا الْمِحْرَابَ وَجَدَ عِندَهَا رِزْقًا\n(Every time he entered the Mihrab to (visit) her, he found her supplied with sustenance.)\nMujahid, 'Ikrimah, Sa'id bin Jubayr, Abu Ash-Sha'tha, Ibrahim An-Nakha'i, Ad-Dahhak, Qatadah, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, 'Atiyah Al-'Awfi and As-Suddi said, \"He would find with her the fruits of the summer during winter, and the fruits of the winter during summer.\" When Zakariyya would see this;\nقَالَ يَا مَرْيَمُ أَنَّىٰ لَكِ هَٰذَا\n(He said: \"O Maryam! From where have you gotten this?\") meaning, where did you get these fruits from?\nقَالَتْ هُوَ مِنْ عِندِ اللَّهِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَرْزُقُ مَن يَشَاءُ بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ\n(She said, \"This is from Allah.\" Verily, Allah provides sustenance to whom He wills, without limit.)","href":"/tafsir/3?verse=37","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:3:38","title":"Ibn Kathir · 3:38–41","text":"At that time Zakariyya invoked his Lord, saying: \"O my Lord! Grant me from You, a good offspring. You are indeed the All-Hearer of invocation. (38)Then the angels called him, while he was standing in prayer in the Mihrab, (saying): \"Allah gives you glad tidings of Yahya, believing in the Word from Allah, and Sayyidan, and Hasuran, a Prophet, from among the righteous. (39)He said: \"O my Lord! How can I have a son when I am very old, and my wife is barren?\" (Allah) said: \"Thus Allah does what He wills. (40)He said: \"O my Lord! Make a sign for me.\" (Allah) said: \"Your sign is that you shall not speak to the people for three days except by signals. And remember your Lord much, and glorify (Him) in the afternoon and in the morning. (41)\n\n## The Supplication of Zakariyya, and the Good News of Yahya's Birth\n\nWhen Zakariyya saw that Allah provided sustenance for Maryam by giving her the fruits of winter in summer and the fruits of summer in winter, he was eager to have a child of his own. By then, Zakariyya had become an old man, his bones feeble and his head full of gray hair. His wife was an old women who was barren. Yet, he still supplicated to Allah and called Him in secret,\nرَبِّ هَبْ لِي مِن لَّدُنكَ\n(O my Lord! Grant me from Ladunka,) from You,\nذُرِّيَّةً طَيِّبَةً\n(A good offspring) meaning, a righteous offspring,\nإِنَّكَ سَمِيعُ الدُّعَاءِ\n(You are indeed the All-Hearer of invocation.) Allah said,\nفَنَادَتْهُ الْمَلَائِكَةُ وَهُوَ قَائِمٌ يُصَلِّي فِي الْمِحْرَابِ\n(Then the angels called him, while he was standing in prayer in the Mihrab,) meaning, the angels spoke to him directly while he was secluded, standing in prayer at his place of worship. Allah told us about the good news that the angels delivered to Zakariyya,\nأَنَّ اللَّهَ يُبَشِّرُكَ بِيَحْيَىٰ\n(Allah gives you glad tidings of Yahya,) of a child from your offspring, his name is Yahya. Qatadah and other scholars said that he was called Yahya (literally, 'he lives') because Allah filled his life with faith.\nAllah said next,\nمُصَدِّقًا بِكَلِمَةٍ مِّنَ اللَّهِ\n(believing in the Word from Allah) Al-'Awfi reported that Ibn 'Abbas said, and also Al-Hasan, Qatadah, 'Ikrimah, Mujahid, Abu Ash-Sha'tha, As-Suddi, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, Ad-Dahhak, and several others said that the Ayah,\nمُصَدِّقًا بِكَلِمَةٍ مِّنَ اللَّهِ\n(believing in the Word from Allah) means, \"Believing in 'Isa, son of Maryam.\"\nAbu Al-'Aliyah, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, Qatadah and Sa'id bin Jubayr said that Allah's statement,\nوَسَيِّدًا\n(And Sayyidan) means, a wise man. Ibn 'Abbas, Ath-Thawri and Ad-Dahhak said that Sayyidan means, \"The noble, wise and pious man.\" Sa'id bin Al-Musayyib said that Sayyid is the scholar and Faqih. 'Atiyah said that Sayyid is the man noble in behavior and piety. 'Ikrimah said that it refers to a person who is not overcome by anger, while Ibn Zayd said that it refers to the noble man. Mujahid said that Sayyidan means, honored by Allah.\nAllah's statement,\nوَحَصُورًا\n(And Hasuran) does not mean he refrains from sexual relations with women, but that he is immune from illegal sexual relations. This does not mean that he does not marry women and have legal sexual relations with them, for Zakariyya said in his supplication for the benefit of Yahya,\nهَبْ لِي مِن لَّدُنكَ ذُرِّيَّةً طَيِّبَةً\n(Grant me from You, a good offspring), meaning, grant me a son who will have offspring, and Allah knows best.\nAllah's statement,\nوَنَبِيًّا مِّنَ الصَّالِحِينَ\n(A Prophet, from among the righteous) delivers more good news of sending Yahya as Prophet after the good news that he will be born. This good news was even better than the news of Yahya's birth. In a similar statement, Allah said to the mother of Musa,\nإِنَّا رَادُّوهُ إِلَيْكِ وَجَاعِلُوهُ مِنَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ\n(Verily, We shall bring him back to you, and shall make him one of the Messengers.)[28:7]\nWhen Zakariyya heard the good news, he started contemplating about having children at his age. He said,\nقَالَ رَبِّ أَنَّىٰ يَكُونُ لِي غُلَامٌ وَقَدْ بَلَغَنِيَ الْكِبَرُ وَامْرَأَتِي عَاقِرٌ قَالَ\n(\"O my Lord! How can I have a son when I am very old, and my wife is barren?\" (He) said...) meaning the angel said,\nكَذَٰلِكَ اللَّهُ يَفْعَلُ مَا يَشَاءُ\n(\"Thus Allah does what He wills.\") meaning, this is Allah's matter, He is so Mighty that nothing escapes His power, nor is anything beyond His ability.\nقَالَ رَبِّ اجْعَل لِّي آيَةً\n(He said: \"O my Lord! Make a sign for me\") meaning make a sign that alerts me that the child will come,\nقَالَ آيَتُكَ أَلَّا تُكَلِّمَ النَّاسَ ثَلَاثَةَ أَيَّامٍ إِلَّا رَمْزًا\n((Allah) said: \"Your sign is that you shall not speak to the people for three days except by signals.\") meaning, you will not be able to speak except with signals, although you are not mute. In another Ayah, Allah said,\nثَلَاثَ لَيَالٍ سَوِيًّا\n(For three nights, though having no bodily defect.)[19:10]\nAllah then commanded Zakariyya to supplicate, thank and praise Him often in that condition,\nوَاذْكُر رَّبَّكَ كَثِيرًا وَسَبِّحْ بِالْعَشِيِّ وَالْإِبْكَارِ\n(And remember your Lord much and glorify (Him) in the afternoon and in the morning.)\nWe will elaborate more on this subject in the beginning of Surah Maryam (chapter 19), Allah willing.","href":"/tafsir/3?verse=38","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:3:42","title":"Ibn Kathir · 3:42–44","text":"And (remember) when the angels said: \"O Maryam! Verily, Allah has chosen you, purified you, and chosen you above the women of the nations. (42)\"O Maryam! Submit yourself with obedience (Aqnuti) to your Lord and prostrate yourself, and bow down along with Ar-Raki'in. (43)This is a part of the news of the Ghayb (Unseen) which We reveal to you. You were not with them, when they cast lots with their pens as to which of them should be charged with the care of Maryam; nor were you with them when they disputed (44)\n\n## The Virtue of Maryam Over the Women of Her Time\n\nAllah states that the angels spoke to Maryam by His command and told her that He chose her because of her service to Him, because of her modesty, honor, innocence, and conviction. Allah also chose her because of her virtue over the women of the world. At-Tirmidhi recorded that 'Ali bin Abi Talib said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah ﷺ say,\nخَيْرُ نِسَائِهَا مَرْيَمُ بِنْتُ عِمْرَانَ، وَخَيْرُ نِسَائِهَا خَدِيجَةُ بِنْتُ خُوَيْلِدٍ\n(The best woman (in her time) was Maryam, daughter of 'Imran, and the best woman (of the Prophet's time) is Khadijah (his wife), daughter of Khuwaylid.)\"\nThe Two Sahihs recorded this Hadith. Ibn Jarir recorded that Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nكَمُلَ مِنَ الرِّجَالِ كَثِيرٌ، وَلَمْ يَكْمُلْ مِنَ النِّسَاءِ إِلَّا مَرْيَمُ بِنْتُ عِمْرَانَ وَ آسِيَةُ امْرَأَةُ فِرْعَوْنَ\n(Many men achieved perfection, but among women, only Maryam the daughter of 'Imran and Asiah, the wife of Fir'awn, achieved perfection.)\nThe Six, with the exception of Abu Dawud, recorded it. Al-Bukhari's wording for it reads,\nكَمُلَ مِنَ الرِّجَالِ كَثِيرٌ، وَلَمْ يَكْمُلْ مِنَ النِّسَاءِ إِلَّا آسِيَةُ امْرَأَةُ فِرْعَوْنَ، وَمَرْيَمُ بِنْتُ عِمْرَانَ، وَإِنَّ فَضْلَ عَائِشَةَ عَلَى النِّسَاءِ كَفَضْلِ الثَّرِيدِ عَلى سَائِرِ الطَّعَامِ\n(Many men reached the level of perfection, but no woman reached such a level except Asiah, the wife of Fir'awn, and Maryam, the daughter of 'Imran. The superiority of 'A'ishah (his wife) to other women, is like the superiority of Tharid (meat and bread dish) to other meals.)\nWe mentioned the various chains of narration and wordings for this Hadith in the story of 'Isa, son of Maryam, in our book, Al-Bidayah wan-Nihayah, all the thanks are due to Allah.\nAllah states that the angels commanded Maryam to increase acts of worship, humbleness, submission, prostration, bowing, and so forth, so that she would acquire what Allah had decreed for her, as a test for her. Yet, this test also earned her a higher grade in this life and the Hereafter, for Allah demonstrated His might by creating a son inside her without male intervention. Allah said,\nيَا مَرْيَمُ اقْنُتِي لِرَبِّكِ وَاسْجُدِي وَارْكَعِي مَعَ الرَّاكِعِينَ\n(\"O Maryam! Submit yourself with obedience (Aqnuti) and prostrate yourself, and bow down along with Ar-Raki'in.\")\nAs for Qunut (Aqnuti in the Ayah), it means to submit with humbleness. In another Ayah, Allah said,\nبَل لَّهُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ كُلٌّ لَّهُ قَانِتُونَ\n(Nay, to Him belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth, and all surrender with obedience (Qanitun) to Him.)[2:116]\nAllah next said to His Messenger ﷺ after He mentioned Maryam's story,\nذَٰلِكَ مِنْ أَنبَاءِ الْغَيْبِ نُوحِيهِ إِلَيْكَ\n(This is a part of the news of the Ghayb which We reveal.) \"and narrate to you (O Muhammad ﷺ), \"\nوَمَا كُنتَ لَدَيْهِمْ إِذْ يُلْقُونَ أَقْلَامَهُمْ أَيُّهُمْ يَكْفُلُ مَرْيَمَ وَمَا كُنتَ لَدَيْهِمْ إِذْ يَخْتَصِمُونَ\n(You were not with them, when they cast lots with their pens as to which of them should be charged with the care of Maryam; nor were you with them when they disputed.) meaning, \"You were not present, O Muhammad, when this occurred, so you cannot narrate what happened to the people as an eye witness. Rather, Allah disclosed these facts to you as if you were a witness, when they conducted a lottery to choose the custodian of Maryam, seeking the reward of this good deed.\"\nIbn Jarir recorded that 'Ikrimah said, \"Maryam's mother left with Maryam, carrying her in her infant cloth, and took her to the rabbis from the offspring of Aaron, the brother of Musa. They were responsible for taking care of Bayt Al-Maqdis (the Masjid) at that time, just as there were those who took care of the Ka'bah. Maryam's mother said to them, 'Take this child whom I vowed [to serve the Masjid], I have set her free, since she is my daughter, for no menstruating woman should enter the Masjid, and I shall not take her back home.' They said, 'She is the daughter of our Imam,' as 'Imran used to lead them in prayer, 'who took care of our sacrificial rituals.' Zakariyya said, 'Give her to me, for her maternal aunt is my wife.' They said, 'Our hearts cannot bear that you take her, for she is the daughter of our Imam.' So they conducted a lottery with the pens with which they wrote the Tawrah, and Zakariyya won the lottery and took Maryam into his care.\"\n'Ikrimah, As-Suddi, Qatadah, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, and several others said that the rabbis went into the Jordan river and conducted a lottery there, deciding to throw their pens into the river. The pen that remained afloat and idle would indicate that its owner would take care of Maryam. When they threw their pens into the river, the water took all the pens under, except Zakariyya's pen, which remained afloat in its place. Zakariyya was also their master, chief, scholar, Imam and Prophet, may Allah's peace and blessings be on him and the rest of the Prophets.","href":"/tafsir/3?verse=42","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:3:45","title":"Ibn Kathir · 3:45–47","text":"(Remember) when the angels said: \"O Maryam! Verily, Allah gives you the glad tidings of a Word from Him, his name will be Al-Masih, 'Isa, the son of Maryam, held in honor in this world and in the Hereafter, and he will be one of those who are near to Allah. (45)\"He will speak to the people, in the cradle and in manhood, and he will be one of the righteous. (46)She said: \"O my Lord! How shall I have a son when no man has touched me.\" He said: \"So (it will be) for Allah creates what He wills. When He has decreed something, He says to it only: 'Be! ـ and it is. (47)\n\n## Delivering the Good News to Maryam of 'Isa's Birth\n\nThis Ayah contains the glad tidings the angels brought to Maryam that she would give birth to a mighty son who will have a great future. Allah said,\nإِذْ قَالَتِ الْمَلَائِكَةُ يَا مَرْيَمُ إِنَّ اللَّهَ يُبَشِّرُكِ بِكَلِمَةٍ مِّنْهُ\n((Remember) when the angels said: \"O Maryam! Verily, Allah gives you the glad tidings of a Word from Him,) a son who will come into existence with a word from Allah, 'Be', and he was. This is the meaning of Allah's statement (about Yahya)\nمُصَدِّقًا بِكَلِمَةٍ مِّنَ اللَّهِ\n(Believing in the Word from Allah.)[3:39], according to the majority of the scholars.\nاسْمُهُ الْمَسِيحُ عِيسَى ابْنُ مَرْيَمَ\n(His name will be Al-Masih, 'Isa, the son of Maryam) and he will be known by this name in this life, especially by the believers. 'Isa was called \"Al-Masih\" (the Messiah) because when he touched (Mash) those afflicted with an illness, they would be healed by Allah's leave. Allah's statement,\nعِيسَى ابْنُ مَرْيَمَ\n('Isa, the son of Maryam) relates 'Isa to his mother, because he did not have a father.\nوَجِيهًا فِي الدُّنْيَا وَالْآخِرَةِ وَمِنَ الْمُقَرَّبِينَ\n(Held in honor in this world and in the Hereafter, and will be one of those who are near to Allah.) meaning, he will be a leader and honored by Allah in this life, because of the Law that Allah will reveal to him, sending down the Scripture to him, along with the other bounties that Allah will grant him with. 'Isa will be honored in the Hereafter and will intercede with Allah, by His leave, on behalf of some people, just as is the case with his brethren the mighty Messengers of Allah, peace be upon them all.\n\n## Isa Spoke When He was Still in the Cradle\n\nAllah said,\nوَيُكَلِّمُ النَّاسَ فِي الْمَهْدِ وَكَهْلًا\n(He will speak to the people, in the cradle and in manhood,) calling to the worship of Allah Alone without partners, while still in the cradle, as a miracle from Allah, and when he is a man, by Allah's revelation to him.\nMuhammad bin Ishaq recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said,\nمَا تَكَلَّمَ مَوْلُودٌ فِي صِغَرِهِ إِلَّا عِيسَى وَصَاحِبُ جُرَيْجٍ\n(No infant spoke in the cradle except 'Isa and the companion of Jurayj.)\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that the Prophet ﷺ said,\nلَمْ يَتَكَلَّمْ فِي الْمَهْدِ إِلَّا ثَلَاثَةٌ: عِيسَى، وَصَبِيٌّ كَانَ فِي زَمَنِ جُرَيْجٍ، وَصَبِيٌّ آخَرُ\n(No infant spoke in the cradle except three, 'Isa, the boy during the time of Jurayj, and another boy.)\nوَمِنَ الصَّالِحِينَ\n(And he will be one of the righteous.) in his statements and actions, for he will possess, pure knowledge and righteous works.\n\n## Isa was Created Without a Father\n\nWhen Maryam heard the good news that the angels conveyed from Allah, she said;\nرَبِّ أَنَّىٰ يَكُونُ لِي وَلَدٌ وَلَمْ يَمْسَسْنِي بَشَرٌ\n(\"O my Lord! How shall I have a son when no man has touched me.\")\nMary said, \"How can I have a son while I did not marry, nor intend to marry, nor am I an indecent woman, may Allah forbid?\" The angel conveyed to Maryam, Allah's answer,\nكَذَٰلِكِ اللَّهُ يَخْلُقُ مَا يَشَاءُ\n(So (it will be) for Allah creates what He wills.)\nHe is Mighty in power and nothing escapes His ability. Allah used the word 'create' here instead of the word 'does' as in the tale about Zakariyya [3:40], to eradicate any evil thought concerning 'Isa. Allah next emphasized this fact when He said,\nإِذَا قَضَىٰ أَمْرًا فَإِنَّمَا يَقُولُ لَهُ كُن فَيَكُونُ\n(When He has decreed something, He says to it only: \"Be! ـ and it is.) meaning, what Allah wills, comes into existence instantly and without delay. In another Ayah, Allah said,\nوَمَا أَمْرُنَا إِلَّا وَاحِدَةٌ كَلَمْحٍ بِالْبَصَرِ\n(And Our commandment is but one as the twinkling of an eye.)[54:50], meaning, \"We only issue the command once, and it comes into existence instantly, as fast as, and faster than, a blink of the eye. \"","href":"/tafsir/3?verse=45","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:3:48","title":"Ibn Kathir · 3:48–51","text":"And He will teach him the Book and Al-Hikmah, and the Tawrah and the Injil (48)And will make him a Messenger to the Children of Israel (saying): \"I have come to you with a sign from your Lord, that I design for you out of clay, a figure like that of a bird, and breathe into it, and it becomes a bird by Allah's leave; and I heal the blind, and the leper, and I bring the dead to life by Allah's leave. And I inform you of what you eat, and what you store in your houses. Surely, therein is a sign for you, if you believe. (49)\"(And I have come) confirming that which was before me of the Tawrah, and to make lawful to you part of what was forbidden to you, and I have come to you with a proof from your Lord. So have Taqwa of Allah and obey me. (50)\"Truly, Allah is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him (Alone). This is the straight path. (51)\n\n## The Description of 'Isa and the Miracles He Performed\n\nAllah states that the good news brought to Maryam about 'Isa was even better because Allah would teach him,\nالْكِتَابَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ\n(the Book and Al-Hikmah). It appears that the 'Book' the Ayah mentioned here refers to writing. We explained the meaning of Al-Hikmah in the Tafsir of Surat Al-Baqarah.\nالتَّوْرَاةَ وَالْإِنجِيلَ\n(the Tawrah and the Injil). The Tawrah is the Book that Allah sent down to Musa, son of 'Imran, while the Injil is what Allah sent down to 'Isa, son of Maryam, peace be upon them, and 'Isa memorized both Books. Allah's statement,\nوَرَسُولًا إِلَىٰ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ\n(And will make him a Messenger to the Children of Israel) means, that Allah will send 'Isa as a Messenger to the Children of Israel, proclaiming to them,\nأَنِّي قَدْ جِئْتُكُم بِآيَةٍ مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ أَنِّي أَخْلُقُ لَكُم مِّنَ الطِّينِ كَهَيْئَةِ الطَّيْرِ فَأَنفُخُ فِيهِ فَيَكُونُ طَيْرًا بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ\n(I have come to you with a sign from your Lord, that I design for you out of clay, a figure like that of a bird, and breathe into it, and it becomes a bird by Allah's leave). These are the miracles that 'Isa performed; he used to make the shape of a bird from clay and blow into it, and it became a bird by Allah's leave. Allah made this a miracle for 'Isa to testify that He had sent him.\nوَأُبْرِئُ الْأَكْمَهَ\n(And I heal him who is Akmah) meaning, 'a person who was born blind,' which perfects this miracle and makes the challenge more daring.\nوَالْأَبْرَصَ\n(And the leper) which is a known disease,\nوَأُحْيِي الْمَوْتَىٰ بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ\n(And I bring the dead to life by Allah's leave).\nMany scholars stated that Allah sent every Prophet with a miracle suitable to his time. For instance, in the time of Musa, magic was the trade of the time, and magicians held a high position. So Allah sent Musa with a miracle that captured the eyes and bewildered every magician. When the magicians realized that Musa's miracle came from the Almighty, Most Great, they embraced Islam and became pious believers. As for 'Isa, he was sent during a time when medicine and knowledge in physics were advancing. 'Isa brought them the types of miracles that could not be performed, except by one sent by Allah. How can any physician bring life to clay, cure blindness and leprosy and bring back to life those entrapped in the grave? Muhammad ﷺ was sent during the time of eloquent people and proficient poets. He brought them a Book from Allah; if mankind and the Jinn tried to imitate ten chapters, or even one chapter of it, they will utterly fail in this task, even if they tried to do it by collective cooperation. This is because the Qur'an is the Word of Allah and is nothing like that of the creatures.\nIsa's statement,\nوَأُنَبِّئُكُم بِمَا تَأْكُلُونَ وَمَا تَدَّخِرُونَ فِي بُيُوتِكُمْ\n(And I inform you of what you eat, and what you store in your houses) means, I tell you about what one of you has just eaten and what he is keeping in his house for tomorrow.\nإِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ\n(Surely, therein), all these miracles,\nلَآيَةً لَّكُمْ\n(is a sign for you) testifying to the truth of what I was sent to you with,\nإِن كُنتُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ - وَمُصَدِّقًا لِّمَا بَيْنَ يَدَيَّ مِنَ التَّوْرَاةِ\n(If you believe. And I have come confirming that which was before me of the Tawrah,) affirming the Tawrah and upholding it,\nوَلِأُحِلَّ لَكُم بَعْضَ الَّذِي حُرِّمَ عَلَيْكُمْ\n(and to make lawful to you part of what was forbidden to you.)\nThis part of the Ayah indicates that 'Isa abrogated some of the Laws of the Tawrah and informed the Jews of the truth regarding some issues that they used to dispute about. In another Ayah;\nوَلِأُبَيِّنَ لَكُم بَعْضَ الَّذِي تَخْتَلِفُونَ فِيهِ\n(And in order to make clear to you some of the (points) in which you differ)[43:63].\nIsa said next,\nوَجِئْتُكُم بِآيَةٍ مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ\n(And I have come to you with a proof from your Lord.) \"Containing affirmation and evidence to the truth of what I am conveying to you.\"\nفَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ - إِنَّ اللَّهَ رَبِّي وَرَبُّكُمْ فَاعْبُدُوهُ\n(So have Taqwa of Allah and obey me. Truly, Allah is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him (Alone).) for I and you are equal in our servitude, submission and humbleness to Him,\nهَٰذَا صِرَاطٌ مُّسْتَقِيمٌ\n(This is the straight path.)","href":"/tafsir/3?verse=48","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:3:52","title":"Ibn Kathir · 3:52–54","text":"Then when 'Isa came to know of their disbelief, he said: \"Who will be my helpers in Allah's cause?\" Al-Hawariyyun said: \"We are the helpers of Allah; we believe in Allah, and bear witness that we are Muslims. (52)\"Our Lord! We believe in what You have sent down, and we follow the Messenger ['Isa]; so write us down among those who bear witness. (53)And they (disbelievers) plotted and Allah planned too. And Allah is the Best of those who plot (54)\n\n## The Disciples Give Their Support to 'Isa\n\nAllah said,\nفَلَمَّا أَحَسَّ عِيسَىٰ\n(Then when 'Isa came to know), meaning, 'Isa felt that they were adamant in disbelief and continuing in misguidance. He said to them,\nمَنْ أَنصَارِي إِلَى اللَّهِ\n(Who will be my helper in Allah's cause) Mujahid commented, \"Meaning, who would follow me to Allah?\" However, it appears that 'Isa was asking, \"Who would help me convey the Message of Allah?\"\nThe Prophet ﷺ said during the Hajj season, before the Hijrah,\nمَنْ رَجُلٌ يُؤْوِينِي حَتَّى أُبَلِّغَ كَلَامَ رَبِّي؟ فَإِنَّ قُرَيْشًا قَدْ مَنَعُونِي أَنْ أُبَلِّغَ كَلَامَ رَبِّي\n(Who will give me asylum so that I can convey the Speech of my Lord, for the Quraysh have prevented me from conveying the Speech of my Lord.) until he found the Ansar. The Ansar helped the Prophet ﷺ and gave him refuge. He later migrated to them, they comforted the Prophet ﷺ and protected him from all his enemies, may Allah be pleased with them all. This is similar to what happened with 'Isa, for some of the Children of Israel believed in him, gave him their aid and support and followed the light that was sent with him. This is why Allah said about them;\nقَالَ الْحَوَارِيُّونَ نَحْنُ أَنصَارُ اللَّهِ آمَنَّا بِاللَّهِ وَاشْهَدْ بِأَنَّا مُسْلِمُونَ - رَبَّنَا آمَنَّا بِمَا أَنزَلْتَ وَاتَّبَعْنَا الرَّسُولَ فَاكْتُبْنَا مَعَ الشَّاهِدِينَ\n(Al-Hawariyyun said: \"We are the helpers of Allah; we believe in Allah, and bear witness that we are Muslims. Our Lord! We believe in what You have sent down, and we follow the Messenger; so write us down among those who bear witness.\")\nHawari in Arabic - means 'support'. The Two Sahihs recorded that when the Prophet ﷺ encouraged the people to fight during the battle of Al-Ahzab, Az-Zubayr came forward, and again, when the Prophet ﷺ asked for fighters a second time. The Prophet ﷺ said,\nإِنَّ لِكُلِّ نَبِيٍّ حَوَارِيًّا، وَحَوَارِيِّي الزُّبَيْرُ\n(Every Prophet has a Hawari, and Az-Zubayr is my Hawari)\nIbn Abi Hatim recorded that Ibn 'Abbas said about,\nفَاكْتُبْنَا مَعَ الشَّاهِدِينَ\n(so write us down among those who bear witness) \"Meaning among the Ummah of Muhammad.\" This Hadith has a good chain of narration.\n\n## The Jews Plot to Kill 'Isa\n\nAllah states that the Children of Israel tried to kill 'Isa by conspiring to defame him and crucify him. They complained about him to the king who was a disbeliever. They claimed that 'Isa was a man who misguided people, discouraged them from obeying the king, caused division, and separated between man and his own son. They also said other lies about 'Isa, which they will carry on their necks, including accusing him of being an illegitimate son. The king became furious and sent his men to capture 'Isa to torture and crucify him. When they surrounded 'Isa's home and he thought that they would surely capture him, Allah saved him from them, raising him up from the house to heaven. Allah put the image of 'Isa on a man who was in the house; when the unjust people went in the house while it was still dark, they thought that he was 'Isa. They captured that man, humiliated and crucified him. They also placed thorns on his head. However, Allah deceived these people. He saved and raised His Prophet from them, leaving them in disarray in the darkness of their transgression, thinking that they had successfully achieved their goal. Allah made their hearts hard, and defiant of the truth, disgracing them in such disgrace that it will remain with them until the Day of Resurrection. This is why Allah said,\nوَمَكَرُوا وَمَكَرَ اللَّهُ وَاللَّهُ خَيْرُ الْمَاكِرِينَ\n(And they plotted, and Allah planned too. And Allah is the Best of those who plot.)","href":"/tafsir/3?verse=52","kind":"tafsir"},{"id":"tafsir:3:55","title":"Ibn Kathir · 3:55–58","text":"And (remember) when Allah said: \"O 'Isa! I will take you and raise you to Myself and purify [save] you from those who disbelieve, and I will make those who follow you superior to those who disbelieve till the Day of Resurrection. Then you will return to Me and I will judge between you in the matters in which you used to dispute (55)\"As to those who disbelieve, I will punish them with severe torment in this world and in the Hereafter, and they will have no helpers. (56)And as for those who believe and do righteous good deeds, Allah will pay them their reward in full. And Allah does not like the wrongdoers (57)This is what We recite to you of the verses and the Wise Reminder (58)\n\n## Meaning of 'Take You'\n\nAllah said,\nإِنِّي مُتَوَفِّيكَ وَرَافِعُكَ إِلَيَّ\n(I will take you and raise you to Myself) while you are asleep. Allah said in a similar Ayat,\nوَهُوَ الَّذِي يَتَوَفَّاكُم بِاللَّيْلِ\n(It is He Who takes your souls by night (when you are asleep).)[6:60], and,\nاللَّهُ يَتَوَفَّى الْأَنفُسَ حِينَ مَوْتِهَا وَالَّتِي لَمْ تَمُتْ فِي مَنَامِهَا\n(It is Allah Who takes away the souls at the time of their death, and those that die not during their sleep.)[39:42].\nThe Messenger of Allah ﷺ used to recite the following words when he would awaken;\nالْحَمْدُ للهِ الَّذِي أَحْيَانَا بَعْدَ مَا أَمَاتَنَا، وَإِلَيْهِ النُّشُورُ\n(All the thanks are due to Allah Who brought us back to life after He had caused us to die (sleep), and the Return is to Him).\nAllah said,\nوَبِكُفْرِهِمْ وَقَوْلِهِمْ عَلَىٰ مَرْيَمَ بُهْتَانًا عَظِيمًا - وَقَوْلِهِمْ إِنَّا قَتَلْنَا الْمَسِيحَ عِيسَى ابْنَ مَرْيَمَ رَسُولَ اللَّهِ وَمَا قَتَلُوهُ وَمَا صَلَبُوهُ وَلَٰكِن شُبِّهَ لَهُمْ\n(And because of their disbelief and allegations against Maryam and because of their saying \"We killed Al-Masih 'Isa, son of Maryam, the Messenger of Allah